Contents
Important Changes ............................1
Introduction ........................................1
Rental Income.....................................2
Rental Expenses ................................2
Repairs and Improvements ............3
Other Expenses ..............................3
Condominiums and Cooperatives .. 4
Not Rented for Profit.........................4
Property Changed to Rental Use..... 5
Renting Part of Property...................5
Personal Use of Vacation Home or
Dwelling Unit...............................5
Dwelling Unit Used as Home .........5
Figuring Days of Personal Use ......6
How To Divide Expenses ...............6
How To Figure Rental Income and
Deductions ...............................7
Depreciation ........................................7
MACRS ...........................................9
MACRS Depreciation Under GDS .. 11
Optional Tables ...............................12
MACRS Depreciation Under ADS .. 12
Casualties and Thefts........................13
Limits on Rental Losses...................13
At-Risk Rules ..................................13
Passive Activity Limits ....................14
How To Report Rental Income and
Expenses ......................................15
How To Get Tax Help.........................18
Index ....................................................19
Important Changes
Paid preparer authorization.Beginning with
your return for 2000, you can check a box and
authorize the IRS to discuss your tax return
with the paid preparer who signed it. If you
check the “Yes” box in the signature area of
your return, the IRS can call your paid
preparer to answer any questions that may
arise during the processing of your return.
Also, you are authorizing your paid preparer
to perform certain actions. See your income
tax package for details.
Photographs of missing children. The
Internal Revenue Service is a proud partner
with the National Center for Missing and Ex-
ploited Children. Photographs of missing
children selected by the Center may appear
in this publication on pages that would other-
wise be blank. You can help bring these
children home by looking at the photographs
and calling 1–800–THE–LOST (1–800–843–
5678) if you recognize a child.
Introduction
This publication discusses rental income and
expenses, including depreciation, and ex-
plains how to report them on your return. It
Department
of the
Treasury
Internal
Revenue
Service
Publication 527
Cat. No. 15052W
Residential
Rental
Property
(Including
Rental of
Vacation Homes)
For use in preparing
2000 Returns


also covers casualty losses on rental property
and the passive activity and at-risk rules.
This publication is designed for those who
rent out no more than a few residential
dwelling units.
Sale of rental property.For information on
how to figure and report any gain or loss from
the sale or other disposition of your rental
property, see chapter 3 in Publication 544,
Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets.
Sale of main home used as rental
property. For information on how to figure
and report any gain or loss from the sale or
other disposition of your main home that you
also used as rental property, get Publication
523, Selling Your Home.
Comments and suggestions. We welcome
your comments about this publication and
your suggestions for future editions.
You can e-mail us while visiting our web
site at www.irs.gov/help/email2.html.
You can write to us at the following ad-
dress:
Internal Revenue Service
Technical Publications Branch
W:CAR:MP:FP:P
1111 Constitution Ave. NW
Washington, DC 20224
We respond to many letters by telephone.
Therefore, it would be helpful if you would
include your daytime phone number, includ-
ing the area code, in your correspondence.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
 Publication
/H18554463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and
Car Expenses
/H18554534 Depreciating Property Placed in
Service Before 1987
/H18554 53 5 Business Expenses
/H18554547 Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
(Business and Nonbusiness)
/H18554551 Basis of Assets
/H18554925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
/H18554946 How To Depreciate Property
Form (and Instructions)
/H185544562 Depreciation and Amortization
/H185545213 Election To Postpone Determi-
nation as To Whether the
Presumption Applies That an Ac-
tivity Is Engaged in for Profit
/H185548582 Passive Activity Loss Limitations
/H18554Schedule E (Form 1040) Supplemental
Income and Loss
See How To Get Tax Help at the end of
this publication for information about getting
these publications and forms.
Rental Income 
You generally must include in your gross in-
come all amounts you receive as rent. Rental
income is any payment you receive for the
use or occupation of property. In addition to
amounts you receive as normal rent pay-
ments, there are other amounts, discussed
later, that may be rental income.
When to report. Report rental income on
your return for the year you actually or con-
structively receive it, if you are a cash basis
taxpayer. You are a cash basis taxpayer if
you report income in the year you receive it,
regardless of when it was earned. You con-
structively receive income when it is made
available to you, for example, by being cred-
ited to your bank account.
For more information about when you
constructively receive income, see Publica-
tion 538, Accounting Periods and Methods.
Advance rent.  Advance rent is any amount
you receive before the period that it covers.
Include advance rent in your rental income in
the year you receive it regardless of the pe-
riod covered or the method of accounting you
use.
Example. You sign a 10-year lease to
rent your property. In the first year, you re-
ceive $5,000 for the first year's rent and
$5,000 as rent for the last year of the lease.
You must include $10,000 in your income in
the first year.
Security deposits.   Do not include a security
deposit in your income when you receive it if
you plan to return it to your tenant at the end
of the lease. But if you keep part or all of the
security deposit during any year because your
tenant does not live up to the terms of the
lease, include the amount you keep in your
income in that year.
If an amount called a security deposit is
to be used as a final payment of rent, it is
advance rent. Include it in your income when
you receive it.
Payment for canceling a lease.  If your
tenant pays you to cancel a lease, the amount
you receive is rent. Include the payment in
your income in the year you receive it re-
gardless of your method of accounting.
Expenses paid by tenant. If your tenant
pays any of your expenses, the payments are
rental income. You must include them in your
income. You can deduct the expenses if they
are deductible rental expenses. See Rental
Expenses, later, for more information.
Example 1. Your tenant pays the water
and sewage bill for your rental property and
deducts it from the normal rent payment. Un-
der the terms of the lease, your tenant does
not have to pay this bill.
Example 2. While you are out of town,
the furnace in your rental property stops
working. Your tenant pays for the necessary
repairs and deducts the repair bill from the
rent payment.
Based on the facts in each example, in-
clude in your rental income both the net
amount of the rent payment and the amount
the tenant paid for the utility bills and the re-
pairs. You can deduct the cost of the utility
bills and repairs as a rental expense.
Property or services.  If you receive property
or services, instead of money, as rent, include
the fair market value of the property or ser-
vices in your rental income.
If the services are provided at an agreed
upon or specified price, that price is the fair
market value unless there is evidence to the
contrary.
Example. Your tenant is a painter. He
offers to paint your rental property instead of
paying 2 months' rent. You accept his offer.
Include in your rental income the amount
the tenant would have paid for 2 months' rent.
You can include that same amount as a rental
expense for painting your property.
Lease with option to buy. If the rental
agreement gives the tenant the right to buy
your rental property, the payments you re-
ceive under the agreement are generally
rental income. If your tenant exercises the
right to buy the property, the payments you
receive for the period after the date of sale
are part of the selling price.
Rental of property also used as a home.
If you rent property that you also use as your
home and you rent it for fewer than 15 days
during the tax year, do not include the rent
you receive in your gross income. You can-
not deduct rental expenses. However, you
can include on Schedule A (Form 1040) the
interest, taxes, and casualty and theft losses
that are allowed for nonrental property. See
Personal Use of Vacation Home or Dwelling
Unit, later.
Part interest.If you own a part interest in
rental property, you must report your part of
the rental income from the property.
Rental Expenses 
This part discusses expenses of renting
property that you ordinarily can deduct from
your gross rental income. It includes infor-
mation on the expenses you can deduct if you
rent a condominium or cooperative apart-
ment, if you rent part of your property, or if
you change your property to rental use. De-
preciation, which you can also deduct from
your gross rental income, is discussed later.
When to deduct. You generally deduct your
rental expenses in the year you pay them.
Vacant rental property.  If you hold property
for rental purposes, you may be able to de-
duct your ordinary and necessary expenses
for managing, conserving, or maintaining the
property while the property is vacant. How-
ever, you cannot deduct any loss of rental
income for the period the property is vacant.
Pre-rental expenses.  You can deduct your
ordinary and necessary expenses for man-
aging, conserving, or maintaining rental
property from the time you make it available
for rent.
Depreciation. You can begin to depreciate
rental property when it is available and ready
for rent. See, Placed-in-Service Date under
Depreciation, later.
Expenses for rental property sold.If you
sell property you held for rental purposes, you
can deduct the ordinary and necessary ex-
penses for managing, conserving, or main-
taining the property until it is sold.
Personal use of rental property.  If you
sometimes use your rental property for per-
sonal purposes, you must divide your ex-
penses between rental and personal use.
Also, your rental expense deductions may be
Page 2

limited. See Personal Use of Vacation Home
or Dwelling Unit, later.
Part interest.If you own a part interest in
rental property, you can deduct your part of
the expenses that you paid.
Repairs and Improvements
You can deduct the cost of repairs to your
rental property. You cannot deduct the cost
of improvements. You recover the cost of
improvements by taking depreciation (ex-
plained later).
RECORDS
Separate the costs of repairs and im-
provements, and keep accurate rec-
ords. You will need to know the cost
of improvements when you sell or depreciate
your property.
Repairs.  A repair keeps your property in
good operating condition. It does not mate-
rially add to the value of your property or
substantially prolong its life. Repainting your
property inside or out, fixing gutters or floors,
fixing leaks, plastering, and replacing broken
windows are examples of repairs.
If you make repairs as part of an extensive
remodeling or restoration of your property, the
whole job is an improvement.
Improvements.  An improvement adds to the
value of property, prolongs its useful life, or
adapts it to new uses. Table 1 shows exam-
ples of many improvements.
If you make an improvement to property,
the cost of the improvement must be capital-
ized. The capitalized cost can generally be
depreciated as if the improvement were sep-
arate property.
Other Expenses
Other expenses you can deduct from your
gross rental income include advertising,
cleaning and maintenance services, utilities,
fire and liability insurance, taxes, interest,
commissions for the collection of rent, ordi-
nary and necessary travel and transportation,
and other expenses discussed next.
Rental payments for property. You can
deduct the rent you pay for property that you
use for rental purposes. If you buy a
leasehold for rental purposes, you can deduct
an equal part of the cost each year over the
term of the lease.
Rental of equipment.You can deduct the
rent you pay for equipment that you use for
rental purposes. However, in some cases,
lease contracts are actually purchase con-
tracts. If so, you cannot deduct these pay-
ments. You can recover the cost of purchased
equipment through depreciation.
Insurance premiums paid in advance. If
you pay an insurance premium for more than
one year in advance, each year you can de-
duct the part of the premium payment that
will apply to that year. You cannot deduct the
total premium in the year you pay it.
Local benefit taxes.Generally, you cannot
deduct charges for local benefits that increase
the value of your property, such as charges
for putting in streets, sidewalks, or water and
sewer systems. These charges are non-
depreciable capital expenditures. You must
add them to the basis of your property. You
Table 1. Examples of Improvements
Caution: Work you do (or have done) on your home that does not add much to
either the value or the life of the property, but rather keeps the property in good
condition, is considered a repair, not an improvement.
Additions
Bedroom
Bathroom
Deck
Garage
Porch
Patio
Lawn & Grounds
Landscaping
Driveway
Walkway
Fence
Retaining wall
Sprinkler system
Swimming pool
Miscellaneous
Storm windows, doors
New roof
Central vacuum
Wiring upgrades
Satellite dish
Security system
Heating & Air Conditioning
Heating system
Central air conditioning
Furnace
Duct work
Central humidifier
Filtration system
Plumbing
Septic system
Water heater
Soft water system
Filtration system
Interior Improvements
Built-in appliances
Kitchen modernization
Flooring
Wall-to-wall carpeting
Insulation
Attic
Walls, floor
Pipes, duct work
can deduct local benefit taxes if they are for
maintaining, repairing, or paying interest
charges for the benefits.
Interest expense.  You can deduct mortgage
interest you pay on your rental property.
Chapter 5 of Publication 535 explains mort-
gage interest in detail.
Expenses paid to obtain a mortgage.
Certain expenses you pay to obtain a mort-
gage on your rental property cannot be de-
ducted as interest. These expenses, which
include mortgage commissions, abstract fees,
and recording fees, are capital expenses.
However, you can amortize them over the life
of the mortgage.
Form 1098.  If you paid $600 or more of
mortgage interest on your rental property to
any one person, you should receive a Form
1098, Mortgage Interest Statement, or similar
statement showing the interest you paid for
the year. If you and at least on other person
(other than your spouse if you file a joint re-
turn) were liable for, and paid interest on the
mortgage, and the other person received the
Form 1098, report your share of the interest
on line 13 of Schedule E (Form 1040). Attach
a statement to your return showing the name
and address of the other person. In the left
margin of Schedule E, next to line 13, write
“See attached.”
Points. The term “points” is often used to
describe some of the charges paid by a bor-
rower when the borrower takes out a loan or
a mortgage. These charges are also called
loan origination fees, maximum loan
charges, or premium charges. If any of these
charges (points) are solely for the use of
money, they are interest.
Points paid when you take out a loan or
mortgage result in original issue discount
(OID). In general, the points (OID) are
deductible as interest unless they must be
capitalized. How you figure the amount of
points (OID) you can deduct each year de-
pends on whether or not your total OID, in-
cluding the OID resulting from the points, is
insignificant or de minimis. If the OID is not
de minimis, you must use the constant-yield
method to figure how much you can deduct.
De minimis OID. In general, the OID is
de minimis if it is less than one-fourth of 1%
(.0025) of the stated redemption price at ma-
turity (generally, the principal amount of the
loan) multiplied by the number of full years
from the date of original issue to maturity (the
term of the loan).
If the OID is de minimis, you can choose
one of the following ways to figure the amount
you can deduct each year.
1) On a constant-yield basis over the term
of the loan.
2) On a straight-line basis over the term of
the loan.
3) In proportion to stated interest payments.
4) In full at maturity of the loan.
You make this choice by deducting the OID
in a manner consistent with the method cho-
sen on your timely filed tax return for the tax
year in which the loan or mortgage is issued.
Example of de minimis amount. On
January 1, 2000, you took out a loan for
$100,000. The loan matures on January 1,
2010 (a 10-year term) and the stated principal
amount of the loan ($100,000) is payable on
that date. An interest payment of $10,000 is
payable to the bank on January 2 of each
year, beginning on January 2, 2001. When
the loan was made, you paid $1,500 in points
to the bank. The points reduced the issue
price of the loan from $100,000 to $98,500,
resulting in $1,500 of OID. You determine that
the points (OID) you paid are de minimis
based on the following computation.
Redemption price at maturity (principal
amount of the loan) ................................. $100,000
Multiplied by: The term of the loan in
complete years ........................................× 10
Multiplied by .............................................× .0025
De minimis amount $2,500
Page 3

The points (OID) you paid ($1,500) are less
than the de minimis amount; therefore, you
have de minimis OID and you can choose one
of the four ways discussed earlier to figure the
amount you can deduct each year. Under the
straight line method, you can deduct $150
each year for 10 years.
Constant-yield method.If the OID is not
de minimis, you must use the constant-yield
method to figure how much you can deduct
each year. 
You figure your deduction for the first year
in the following manner.
1) Determine the issue price of the loan.
For example, if you paid points on a
loan, subtract the points you paid from
the principal amount of the loan to get
the issue price.
2) Multiply the issue price (the result in (1))
by the yield to maturity.
3) Subtract any qualified stated interest
payments from the result in (2). This is
the amount of OID you can deduct in the
first year.
To figure your deduction in any subse-
quent years, you start with the adjusted is-
sue price. To get the adjusted issue price,
add to the issue price any OID previously
deducted. Then follow steps (2) and (3)
above.
The yield to maturity (YTM) is generally
shown in the literature you receive from your
lender. If you do not have this information,
consult your lender or tax advisor. In general,
the YTM is the discount rate that, when used
in computing the present value of all principal
and interest payments, produces an amount
equal to the principal amount of the loan.
Qualified stated interest (QSI) generally
is stated interest that is unconditionally pay-
able in cash or property (other than debt in-
struments of the issuer) at least annually at
a single fixed rate.
Example of constant yield.The facts
are the same as in the previous example. The
yield to maturity on your loan is 10.2467%,
compounded annually. 
You figure the amount of points (OID) you
can deduct in 2000 as follows.
You figure the deduction for 2001 as fol-
lows.
Loan or mortgage ends. If your loan or
mortgage ends, you may be able to deduct
any remaining points (OID) in the tax year in
which the loan or mortgage ends. A loan or
mortgage may end due to a refinancing, pre-
payment, foreclosure, or similar event. How-
ever, if the refinancing is with the same
lender, the remaining points (OID) generally
are not deductible in the year in which the
refinancing occurs, but may be deductible
over the term of the new mortgage or loan.
Travel expenses.  You can deduct the ordi-
nary and necessary expenses of traveling
away from home if the primary purpose of the
trip was to collect rental income or to manage,
conserve, or maintain your rental property.
You must properly allocate your expenses
between rental and nonrental activities. For
information on travel expenses, see chapter
1 of Publication 463.
RECORDS
To deduct travel expenses, you must
keep records that follow the rules in
chapter 5 of Publication 463.
Local transportation expenses.  You can
deduct your ordinary and necessary local
transportation expenses if you incur them to
collect rental income or to manage, conserve,
or maintain your rental property.
Generally, if you use your personal car,
pickup truck, or light van for rental activities,
you can deduct the expenses using one of
two methods: actual expenses or the stand-
ard mileage rate. For 2000 the standard
mileage rate for all business miles is 32.5
cents a mile. For more information, see
chapter 4 of Publication 463.
RECORDS
To deduct car expenses under either
method, you must keep records that
follow the rules in chapter 5 of Publi-
cation 463. In addition, you must complete
Part V of Form 4562, and attach it to your tax
return.
Tax return preparation.  You can deduct,
as a rental expense, the part of tax return
preparation fees you paid to prepare Part I
of Schedule E (Form 1040). For example, on
your 2000 Schedule E you can deduct fees
paid in 2000 to prepare Part I of your 1999
Schedule E. You can also deduct, as a rental
expense, any expense you paid to resolve a
tax underpayment related to your rental ac-
tivities.
Condominiums
and Cooperatives
If you rent out a condominium or a cooper-
ative apartment, special rules apply. Condo-
miniums are treated differently from cooper-
atives.
Condominium 
If you own a condominium, you own a dwell-
ing unit in a multi-unit building. You also own
a share of the common elements of the
structure, such as land, lobbies, elevators,
and service areas. You and the other condo-
minium owners may pay dues or assess-
ments to a special corporation that is organ-
ized to take care of the common elements.
If you rent your condominium to others,
you can deduct depreciation, repairs, upkeep,
dues, interest and taxes, and assessments for
the care of the common parts of the structure.
You cannot deduct special assessments you
pay to a condominium management corpo-
ration for improvements. But you may be able
to recover your share of the cost of any im-
provement by taking depreciation.
Cooperative 
If you have a cooperative apartment that you
rent to others, you can usually deduct, as a
rental expense, all the maintenance fees you
pay to the cooperative housing corporation.
However, you cannot deduct a payment ear-
marked for a capital asset or improvement,
or otherwise charged to the corporation's
capital account. For example, you cannot
deduct a payment used to pave a community
parking lot, install a new roof, or pay the
principal of the corporation's mortgage. You
must add the payment to the basis of your
stock in the corporation.
Treat as a capital cost the amount you
were assessed for capital items. This cannot
be more than the amount by which your pay-
ments to the corporation exceeded your share
of the corporation's mortgage interest and
real estate taxes.
 Your share of interest and taxes is the
amount the corporation elected to allocate to
you, if it reasonably reflects those expenses
for your apartment. Otherwise, figure your
share in the following way.
1) Divide the number of your shares of
stock by the total number of shares out-
standing, including any shares held by
the corporation.
2) Multiply the corporation's deductible in-
terest by the number you figured in (1).
This is your share of the interest.
3) Multiply the corporation's deductible
taxes by the number you figured in (1).
This is your share of the taxes.
In addition to the maintenance fees paid
to the cooperative housing corporation, you
can deduct your direct payments for repairs,
upkeep, and other rental expenses, including
interest paid on a loan used to buy your stock
in the corporation. The depreciation de-
duction allowed for cooperative apartments is
discussed later.
Not Rented for Profit 
If you do not rent your property to make a
profit, you can deduct your rental expenses
only up to the amount of your rental income.
You cannot carry forward your rental ex-
penses that are more than your rental in-
come. For more information about the rules
for an activity not engaged in for profit, see
chapter 1 of Publication 535.
Where to report.  Report your not-for-profit
rental income on line 21, Form 1040. You
can include your mortgage interest (if you use
the property as your main home or second
home), real estate taxes, and casualty losses
on the appropriate lines of Schedule A (Form
1040), Itemized Deductions, if you itemize
your deductions.
Claim your other expenses, subject to the
rules explained in chapter 1 of Publication
535, as miscellaneous itemized deductions
on line 22 of Schedule A (Form 1040). You
can deduct these expenses only if they, to-
gether with certain other miscellaneous item-
ized deductions, total more than 2% of your
adjusted gross income. For more information
about miscellaneous itemized deductions,
see Publication 529, Miscellaneous De-
ductions.
Postponing decision.  If your rental income
is more than your rental expenses for at least
3 years out of a period of 5 consecutive years,
you are presumed to be renting your property
to make a profit. You may choose to post-
pone the decision of whether the rental is for
profit by filing Form 5213.
See Publication 535 for more information.
Principal amount of the loan ................... $100,000
Minus: Points .......................................... 1,500
Issue price of the loan ............................ $ 98,500
Multiplied by: YTM ..................................× .102467
Total ........................................................ 10,093
Minus: QSI .............................................. 10,000
Points (OID) deductible in 2000 $93
Issue price .............................................. $98,500
Plus: Points (OID) deducted in 2000 ...... 93
Adjusted issue price ............................... $98,593
Multiplied by: YTM ..................................× .102467
Total ........................................................ 10,103
Minus: QSI .............................................. 10,000
Points (OID) deductible in 2001 ............. $103
Page 4

Property Changed
to Rental Use 
If you change your home or other property (or
a part of it) to rental use at any time other than
the beginning of your tax year, you must di-
vide yearly expenses, such as depreciation,
taxes, and insurance, between rental use and
personal use.
You can deduct as rental expenses only
the part of the expense that is for the part of
the year the property was used or held for
rental purposes.
You cannot deduct depreciation or insur-
ance for the part of the year the property was
held for personal use. However, you can in-
clude the home mortgage interest and real
estate tax expenses for the part of the year
the property was held for personal use as an
itemized deduction on Schedule A (Form
1040).
Example. Your tax year is the calendar
year. You moved from your home in May and
started renting it out on June 1. You can de-
duct as rental expenses seven-twelfths of
your yearly expenses, such as taxes and in-
surance.
Starting with June, you can deduct as
rental expenses the amounts you pay for
items generally billed monthly, such as utili-
ties.
Renting Part of
Property 
If you rent part of your property, you must
divide certain expenses between the part of
the property used for rental purposes and the
part of the property used for personal pur-
poses, as though you actually had two sepa-
rate pieces of property.
You can deduct the expenses related to
the part of the property used for rental pur-
poses, such as home mortgage interest and
real estate taxes, as rental expenses. You
can deduct the expenses for the part of the
property used for personal purposes, subject
to certain limitations, only if you itemize your
deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). You
can also deduct as a rental expense a part
of other expenses that normally are non-
deductible personal expenses, such as ex-
penses for electricity, or painting the outside
of your house. You cannot deduct any part
of the cost of a single phone line even if your
tenants have unlimited use of it.
You do not have to divide the expenses
that belong only to the rental part of your
property. For example, if you paint a room
that you rent, or if you pay premiums for li-
ability insurance in connection with renting a
room in your home, your entire cost is a rental
expense. If you install a second phone line
strictly for your tenant's use, all of the cost of
the second line is deductible as a rental ex-
pense. You can deduct depreciation, dis-
cussed later, on the part of the property used
for rental purposes as well as on the furniture
and equipment you use for rental purposes.
How to divide expenses.If an expense is
for both rental use and personal use, such
as mortgage interest or heat for the entire
house, you must divide the expense between
rental use and personal use. You can use
any reasonable method for dividing the ex-
pense. It may be reasonable to divide the
cost of some items (for example, water)
based on the number of people using them.
However, the two most common methods for
dividing an expense are one based on the
number of rooms in your home and one
based on the square footage of your home.
Example. You rent a room in your house.
The room is 12 × 15 feet, or 180 square feet.
Your entire house has 1,800 square feet of
floor space. You can deduct as a rental ex-
pense 10% of any expense that must be di-
vided between rental use and personal use.
If your heating bill for the year for the entire
house was $600, $60 ($600 × 10%) is a rental
expense. The balance, $540, is a personal
expense that you cannot deduct.
Personal Use of
Vacation Home or
Dwelling Unit 
If you have any personal use of a vacation
home or other dwelling unit that you rent out,
you must divide your expenses between
rental use and personal use. See Figuring
Days of Personal Use and How To Divide
Expenses, later. If your expenses for rental
use are more than your rental income, you
may not be able to deduct all of the rental
expenses. See How To Figure Rental Income
and Deductions, later.
Exception for minimal rental use.If you
use the dwelling unit as a home and you rent
it for fewer than 15 days during the year, do
not include any of the rent in your income and
do not deduct any of the rental expenses. See
Dwelling Unit Used as Home, later.
Dwelling unit.  The rules in this section apply
to vacation homes and other dwelling units.
A dwelling unit includes a house, apartment,
condominium, mobile home , boat, or similar
property. A dwelling unit has basic living ac-
commodations, such as sleeping space, a
toilet, and cooking facilities. A dwelling unit
does not include property used solely as a
hotel, motel, inn, or similar establishment.
Property is used solely as a hotel, motel,
inn, or similar establishment if it is regularly
available for occupancy by paying customers
and is not used by an owner as a home during
the year.
Example. You rent out a room in your
home that is always available for short-term
occupancy by paying customers. You do not
use the room yourself and you allow only
paying customers to use the room. The room
is used solely as a hotel, motel, inn, or similar
establishment and is not a dwelling unit.
Dwelling Unit Used as Home
The tax treatment of rental income and ex-
penses for a dwelling unit that you also use
for personal purposes depends on whether
you use it as a home. (See How To Figure
Rental Income and Deductions, later).
You use a dwelling unit as a home during
the tax year if you use it for personal pur-
poses more than the greater of:
1) 14 days, or
2) 10% of the total days it is rented to oth-
ers at a fair rental price.
See Figuring Days of Personal Use, later.
If a dwelling unit is used for personal pur-
poses on a day it is rented at a fair rental
price, do not count that day as a day of rental
use in applying (2) above. Instead, count it
as a day of personal use in applying both (1)
and (2) above. This rule does not apply when
dividing expenses between rental and per-
sonal use.
Fair rental price.A fair rental price for your
property generally is an amount that a person
who is not related to you would be willing to
pay. The rent you charge is not a fair rental
price if it is substantially less than the rents
charged for other properties that are similar
to your property.
Ask yourself the following questions when
comparing another property with yours.
 Is it used for the same purpose?
 Is it approximately the same size?
 Is it in approximately the same condition?
 Does it have similar furnishings?
 Is it in a similar location?
If any of the answers are no, the properties
probably are not similar.
Examples
The following examples show how to deter-
mine whether you used your rental property
as a home.
Example 1. You converted the basement
of your home into an apartment with a
bedroom, a bathroom, and a small kitchen.
You rented the basement apartment at a fair
rental price to college students during the
regular school year. You rented to them on a
9-month lease (273 days).
During June (30 days), your brothers
stayed with you and lived in the basement
apartment rent free.
Your basement apartment was used as a
home because you used it for personal pur-
poses for 30 days. Rent-free use by your
brothers is considered personal use. Your
personal use (30 days) is more than the
greater of 14 days or 10% of the total days it
was rented (27 days).
Example 2. You rented out the guest
bedroom in your home at a fair rental price
during the local college's homecoming, com-
mencement, and football weekends (a total
of 27 days). Your sister-in-law stayed in the
room, rent free, for the last 3 weeks (21 days)
in July.
The room was used as a home because
you used it for personal purposes for 21 days.
That is more than the greater of 14 days or
10% of the total days it was rented (2 days).
Example 3. You own a condominium
apartment in a resort area. You rented it out
at a fair rental price for a total of 170 days
during the year. For 12 of these days, the
tenant was not able to use the apartment and
allowed you to use it even though you did not
refund any of the rent. Your family actually
used the apartment for 10 of those days.
Therefore, the apartment is treated as having
been rented for 160 (170 – 10) days. Your
family also used the apartment for 7 other
days during the year.
Page 5

You used the apartment as a home be-
cause you used it for personal purposes for
17 days. That is more than the greater of 14
days or 10% of the total days it was rented
(16 days).
Use as Main Home
Before or After Renting
Do not count as days of personal use the
days you used the property as your main
home before or after renting it or offering it for
rent in either of the following circumstances.
1) You rented or tried to rent the property
for 12 or more consecutive months.
2) You rented or tried to rent the property
for a period of less than 12 consecutive
months and the period ended because
you sold or exchanged the property.
This special rule does not apply when dividing
expenses between rental and personal use.
Example 1. On February 28, you moved
out of the house you had lived in for 6 years
because you accepted a job in another town.
You rent your house at a fair rental price from
March 15 of that year to May 14 of the next
year (14 months). On the following June 1,
you move back into your old house.
The days you used the house as your
main home from January 1 to February 28
and from June 1 to December 31 of the next
year are not counted as days of personal use.
Example 2. On January 31, you moved
out of the condominium where you had lived
for 3 years. You offered it for rent at a fair
rental price beginning on February 1. You
were unable to rent it until April. On Septem-
ber 15, you sold the condominium.
The days you used the condominium as
your main home from January 1 to January
31 are not counted as days of personal use
when determining whether you used it as a
home.
Figuring Days
of Personal Use
A day of personal use of a dwelling unit is any
day that it is used by any of the following
persons.
1) You or any other person who has an in-
terest in it, unless you rent it out to an-
other owner as his or her main home
under a shared equity financing agree-
ment (defined later). However, see Use
as Main Home Before or After Renting
under Dwelling Unit Used As Home,
earlier.
2) A member of your family or a member
of the family of any other person who
has an interest in it, unless the family
member uses the dwelling unit as his or
her main home and pays a fair rental
price. Family includes only brothers and
sisters, half-brothers and half-sisters,
spouses, ancestors (parents, grand-
parents, etc.) and lineal descendants
(children, grandchildren, etc.).
3) Anyone under an arrangement that lets
you use some other dwelling unit.
4) Anyone at less than a fair rental price.
Main home. If the other person or member
of the family in (1) or (2) above has more than
one home, his or her main home is the one
lived in most of the time.
Shared equity financing agreement.  This
is an agreement under which two or more
persons acquire undivided interests for more
than 50 years in an entire dwelling unit, in-
cluding the land, and one or more of the co-
owners is entitled to occupy the unit as his
or her main home upon payment of rent to the
other co-owner or owners.
Donation of use of property.You use a
dwelling unit for personal purposes if:
 You donate the use of the unit to a char-
itable organization,
 The organization sells the use of the unit
at a fund-raising event, and
 The “purchaser” uses the unit.
Examples
The following examples show how to deter-
mine days of personal use.
Example 1. You and your neighbor are
co-owners of a condominium at the beach.
You rent the unit out to vacationers whenever
possible. The unit is not used as a main home
by anyone. Your neighbor uses the unit for
2 weeks every year.
Because your neighbor has an interest in
the unit, both of you are considered to have
used the unit for personal purposes during
those 2 weeks.
Example 2. You and your neighbors are
co-owners of a house under a shared equity
financing agreement. Your neighbors live in
the house and pay you a fair rental price.
Even though your neighbors have an in-
terest in the house, the days your neighbors
live there are not counted as days of personal
use by you. This is because your neighbors
rent the house as their main home under a
shared equity financing agreement.
Example 3. You own a rental property
that you rent to your son. Your son has no
interest in this dwelling unit. He uses it as his
main home. He pays you a fair rental price for
the property.
Your son's use of the property is not per-
sonal use by you because your son is using
it as his main home, he has no interest in the
property, and he is paying you a fair rental
price.
Example 4. You rent your beach house
to Rosa. Rosa rents her house in the moun-
tains to you. You each pay a fair rental price.
You are using your house for personal
purposes on the days that Rosa uses it be-
cause your house is used by Rosa under an
arrangement that allows you to use her
house.
Example 5. You rent an apartment to
your mother at less than a fair rental price.
You are using the apartment for personal
purposes on the days that your mother rents
it because you rent it for less than a fair rental
price.
Days Used for
Repairs and Maintenance
Any day that you spend working substantially
full time repairing and maintaining your prop-
erty is not counted as a day of personal use.
Do not count such a day as a day of personal
use even if family members use the property
for recreational purposes on the same day.
Example. You own a cabin in the moun-
tains that you rent out during the summer.
You spend 3 days at the cabin each May,
working full time to repair anything that was
damaged over the winter and get the cabin
ready for the summer. You also spend 3 days
each September, working full time to repair
any damage done by renters and getting the
cabin ready for the winter.
These 6 days do not count as days of
personal use even if your family uses the
cabin while you are repairing it.
How To Divide Expenses 
If you use a dwelling unit for both rental and
personal purposes, divide your expenses be-
tween the rental use and the personal use
based on the number of days used for each
purpose. Expenses for the rental use of the
unit are deductible under the rules explained
in How To Figure Rental Income and De-
ductions, later.
When dividing your expenses, follow
these rules.
1) Any day that the unit is rented at a fair
rental price is a day of rental use even
if you used the unit for personal pur-
poses that day. This rule does not apply
when determining whether you used the
unit as a home.
2) Any day that the unit is available for rent
but not actually rented is not a day of
rental use.
Example. Your beach cottage was avail-
able for rent from June 1 through August 31
(92 days). Your family uses the cottage during
the last 2 weeks in May (14 days). You were
unable to find a renter for the first week in
August (7 days). The person who rented the
cottage for July allowed you to use it over a
weekend (2 days) without any reduction in or
refund of rent. The cottage was not used at
all before May 17 or after August 31.
You figure the part of the cottage ex-
penses to treat as rental expenses by using
the following steps.
1) The cottage was used for rental a total
of 85 days (92 − 7). The days it was
available for rent but not rented (7 days)
are not days of rental use. The July
weekend (2 days) you used it is rental
use because you received a fair rental
price for the weekend.
2) You used the cottage for personal pur-
poses for 14 days (the last 2 weeks in
May).
3) The total use of the cottage was 99 days
(14 days personal use + 85 days rental
use). 
4) Your rental expenses are 85/99 (86%)
of the cottage expenses.
When determining whether you used the
cottage as a home, the July weekend (2 days)
you used it is personal use even though you
received a fair rental price for the weekend.
Page 6

Therefore, you had 16 days of personal use
and 83 days of rental use for this purpose.
Because you used the cottage for personal
purposes more than 14 days and more than
10% of the days of rental use, you used it as
a home. If you have a net loss, you may not
be able to deduct all of the rental expenses.
See Property Used as a Home in the following
discussion.
How To Figure Rental
Income and Deductions 
How you figure your rental income and de-
ductions depends on whether the dwelling
unit was used as a home (see Dwelling Unit
Used as Home, earlier) and, if used as a
home, how many days the property was
rented.
Property Not Used As a Home
If you do not use a dwelling unit as a home,
report all the rental income and deduct all the
rental expenses. See How To Report Rental
Income and Expenses, later.
Your deductible rental expenses can be
more than your gross rental income. How-
ever, see Limits on Rental Losses, later.
Property Used As a Home
If you use a dwelling unit as a home during
the year, how you figure your rental income
and deductions depends on how many days
the unit was rented.
Rented fewer than 15 days.If you use a
dwelling unit as a home and you rent it for
fewer than 15 days during the year, do not
include in income any of the rental income.
Also, you cannot deduct any expenses as
rental expenses.
Rented 15 days or more. If you use a
dwelling unit as a home and rent it for 15 days
or more during the year, you include all your
rental income in your gross income. See How
To Report Rental Income and Expenses,
later. If you had a net profit from the rental
property for the year (that is, if your rental
income is more than the total of your rental
expenses, including depreciation), deduct all
of your rental expenses. However, if you had
a net loss, your deduction for certain rental
expenses is limited.
Limit on deductions.If your rental ex-
penses are more than your rental income, you
cannot use the excess expenses to offset in-
come from other sources. The excess can be
carried forward to the next year and treated
as rental expenses for the same property.
Any expenses carried forward to next year
will be subject to any limits that apply next
year. You can deduct the expenses carried
over to a year only up to the amount of your
rental income for that year, even if you do not
use the property as your home for that year.
To figure your deductible rental expenses
and any carryover to next year, use Table 2.
Depreciation 
When you use your property to produce in-
come, such as rents, you can recover (get
back) some or all of what you paid for the
property through tax deductions. You do this
by depreciating the property; that is, by de-
ducting some of your cost on your tax return
each year.
Several factors determine how much de-
preciation you can deduct. The main factors
are: (1) your basis in the property, (2) the re-
covery period for the property, and (3) the
depreciation method used. You cannot simply
deduct your mortgage or principal payments
as an expense. 
You can deduct depreciation only on the
part of your property used for rental purposes.
Depreciation reduces your basis for figuring
gain or loss on a later sale or exchange.
You may have to use Form 4562 to figure
and report your depreciation. See How To
Report Rental Income and Expenses, later.
Also see Publication 946.
Claiming the correct amount of depreci-
ation.You should claim the correct amount
of depreciation each tax year. If you did not
claim depreciation that you were entitled to
deduct, you must still reduce your basis in the
property by the amount of depreciation that
you should have deducted. If you did not de-
duct the correct amount of depreciation for
property in any year, you may be able to
make a correction for that year by filing Form
1040X, Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax
Return. If you are not allowed to make the
correction on an amended return, you can
change your accounting method to claim the
correct amount of depreciation. See Chang-
ing your accounting method, later.
Amended return. If you deducted an in-
correct amount of depreciation, you can file
an amended return to correct the following.
1) A mathematical error made in any year.
2) A posting error made in any year.
3) The amount of depreciation for property
for which you have not adopted a
method of accounting for depreciation.
If an amended return is allowed, you must
file it by the later of the following:
1) 3 years from the date you filed your ori-
ginal return for the year in which you did
not deduct the correct amount, or
2) 2 years from the time you paid your tax
for that year.
A return filed early is considered filed on the
due date.
If you have adopted a method of ac-
counting for depreciation for property, you
cannot change the method by filing an
amended return. You have adopted a method
of accounting if you deducted an incorrect
amount of depreciation for the property on
two or more consecutively filed tax returns.
Changing your accounting method.To
change your accounting method, you must file
Form 3115, Application for Change in Ac-
counting Method, to get the consent of the
IRS. In some instances, that consent is au-
tomatic. For more information, see Changing
Your Accounting Method in Publication 946.
What can be depreciated.You can depre-
ciate your property if it meets all the following
conditions.
1) It is used in business or held for the
production of income (such as rental
property).
2) It has a determinable useful life that ex-
tends substantially beyond the year it is
placed in service.
3) It is something that wears out, gets used
up, decays, becomes obsolete, or loses
value from natural causes.
You can depreciate both real property,
other than land (discussed next), and per-
sonal property.
Real property. Real property is land and,
generally, anything that is built on, growing
on, or attached to land. Buildings, fences,
sidewalks, and trees are real property.
Personal property. Personal property is
property that is not real property. Furniture,
appliances, and lawn mowers are personal
property.
Land. You can never depreciate land. The
costs of clearing, grading, planting, and land-
scaping are usually all part of the cost of land
and are not depreciable.
Rented property.Generally, if you pay rent
on property, you cannot depreciate that
property. Usually, only the owner can depre-
ciate it. If you make permanent improve-
ments to the property, you may be able to
depreciate the improvements. See Additions
or improvements to property, later.
Cooperative apartments.  If you rent your
cooperative apartment to others, you can de-
duct your share of the cooperative housing
corporation's depreciation.
Figure your depreciation deduction as a
tenant-stockholder in a cooperative housing
corporation in the following way.
1) Figure the depreciation for all the
depreciable real property owned by the
corporation. (Depreciation methods are
discussed later.) If you bought your co-
operative stock after its first offering, fig-
ure the depreciable basis of this property
as follows.
a) Multiply your cost per share by the
total number of shares outstanding.
b) Add to the amount figured in (a) any
mortgage debt on the property on
the date you bought the stock.
c) Subtract from the amount figured in
(b) any mortgage debt that is not for
the depreciable real property, such
as the part for the land.
2) Subtract from (1) any depreciation for
space owned by the corporation that can
be rented but cannot be lived in by
tenant-stockholders. The result is the
yearly depreciation as reduced.
3) Divide the number of your shares of
stock by the total number of shares out-
standing, including any shares held by
the corporation.
4) Multiply the yearly depreciation as re-
duced (from (2)) by the percentage you
figured in (3). This is your share of the
depreciation.
Your depreciation deduction for the year
cannot be more than the part of your adjusted
basis (defined later) in the stock of the cor-
poration that is for your rental property.
See Cooperative apartments under What
Can Be Depreciated in chapter 1 of Publica-
tion 946 for more information.
Cannot be more than basis. The total of
all your yearly depreciation deductions cannot
be more than the cost or other basis of the
Page 7

Table 2. Worksheet for Figuring the Limit on Rental Deductions for a Dwelling Unit Used as a Home
Use this worksheet only if you answer “yes” to all of the following questions.
● Did you use the dwelling unit as a home this year? (See Dwelling Unit Used as Home. )
● Did you rent the dwelling unit 15 days or more this year?
● Is the total of your rental expenses and depreciation more than your rental income?
1.
2a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
3.
4a.
5.
6a.
7a.
Enter rents received
Enter the rental portion of deductible home mortgage interest (see instructions)
Enter the rental portion of real estate taxes
Enter the rental portion of deductible casualty and theft losses (see instructions)
Enter direct rental expenses (see instructions)
Fully deductible rental expenses. Add lines 2a–2d
Subtract line 2e from line 1. If zero or less, enter zero
Enter the rental portion of expenses directly related to operating or maintaining the dwelling unit (such
as repairs, insurance, and utilities)
Enter the rental portion of excess mortgage interest (see instructions)
Add lines 4a and 4b
Allowable operating expenses. Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 4c
Subtract line 4d from line 3. If zero or less, enter zero
Enter the rental portion of excess casualty and theft losses (see instructions)
Enter the rental portion of depreciation of the dwelling unit
Add lines 6a and 6b
Allowable excess casualty and theft losses and depreciation. Enter the smaller of line 5 or
line 6c
Operating expenses to be carried over to next year. Subtract line 4d from line 4c
Excess casualty and theft losses and depreciation to be carried over to next year. Subtract
line 6d from line 6c
Enter the amounts on lines 2e, 4d, and 6d on the appropriate lines of Schedule E (Form 1040), Part I.
b.
c.
d.
b.
c.
d.
b.
Worksheet Instructions
Follow these instructions for the worksheet
above. If you were unable to deduct all your
expenses last year, because of the rental
income limit, add these unused amounts to
your expenses for this year.
Line 2a. Figure the mortgage interest on the
dwelling unit that you could deduct on
Schedule A (Form 1040) if you had not rented
the unit. Do not include interest on a loan that
did not benefit the dwelling unit. For example,
do not include interest on a home equity loan
used to pay off credit cards or other personal
loans, buy a car, or pay college tuition. Include
interest on a loan used to buy, build, or
improve the dwelling unit, or to refinance such
a loan. Enter the rental portion of this interest
on line 2a of the worksheet.
Line 2c. Figure the casualty and theft losses
related to the dwelling unit that you could
deduct on Schedule A (Form 1040) if you had
not rented the dwelling unit. To do this,
complete Section A of Form 4684, treating the
losses as personal losses. On line 17 of
Line 2d. Enter the total of your rental
expenses that are directly related only to the
rental activity. These include interest on loans
used for rental activities other than to buy,
build, or improve the dwelling unit. Also
include rental agency fees, advertising, office
supplies, and depreciation on office
equipment used in your rental activity.
Line 4b. On line 2a, you entered the rental
portion of the mortgage interest you could
deduct on Schedule A if you had not rented
out the dwelling unit. Enter on line 4b of this
worksheet the rental portion of the mortgage
interest you could not deduct on Schedule A
because it is more than the limit on home
Line 6a. To find the rental portion of excess
casualty and theft losses, use the Form 4684
you prepared for line 2c of this worksheet.
A.
B.
C.
D.
Enter the amount from line 10
of Form 4684
Enter the rental portion of A
Enter the amount from line 2c
of this worksheet
Subtract C from B. Enter the
result here and on line 6a of this
worksheet
Allocating the limited deduction. If you
cannot deduct all of the amount on line 4c or
6c this year, you can allocate the allowable
deduction in any way you wish among the
expenses included on line 4c or 6c. Enter the
amount you allocate to each expense on the
appropriate line of Schedule E, Part I.
mortgage interest. Do not include interest on
a loan that did not benefit the dwelling unit
(as explained in the line 2a instructions).
Note. Do not file this Form 4684 or use it to
figure your personal losses on Schedule A.
Instead, figure the personal portion on a
separate Form 4684.
Form 4684, enter 10% of your adjusted gross
income figured without your rental income
and expenses from the dwelling unit. Enter
the rental portion of the result from line 18 of
Form 4684 on line 2c of this worksheet.
property. For this purpose, your yearly de-
preciation deductions include any depreci-
ation that you were allowed to claim, even if
you did not claim it.
Depreciation systems.  There are three
ways to figure depreciation. The depreciation
system you use depends on the type of
property and when it was placed in service.
For property used in rental activities you use:
 Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery
Systems (MACRS) for property placed in
service after 1986,
 Accelerated Cost Recovery Systems
(ACRS) for property placed in service af-
ter 1980 but before 1987, or
 Useful lives and either straight line or an
accelerated method of depreciation, such
as the declining balance method, for
property placed in service before 1981.
CAUTION
!
This publication discusses MACRS
only. If you need information about
depreciating property placed in ser-
vice before 1987, see Publication 534.
If you placed property in service before
2000, continue to use the same method of
figuring depreciation that you used in the
past.
Section 179 deduction.You cannot claim
the section 179 deduction for property held to
produce rental income (unless renting prop-
erty is your trade or business). See chapter
2 of Publication 946.
Alternative minimum tax.  If you use accel-
erated depreciation, you may have to file
Form 6251, Alternative Minimum Tax. Accel-
erated depreciation includes MACRS, ACRS,
and any other method that allows you to de-
Page 8

Table 3. MACRS Recovery Periods for Property Used in Rental
Activities
Type of Property
MACRS Recovery Period To Use
General
Depreciation
System
Alternative
Depreciation
System
Computers and their peripheral equipment
Office machinery, such as:
Typewriters
Calculators
Copiers
Automobiles
Light trucks
Appliances, such as:
Stoves
Refrigerators
Carpets
Furniture used in rental property
Any property that does not have a class life and that
has not been designated by law as being in
any other class
Roads
Shrubbery
Fences
Residential rental property (buildings or structures)
and structural components such as furnaces,
water pipes, venting, etc.
Improvements and additions, such as a new roof
5 years
6 years
7 years 10 years
9 years
15 years 20 years
27.5 years 40 years
The recovery period of the property
to which the addition or
improvement is made, determined
as if the property were placed in
service at the same time as the
improvement or addition.
Office furniture and equipment, such as:
Desks
Files
5 years
5 years
5 years 5 years
5 years 5 years
5 years
5 years 9 years
5 years 9 years
7 years 12 years
15 years 20 years
15 years 20 years
Under GDS, property that you placed in
service during 2000 in your rental activities
generally falls into one of the following
classes. Also see Table 3.
1) 5-year property. This class includes
computers and peripheral equipment,
office machinery (typewriters, calcula-
tors, copiers, etc.), automobiles, and
light trucks.
This class also includes appliances,
carpeting, furniture, etc., used in a rental
real estate activity.
Depreciation on automobiles, certain
computers, and cellular telephones is
limited. See chapter 4 of Publication 946.
2) 7-year property. This class includes of-
fice furniture and equipment (desks,
files, etc.). This class also includes any
property that does not have a class life
and that has not been designated by law
as being in any other class.
3) 15-year property. This class includes
roads and shrubbery (if depreciable).
4) Residential rental property.  This class
includes any real property that is a rental
building or structure (including a mobile
home) for which 80% or more of the
gross rental income for the tax year is
from dwelling units. A dwelling unit is a
house or an apartment used to provide
living accommodations in a building or
structure. It does not include a unit in a
hotel, motel, inn, or other establishment
where more than half of the units are
used on a transient basis. If you live in
any part of the building or structure, the
gross rental income includes the fair
rental value of the part you live in. Resi-
dential rental property is depreciated
over 27.5 years.
CAUTION
!
The other recovery classes do not
generally apply to property used in
rental activities. These classes are not
discussed in this publication. See Publication
946 for more information.
Qualified Indian reservation property.  For
the applicable recovery period for qualified
Indian reservation property, see Publication
946.
Additions or improvements to property. 
Treat depreciable additions or improvements
you make to any property as separate prop-
erty items for depreciation purposes. The re-
covery period for an addition or improvement
to property begins on the later of:
1) The date the addition or improvement is
placed in service, or
2) The date the property to which the ad-
dition or improvement was made is
placed in service.
The class and recovery period of the ad-
dition or improvement is the one that would
apply to the underlying property if it were
placed in service at the same time as the
addition or improvement.
Example. You own a residential rental
house that you have been renting out since
1980 and that you are depreciating under
ACRS. You put an addition onto the house
and placed the improvement in service in
2000. You must use MACRS for the addition.
Under MACRS, the addition is depreciated
as residential rental property.
duct more depreciation than you could deduct
using a straight line method.
MACRS
In general, tangible property placed in service
during 2000 is depreciated using MACRS.
MACRS consists of two systems that de-
termine how you depreciate your property.
The main system is called the General De-
preciation System (GDS). The second sys-
tem is called the Alternative Depreciation
System (ADS). GDS is used to figure your
depreciation deduction for property used in
most rental activities, unless you elect ADS.
To figure your MACRS deduction, you
need to know the following information about
your property:
1) Its recovery period,
2) Its placed-in-service date, and
3) Its depreciable basis.
Personal home changed to rental use.  You
must use MACRS to figure the depreciation
on property used as your home and changed
to rental property in 2000.
Excluded property. You cannot use
MACRS for certain personal property placed
in service in your rental property in 2000 if it
had been previously placed in service before
MACRS became effective. Generally, per-
sonal property is excluded from MACRS if
you (or a person related to you) owned or
used it in 1986 or if your tenant is a person
(or someone related to the person) who
owned or used it in 1986. However, the
property is not excluded if your 2000 de-
duction under MACRS (using a half-year
convention) is less than the deduction you
would have under ACRS. See What Cannot
Be Depreciated Under MACRS in Publication
946 for more information.
Recovery Periods Under GDS 
Each item of property that can be depreciated
is assigned to a property class. The recovery
period of the property depends on the class
the property is in. The property classes are:
 3-year property,
 5-year property,
 7-year property,
 10-year property,
 15-year property,
 20-year property,
 Nonresidential real property, and
 Residential rental property.
The class to which property is assigned is
determined by its class life. Class lives and
recovery periods for most assets are listed in
Appendix B in Publication 946.
Page 9

Placed-in-Service Date
You can begin to depreciate property when
you place it in service in your trade or busi-
ness or for the production of income. Property
is considered placed in service in a rental
activity when it is ready and available for a
specific use in that activity.
Example 1. On November 22 of last year,
you purchased a dishwasher for your rental
property. The appliance was delivered on
December 7, but was not installed and ready
for use until January 3 of this year. Because
the dishwasher was not ready for use last
year, it is not considered placed in service
until this year.
If the appliance had been ready for use
when it was delivered in December of last
year, it would have been considered placed
in service in December, even if it was not
actually used until this year.
Example 2. On April 6, you purchased a
house to use as residential rental property.
You made extensive repairs to the house and
had it ready for rent on July 5. You began to
advertise the house for rent in July and actu-
ally rented it out beginning September 1. The
house is considered placed in service in July
when it was ready and available for rent. You
can begin to depreciate the house in July.
Example 3. You moved from your home
in July. During August and September you
made several repairs to the house. On Octo-
ber 1, you listed the property for rent with a
real estate company, which rented it on De-
cember 1. The property is considered placed
in service on October 1, the date when it was
available for rent.
Depreciable Basis
The depreciable basis of property used in a
rental activity is generally its adjusted basis
when you place it in service in that activity.
This is its cost or other basis when you ac-
quired it, adjusted for certain items occurring
before you place it in service in the rental
activity. Basis and adjusted basis are ex-
plained in the following discussions.
However, if you used the property for
personal purposes before changing it to rental
use, its depreciable basis is the lesser of its
adjusted basis or its fair market value when
you change it to rental use. See Basis of
Property Changed to Rental Use, later.
Cost Basis 
The basis of property you buy is usually its
cost. The cost is the amount you pay for it in
cash, in debt obligation, in other property, or
in services. Your cost also includes amounts
you pay for:
 Sales tax charged on the purchase,
 Freight charges to obtain the property,
and
 Installation and testing charges.
Loans with low or no interest.If you buy
property on any time-payment plan that
charges little or no interest, the basis of your
property is your stated purchase price, less
the amount considered to be unstated inter-
est. See Unstated Interest and Original Issue
Discount in Publication 537, Installment
Sales.
Real property.If you buy real property, such
as a building and land, certain fees and other
expenses you pay are part of your cost basis
in the property.
Real estate taxes.  If you buy real prop-
erty and agree to pay real estate taxes on it
that were owed by the seller and the seller
did not reimburse you, the taxes you pay are
treated as part of your basis in the property.
You cannot deduct them as taxes paid.
If you reimburse the seller for real estate
taxes the seller paid for you, you can usually
deduct that amount. Do not include that
amount in the basis of the property.
Settlement fees and other costs.
Settlement fees and closing costs that are for
buying the property are part of your basis in
the property. These include:
 Abstract fees,
 Charges for installing utility services,
 Legal fees,
 Recording fees,
 Surveys,
 Transfer taxes,
 Title insurance, and
 Any amounts the seller owes that you
agree to pay, such as back taxes or in-
terest, recording or mortgage fees,
charges for improvements or repairs, and
sales commissions.
Some settlement fees and closing costs
you cannot include in the basis of the prop-
erty are:
1) Fire insurance premiums,
2) Rent or other charges relating to occu-
pancy of the property before closing, and
3) Charges connected with getting or refi-
nancing a loan, such as:
a) Points (discount points, loan origi-
nation fees),
b) Mortgage insurance premiums,
c) Loan assumption fees,
d) Cost of a credit report, and
e) Fees for an appraisal required by a
lender.
Also, do not include amounts placed in
escrow for the future payment of items such
as taxes and insurance.
Assumption of a mortgage.  If you buy
property and become liable for an existing
mortgage on the property, your basis is the
amount you pay for the property plus the
amount that still must be paid on the mort-
gage.
Example. You buy a building for $60,000
cash and assume a mortgage of $240,000
on it. Your basis is $300,000.
Land and buildings. If you buy buildings
and your cost includes the cost of the land
on which they stand, you must divide the cost
between the land and the buildings to figure
the basis for depreciation of the buildings.
The part of the cost that you allocate to each
asset is the ratio of the fair market value of
that asset to the fair market value of the whole
property at the time you buy it.
If you are not certain of the fair market
values of the land and the buildings, you can
divide the cost between them based on the
assessed values for real estate tax purposes.
Example. You buy a house and land for
$100,000. The purchase contract does not
specify how much of the purchase price is for
the house and how much is for the land.
The latest real estate tax assessment on
the property was based on an assessed value
of $80,000, of which $68,000 is for the house
and $12,000 is for the land.
You can allocate 85% ($68,000 ÷
$80,000) of the purchase price to the house
and 15% ($12,000 ÷ $80,000) of the purchase
price to the land.
Your basis in the house is $85,000 (85%
of $100,000) and your basis in the land is
$15,000 (15% of $100,000).
Basis Other Than Cost 
There are many times when you cannot use
cost as a basis. You cannot use cost as a
basis for property that you received:
 In return for services you performed,
 In an exchange for other property,
 As a gift,
 From your spouse, or from your former
spouse as the result of a divorce, or
 As an inheritance.
If you received property in one of these
ways, see Publication 551 for information on
how to figure your basis.
Adjusted Basis 
Before you can figure allowable depreciation,
you may have to make certain adjustments
(increases and decreases) to the basis of the
property. The result of these adjustments to
the basis is the adjusted basis.
Increases to basis.  You must increase the
basis of any property by the cost of all items
properly added to a capital account. This in-
cludes:
 The cost of any improvements having a
useful life of more than one year,
 Amounts spent after a casualty to restore
the damaged property,
 The cost of extending utility service lines
to the property, and
 Legal fees, such as the cost of defending
and perfecting title.
Improvements. Add to the basis of your
property the amount an improvement actually
cost you, including any amount you borrowed
to make the improvement. This includes all
direct costs, such as material and labor, but
not your own labor. It also includes all ex-
penses related to the improvement.
For example, if you had an architect draw
up plans for remodeling your property, the
architect's fee is a part of the cost of the re-
modeling. Or, if you had your lot surveyed to
put up a fence, the cost of the survey is a part
of the cost of the fence.
Keep separate accounts for depreciable
improvements made after you place the
property in service in your rental activity. For
information on depreciating improvements,
see Additions or improvements to property,
earlier, under Recovery Periods Under GDS.
Page 10

CAUTION
!
The cost of landscaping improve-
ments is usually treated as an addi-
tion to the basis of the land, which is
not depreciable property. See What can be
depreciated, earlier.
Assessments for local improvements.
Assessments for items which tend to increase
the value of property, such as streets and
sidewalks, must be added to the basis of the
property. For example, if your city installs
curbing on the street in front of your house,
and assesses you and your neighbors for the
cost of curbing, you must add the assessment
to the basis of your property. Also add the
cost of legal fees paid to obtain a decrease
in an assessment levied against property to
pay for local improvements. You cannot de-
duct these items as taxes or depreciate them.
Assessments for maintenance or repair
or meeting interest charges are deductible as
taxes. Do not add them to your basis in the
property.
Deducting vs. capitalizing costs.You
cannot add to your basis costs that are
deductible as current expenses. However,
there are certain costs you can choose either
to deduct or to capitalize. If you capitalize
these costs, include them in your basis. If you
deduct them, do not include them in your ba-
sis.
The costs you may be able to choose to
deduct or to capitalize include carrying
charges, such as interest and taxes, that you
must pay to own property.
For more information about deducting or
capitalizing costs, see chapter 8 in Publication
535.
Decreases to basis.  You must decrease the
basis of your property by any items that rep-
resent a return of your cost. These include:
 The amount of any insurance or other
payment you receive as the result of a
casualty or theft loss,
 Any deductible casualty loss not covered
by insurance,
 Any amount you receive for granting an
easement,
 Any residential energy credit you were
allowed before 1986, if you added the
cost of the energy items to the basis of
your home, and
 The amount of depreciation you could
have deducted on your tax returns under
the method of depreciation you selected.
If you took less depreciation than you
could have under the method you se-
lected, you must decrease the basis by
the amount you could have taken under
that method.
If you deducted more depreciation
than you should have, you must decrease
your basis by the amount you should
have deducted, plus the part of the ex-
cess you deducted that actually lowered
your tax liability for any year.
Basis of Property
Changed to Rental Use 
When you change property you held for per-
sonal use to rental use (for example, you rent
out your former home), you figure the basis
for depreciation using the lesser of fair market
value or adjusted basis.
Fair market value.  This is the price at which
the property would change hands between a
buyer and a seller, neither having to buy or
sell, and both having reasonable knowledge
of all the relevant facts. Sales of similar
property, on or about the same date, may be
helpful in figuring the fair market value of the
property.
Figuring the basis.The basis for depreci-
ation is the lesser of:
 The fair market value of the property on
the date you changed it to rental use, or
 Your adjusted basis on the date of the
change—that is, your original cost or
other basis of the property, plus the cost
of permanent improvements or additions
since you acquired it, minus deductions
for any casualty or theft losses claimed
on earlier years' income tax returns and
other decreases to basis.
Example. Several years ago you built
your home for $40,000 on a lot that cost you
$4,000. Before changing the property to rental
use last year, you added $8,000 of permanent
improvements to the house and claimed a
$1,000 deduction for a casualty loss to the
house. Because land is not depreciable, you
can only include the cost of the house when
figuring the basis for depreciation.
The adjusted basis of the house at the
time of the change in use was $47,000
($40,000 + $8,000 − $1,000).
On the date of the change in use, your
property had a fair market value of $48,000,
of which $6,000 was for the land and $42,000
was for the house.
The basis for depreciation on the house
is the fair market value at the date of the
change ($42,000), because it is less than
your adjusted basis ($47,000).
MACRS Depreciation
Under GDS 
You can figure your MACRS depreciation
deduction under GDS in one of two ways. The
deduction is substantially the same both
ways. (The difference, if any, is slight.) You
can either:
1) Actually compute the deduction using
the depreciation method and convention
that apply over the recovery period of the
property, or
2) Use the percentage from the optional
MACRS tables, shown later.
If you actually compute the deduction, the
depreciation method you use depends on the
class of the property.
5-, 7-, or 15-year property.For property in
the 5- or 7-year class, use the double (200%)
declining balance method and a half-year
convention. However, you must use the mid-
quarter convention, if it applies. These con-
ventions are explained later. For property in
the 15-year class, use the 150% declining
balance method and a half-year convention.
You can also choose to use the 150%
declining balance method for property in the
5- or 7-year class. The choice to use the
150% method for one item in a class of
property applies to all property in that class
that is placed in service during the tax year
of the election. You make this election on
Form 4562. In column (f), Part II, enter “150
DB.”
If you use either the 200% or 150% de-
clining balance method, you figure your de-
duction using the straight line method in the
first tax year that the straight line method
gives you a larger deduction.
You can also choose to use the straight
line method with a half-year or mid-quarter
convention for 5-, 7-, or 15-year property. The
choice to use the straight line method for one
item in a class of property applies to all
property in that class that is placed in service
during the tax year of the election. You elect
the straight line method on Form 4562. In
column (f), Part II, enter “S/L.” Once you
make this election, you cannot change to an-
other method.
Residential rental property.You must use
the straight line method and a mid-month
convention for residential rental property.
Declining Balance Method 
To figure your MACRS deduction, first deter-
mine your declining balance rate from the ta-
ble below. However, if you elect to use the
150% declining balance method for 5- or
7-year property, figure the declining balance
rate by dividing 1.5 (150%) by the recovery
period for the property.
In the first tax year, multiply the adjusted
basis of the property by the declining balance
rate and apply the appropriate convention to
figure your depreciation. In later years, use
the following steps to figure your depreciation.
1) Adjust your basis by subtracting the
amount of depreciation allowable for the
earlier years.
2) Multiply your adjusted basis in (1) by the
same rate used in the first year.
See Conventions, later, for information on
depreciation in the year you dispose of prop-
erty.
Declining balance rates.The following table
shows the declining balance rate that applies
for each class of property and the first year
for which the straight line method will give a
greater deduction. (The rates for 5- and
7-year property are based on the 200% de-
clining balance method. The rate for 15-year
property is based on the 150% declining bal-
ance method.)
Straight Line Method 
To figure your MACRS deduction under the
straight line method, you must figure a new
depreciation rate for each tax year in the re-
covery period.
For any tax year, figure the straight line
rate by dividing the number 1 by the years
remaining in the recovery period at the be-
ginning of the tax year. When figuring the
number of years remaining, you must take
into account the convention used in the first
year. If the remaining recovery period at the
beginning of the tax year is less than one
year, the straight line rate for that tax year is
100%.
Multiply the adjusted basis of the property
by the straight line rate. You must figure the
Class Declining Balance Rate Year
5 40% 4th
7 28.57% 5th
15 10% 7th
Page 11

depreciation for the first year using the con-
vention that applies. (See Conventions, later.)
Example. For property with a 5-year re-
covery period, the straight line rate is 20% (1
divided by 5) for the first tax year. After you
apply the half-year convention, the first year
rate is 10% (20% divided by 2).
At the beginning of the second year, the
remaining recovery period is 4
1/2 years be-
cause of the half-year convention. The
straight line rate for the second year is
22.22% (1 divided by 4.5).
To figure your depreciation deduction for
the second year:
1) Subtract the depreciation taken in the
first year from the basis of the property,
and
2) Multiply the remaining basis in (1) by
22.22%.
Residential rental property.In the first year
that you claim depreciation for residential
rental property, you can only claim depreci-
ation for the number of months the property
is in use, and you must use the mid-month
convention (explained under Conventions,
next).
Conventions 
To figure your depreciation deduction for both
the year in which you place property in ser-
vice and the year in which you dispose of the
property, you use one of the following con-
ventions.
 1) Mid-month convention.
 2) Half-year convention.
 3) Mid-quarter convention.
Mid-month convention. A mid-month con-
vention is used for residential rental property
in all situations. Under a mid-month conven-
tion, residential rental property placed in ser-
vice, or disposed of, during any month is
treated as placed in service, or disposed of,
in the middle of that month.
Half-year convention. The half-year con-
vention is used for property other than resi-
dential rental property. The half-year conven-
tion treats all property placed in service, or
disposed of, during a tax year as placed in
service, or disposed of, in the middle of that
tax year.
A half year of depreciation is allowable for
the first year the property is placed in service,
regardless of when the property is placed in
service during the tax year. For each of the
remaining years of the recovery period, you
will take a full year of depreciation. If you hold
the property for the entire recovery period, a
half year of depreciation is allowable for the
year in which the recovery period ends. If you
dispose of the property before the end of the
recovery period, a half year of depreciation is
allowable for the year of disposition.
Mid-quarter convention. A mid-quarter
convention must be used in certain circum-
stances for property other than residential
rental property. This convention applies if the
total basis of such property that is placed in
service in the last 3 months of a tax year is
more than 40% of the total basis of all such
property you place in service during the year.
Under a mid-quarter convention, all prop-
erty placed in service, or disposed of, during
any quarter of a tax year is treated as placed
in service, or disposed of, in the middle of the
quarter.
Do not include in the total basis any
property placed in service and disposed of
during the same tax year.
Example. During the tax year, Tom
Martin purchased the following items to use
in his rental property.
 A dishwasher for $400 that he placed in
service in January. 
 Used furniture for $100 that he placed in
service in September.
 A refrigerator for $500 that he placed in
service in October.
Tom uses the calendar year as his tax year.
The total basis of all property placed in ser-
vice that year is $1,000. The $500 basis of the
refrigerator placed in service during the last
3 months of his tax year exceeds $400 (40%
× $1,000). Tom must use the mid-quarter
convention for all three items.
Optional Tables
You can use the tables in Table 4 to compute
annual depreciation under MACRS. The ta-
bles show the percentages for the first 6
years. See Appendix A of Publication 946 for
complete tables. The percentages in  Tables
4–A, 4–B, and 4–C make the change from
declining balance to straight line in the year
that straight line will yield a larger deduction.
See Declining Balance Method, earlier.
If you elect to use the straight line method
for 5-, 7-, or 15-year property, or the 150%
declining balance method for 5- or 7-year
property, use the tables in Appendix A of
Publication 946.
How to use the tables.The following section
explains how to use the optional tables.
Figure the depreciation deduction by
multiplying your unadjusted basis in the
property by the percentage shown in the ap-
propriate table. Your unadjusted basis is
your depreciable basis without reduction for
depreciation previously claimed.
Once you begin using an optional table to
figure depreciation, you must continue to use
it for the entire recovery period unless there
is an adjustment to the basis of your property
for a reason other than:
1) Depreciation allowed or allowable, or
2) An addition or improvement that is de-
preciated as a separate item of property.
If there is an adjustment for any other reason
(for example, because of a deductible casu-
alty loss) you can no longer use the table. For
the year of the adjustment and for the re-
maining recovery period, figure depreciation
using the property's adjusted basis at the end
of the year and the appropriate depreciation
method, as explained earlier under MACRS
Depreciation Under GDS.
Tables 4–A, 4–B, and 4–C. The percent-
ages in these tables take into account the
half-year and mid-quarter conventions. Use
Table 4–A for 5-year property, Table 4–B for
7-year property, and Table 4–C for 15-year
property. Use the percentage in the second
column (half-year convention) unless you
must use the mid-quarter convention (ex-
plained earlier). If you must use the mid-
quarter convention, use the column that cor-
responds to the calendar year quarter in
which you placed the property in service.
Example 1. You purchased a stove and
refrigerator and placed them in service in
February. Your basis in the stove is $300 and
your basis in the refrigerator is $500. Both are
5-year property. Using the half-year conven-
tion column in Table 4–A, you find the de-
preciation percentage for year 1 is 20%. For
that year your depreciation deduction is $60
($300 × .20) for the stove and $100 ($500 ×
.20) for the refrigerator.
For year 2, you find your depreciation
percentage is 32%. That year's depreciation
deduction will be $96 ($300 × .32) for the
stove and $160 ($500 × .32) for the
refrigerator.
Example 2. Assume the same facts as
in Example 1, except you buy the refrigerator
in October instead of February. You must use
the mid-quarter convention to figure depreci-
ation on the stove and refrigerator. The
refrigerator was placed in service in the last
3 months of the tax year, and its basis ($500)
is more than 40% of the total basis of all
property placed in service during the year
($800 × .40 = $320).
Because you placed the refrigerator in
service in October, you use the fourth quarter
column of Table 4–A and find that the depre-
ciation percentage for year 1 is 5%. Your de-
preciation deduction for the refrigerator is $25
($500 × .05).
Because you placed the stove in service
in February, you use the first quarter column
of Table 4–A and find that the depreciation
percentage for year 1 is 35%. For that year,
your depreciation deduction for the stove is
$105 ($300 × .35).
Table 4–D. Use this table for residential
rental property. Find the row for the month
that you placed the property in service. Use
the percentages listed for that month to figure
your depreciation deduction. The mid-month
convention is taken into account in the per-
centages shown in the table.
Example. You purchased a single family
rental house and placed it in service in Feb-
ruary. Your basis in the house is $80,000.
Using Table 4–D, you find that the percentage
for property placed in service in February of
year 1 is 3.182%. That year's depreciation
deduction is $2,546 ($80,000 × .03182).
MACRS Depreciation
Under ADS 
If you choose, you can use the ADS method
for most property. Under ADS, you use the
straight line method of depreciation.
Table 3 shows the recovery periods for
property used in rental activities that you de-
preciate under ADS.
See Appendix B in Publication 946 for
other property. If your property is not listed,
it is considered to have no class life.
Use the mid-month convention for resi-
dential rental property. For all other property,
use the half-year or mid-quarter convention.
Election.You choose to use ADS by enter-
ing the depreciation on line 16, Part II of Form
4562.
The election of ADS for one item in a class
of property generally applies to all property in
that class that is placed in service during the
tax year of the election. However, the election
Page 12

Table 4. Optional MACRS Tables
Table 4–A. MACRS 5-Year Property
Half-year convention Mid-quarter convention
Year First
quarter
Second
quarter
Third
quarter
Fourth
quarter
1
2
3
4
5
6
20.00%
32.00
19.20
11.52
11.52
5.76
35.00%
26.00
15.60
11.01
11.01
1.38
25.00%
30.00
18.00
11.37
11.37
4.26
15.00%
34.00
20.40
12.24
11.30
7.06
5.00%
38.00
22.80
13.68
10.94
9.58
Table 4–B. MACRS 7-Year Property
Half-year convention Mid-quarter convention
Year First
quarter
Second
quarter
Third
quarter
Fourth
quarter
1
2
3
4
5
6
Table 4–C. MACRS 15-Year Property
Half-year convention Mid-quarter convention
Year First
quarter
Second
quarter
Third
quarter
Fourth
quarter
1
2
3
4
5
6
Table 4–D. Residential Rental Property (27.5-year)
14.29%
24.49
17.49
12.49
8.93
8.92
25.00%
21.43
15.31
10.93
8.75
8.74
17.85%
23.47
16.76
11.97
8.87
8.87
10.71%
25.51
18.22
13.02
9.30
8.85
3.57%
27.55
19.68
14.06
10.04
8.73
5.00%
9.50
8.55
7.70
6.93
6.23
8.75%
9.13
8.21
7.39
6.65
5.99
6.25%
9.38
8.44
7.59
6.83
6.15
3.75%
9.63
8.66
7.80
7.02
6.31
1.25%
9.88
8.89
8.00
7.20
6.48
Use the row for the month of the taxable year placed in service.
Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Year 6
Jan.
Feb.
March
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
3.485% 3.636%
3.182
2.879
2.576
2.273
1.970
1.667
1.364
1.061
0.758
0.455
0.152
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636%
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636%
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636%
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636%
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
Theft. The unlawful taking and removing of
your money or property with the intent to de-
prive you of it is a theft.
Gain from casualty or theft.  When you
have a casualty to, or theft of, your property
and you receive money, including insurance,
that is more than your adjusted basis in the
property, you generally must report the gain.
However, under certain circumstances, you
may defer the payment of tax by choosing to
postpone reporting the gain. To do this, you
must generally buy replacement property
within 2 years after the close of the first tax
year in which any part of your gain is realized.
The cost of the replacement property must
be equal to or more than the net insurance
or other payment you received. For more in-
formation, see Publication 547.
How to report.If you had a casualty or theft
that involved property used in your rental ac-
tivity, you figure the net gain or loss in Section
B of Form 4684, Casualties and Thefts. Also,
you may have to report the net gain or loss
from Form 4684 on Form 4797, Sales of
Business Property.(Follow the instructions
for Form 4684.)
Limits on
Rental Losses 
Rental real estate activities are generally
considered passive activities, and the amount
of loss you can deduct is limited. Generally,
you cannot deduct losses from rental real
estate activities unless you have income from
other passive activities. See Passive Activity
Limits, later.
Losses from passive activities are first
subject to the at-risk rules. At-risk rules limit
the amount of deductible losses from holding
most real property placed in service after
1986.
Exception.If your rental losses are less than
$25,000 ($12,500 if married filing separately),
the passive activity limits probably do not ap-
ply to you. See Losses From Rental Real
Estate Activities, later.
Property used as a home.  If you used the
rental property as a home during the year, the
passive activity rules do not apply to that
home. Instead, you must follow the rules ex-
plained under Personal Use of Vacation
Home or Dwelling Unit, earlier.
At-Risk Rules 
The at-risk rules place a limit on the amount
you can deduct as losses from activities often
described as tax shelters. Losses from hold-
ing real property (other than mineral property)
placed in service before 1987 are not subject
to the at-risk rules.
Generally, any loss from an activity sub-
ject to the at-risk rules is allowed only to the
extent of the total amount you have at risk in
the activity at the end of the tax year. You
are considered at risk in an activity to the
extent of cash and the adjusted basis of other
property you contributed to the activity and
certain amounts borrowed for use in the ac-
tivity. See Publication 925 for more informa-
tion.
applies on a property-by-property basis for
residential rental property.
Once you choose to use ADS, you cannot
change your election.
Casualties and Thefts 
As a result of a casualty or theft, you may
have a loss related to your property. You may
be able to deduct the loss on your income tax
return. For information on casualty and theft
losses (business and nonbusiness), see
Publication 547.
Casualty.Damage to, destruction of, or loss
of property is a casualty if it results from an
identifiable event that is sudden, unexpected,
or unusual.
Page 13

Passive Activity Limits
In general, all rental activities (except those
meeting the exception for real estate profes-
sionals, below) are passive activities. For this
purpose, a rental activity is an activity from
which you receive income mainly for the use
of tangible property, rather than for services.
Limits on passive activity deductions and
credits.Deductions for losses from passive
activities are limited. You generally cannot
offset income, other than passive income,
with losses from passive activities. Nor can
you offset taxes on income, other than pas-
sive income, with credits resulting from pas-
sive activities. Any excess loss or credit is
carried forward to the next tax year.
For a detailed discussion of these rules,
see Publication 925.
You may have to complete Form 8582 to
figure the amount of any passive activity loss
for the current tax year for all activities and
the amount of the passive activity loss al-
lowed on your tax return. See Form 8582 not
required under Losses From Rental Real Es-
tate Activities, later, to determine whether you
have to complete Form 8582.
Exception for Real Estate
Professionals
Rental activities in which you materially par-
ticipated during the year are not passive ac-
tivities if for that year you were a real estate
professional. Losses from these activities are
not limited by the passive activity rules.
For this purpose, each interest you have
in a rental real estate activity is a separate
activity, unless you choose to treat all inter-
ests in rental real estate activities as one ac-
tivity.
If you were a real estate professional for
2000, complete line 42 of Schedule E (Form
1040). 
Real estate professional.You were a real
estate professional if, during the year, the
time you spent performing services in real
property trades or businesses in which you
materially participated was:
1) More than half of the time you spent
performing personal services in all
trades or businesses, and
2) More than 750 hours.
A real property trade or business is one
that develops, redevelops, constructs, recon-
structs, acquires, converts, rents, operates,
manages, leases, or sells real property.
Services you performed as an employee
are not treated as performed in a real property
trade or business, unless you own more than
5% of the stock (or more than 5% of the
capital or profits interest) in the employer.
If you file a joint return, one spouse must
separately meet both of the above conditions,
without taking into account services per-
formed by the other spouse.
Material participation. Generally, you
materially participated in an activity for the tax
year if you were involved in its operations on
a regular, continuous, and substantial basis
during the year. For more information, see
section 1.469–5T of the regulations.
Participating spouse.If you are married,
determine whether you materially participated
in an activity by also counting any partici-
pation in the activity by your spouse during
the year. Do this even if your spouse owns
no interest in the activity or files a separate
return for the year.
Choice to treat all interests as one activity.
If you were a real estate professional and had
more than one rental real estate interest dur-
ing the year, you can choose to treat all the
interests as one activity. You can make this
choice for any year that you qualify as a real
estate professional. If you forgo making the
choice for one year, you can still make it for
a later year.
If you make the choice, it is binding for the
tax year you make it and for any later year
that you are a real estate professional. This
is true even if you are not a real estate pro-
fessional in any intervening year. (For that
year, the exception for real estate profes-
sionals will not apply in determining whether
your activity is subject to the passive activity
rules.)
See the instructions for line 23 of Sched-
ule E (Form 1040) for information about
making this choice.
Losses From Rental
Real Estate Activities
If you actively participated in a passive
rental real estate activity, you may be able to
deduct up to $25,000 of loss from the activity
from nonpassive income. This special allow-
ance cannot be more than $12,500 if you
were married, file a separate return, and lived
apart from your spouse at all times during the
year. It is not available if you were married,
file a separate return, and did not live apart
from your spouse at all times during the year.
The maximum amount of the special al-
lowance is reduced if your modified adjusted
gross income is more than $100,000 ($50,000
if married filing separately).
Example. Jane is single and has $40,000
in wages, $2,000 of passive income from a
limited partnership, and $3,500 of passive
loss from a rental real estate activity in which
she actively participated. $2,000 of Jane's
$3,500 loss offsets her passive income. The
remaining $1,500 loss can be deducted from
her $40,000 wages.
Active participation.You actively partic-
ipated in a rental real estate activity if you
(and your spouse) owned at least 10% of the
rental property and you made management
decisions in a significant and bona fide sense.
Management decisions include approving
new tenants, deciding on rental terms, ap-
proving expenditures, and similar decisions.
Example. Mike is single and had the fol-
lowing income and losses during the tax year:
The rental loss resulted from the rental of
a house Mike owned. Mike had advertised
and rented the house to the current tenant
himself. He also collected the rents, which
usually came by mail. All repairs were either
done or contracted out by Mike.
Even though the rental loss is a loss from
a passive activity, because Mike actively
participated in the rental property manage-
ment, he can use the entire $4,000 loss to
offset his other income.
Maximum special allowance.If your modi-
fied adjusted gross income is $100,000 or
less ($50,000 or less if married filing sepa-
rately), you can deduct your loss up to
$25,000 ($12,500 if married filing separately).
If your modified adjusted gross income is
more than $100,000 (more than $50,000 if
married filing separately), this special allow-
ance is limited to 50% of the difference be-
tween $150,000 ($75,000 if married filing
separately) and your modified adjusted gross
income.
Generally, there is no relief from the pas-
sive activity loss limits if your modified ad-
justed gross income is $150,000 or more
($75,000 or more if married filing separately).
Modified adjusted gross income.This
is your adjusted gross income from line 33,
Form 1040, figured without taking into ac-
count:
1) Any passive income or loss or any loss
allowable by reason of the exception for
real estate professionals discussed ear-
lier,
2) Taxable social security or equivalent tier
1 railroad retirement benefits,
3) Deductible contributions to an IRA or
certain other qualified retirement plans,
4) The deduction for one-half of self-
employment tax,
5) The exclusion allowed for employer-pro-
vided adoption benefits, and
6) The exclusion allowed for qualified U.S.
savings bond interest used to pay higher
educational expenses.
Form 8582 not required.Do not complete
Form 8582 if you meet all of the following
conditions.
1) Your only passive activities were rental
real estate activities in which you actively
participated.
2) Your overall net loss from these activities
is $25,000 or less ($12,500 or less if
married filing separately).
3) You do not have any prior year unal-
lowed losses from any passive activities.
4) If married filing separately, you lived
apart from your spouse all year.
5) You have no current or prior year unal-
lowed credits from passive activities.
6) Your modified adjusted gross income is
$100,000 or less ($50,000 or less if
married filing separately).
7) You do not hold any interest in a rental
real estate activity as a limited partner
or as a beneficiary of an estate or a trust.
If you meet all of the conditions listed
above, your rental real estate activities are
not limited by the passive activity rules and
you do not have to complete Form 8582. En-
ter each rental real estate loss from line 22
of Schedule E (Form 1040) on line 23 of
Schedule E.
If you do not meet all of the conditions
listed above, see the instructions for Form
8582 to find out if you must complete and at-
tach that form to your tax return.
Salary ........................................................ $42,300
Dividends .................................................. 300
Interest ...................................................... 1,400
Rental loss ................................................ (4,000)
Page 14

How To Report
Rental Income
and Expenses 
If you rent out buildings, rooms, or apart-
ments, and provide only heat and light, trash
collection, etc., you normally report your
rental income and expenses in Part I of
Schedule E (Form 1040). However, do not
use that schedule to report a not-for-profit
activity. See Not Rented For Profit under
Rental Expenses, earlier.
If you provide significant services that are
primarily for your tenant's convenience, such
as regular cleaning, changing linen, or maid
service, you report your rental income and
expenses on Schedule C (Form 1040), Profit
or Loss From Business or Schedule C–EZ,
Net Profit From Business. Significant services
do not include the furnishing of heat and light,
cleaning of public areas, trash collection, etc.
For information, see Publication 334, Tax
Guide for Small Business (For Individuals
Who Use Schedule C or C –EZ). You also
may have to pay self-employment tax on your
rental income. See Publication 533, Self-
Employment Tax.
Schedule E (Form 1040) 
Use Part I of Schedule E (Form 1040) to re-
port your rental income and expenses. List
your total income, expenses, and depreci-
ation for each rental property. Be sure to an-
swer the question on line 2.
If you have more than three rental or roy-
alty properties, complete and attach as many
Schedules E as are needed to list the prop-
erties. Complete lines 1 and 2 for each prop-
erty. However, fill in the “Totals” column on
only one Schedule E. The figures in the
“Totals” column on that Schedule E should
be the combined totals of all Schedules E.
Page 2 of Schedule E is used to report
income or loss from partnerships, S corpo-
rations, estates, trusts, and real estate mort-
gage investment conduits. If you need to use
page 2 of Schedule E, use page 2 of the
same Schedule E you used to enter the
combined totals in Part I.
On page 1, line 20 of Schedule E, enter
the depreciation you are claiming. You must
complete and attach Form 4562 for rental
activities only if you are claiming:
 Depreciation on property placed in ser-
vice during 2000,
 Depreciation on any property that is listed
property (such as a car), regardless of
when it was placed in service, or
 Any car expenses (actual or the standard
mileage rate).
Otherwise, figure your depreciation on your
own worksheet. You do not have to attach
these computations to your return.
Illustrated Example 
In January, Eileen Johnson bought a condo-
minium apartment to live in. Instead of selling
the house she had been living in, she decided
to change it to rental property. Eileen selected
a tenant and started renting the house on
February 1. Eileen charges $550 a month for
rent and collects it herself. Eileen received a
$550 security deposit from her tenant. Be-
cause she plans to return it to her tenant at
the end of the lease, she does not include it
in her income. Her house expenses for the
year are as follows:
Eileen must divide the real estate taxes,
mortgage interest, and fire insurance between
the personal use of the property and the
rental use of the property. She can deduct
eleven-twelfths of these expenses as rental
expenses. She can include the balance of the
allowable taxes and mortgage interest on
Schedule A (Form 1040) if she itemizes. She
cannot deduct the balance of the fire insur-
ance because it is a personal expense.
Eileen bought this house in 1979 for
$35,000. Her property tax was based on as-
sessed values of $10,000 for the land and
$25,000 for the house. Before changing it to
rental property, Eileen added several im-
provements to the house. She figures her
adjusted basis as follows:
On February 1, when Eileen changed her
house to rental property, the property had a
fair market value of $92,000. Of this amount,
$20,000 was for the land and $72,000 was for
the house.
Because Eileen's adjusted basis is less
than the fair market value on the date of the
change, Eileen uses $39,000 as her basis for
depreciation.
Because the house is residential rental
property, she must use the straight line
method of depreciation using either the GDS
recovery period or the ADS recovery period.
She chooses the GDS recovery period of 27.5
years.
She uses Table 4–D to find her depreci-
ation percentage. Because she placed the
property in service in February, she finds the
percentage to be 3.182%.
On April 1, Eileen bought a new
dishwasher for the rental property at a cost
of $425. The dishwasher is personal property
used in a rental real estate activity, which has
a 5-year recovery period. She uses the per-
centage under “Half-year convention” in Table
4–A to figure her depreciation deduction for
the dishwasher.
On May 1, Eileen paid $2,000 to have a
furnace installed in the house. The furnace is
residential rental property. Because she
placed the property in service in May, she
finds the percentage from Table 4–D to be
2.273%.
Eileen figures her net rental income or
loss for the house as follows:
Eileen uses Part I of Schedule E (Form
1040) to report her rental income and ex-
penses. She enters her income, expenses,
and depreciation for the house in the column
for Property A. She uses Form 4562 to figure
and report her depreciation. Eileen's Sched-
ule E (Form 1040) and Form 4562 are shown
next.
Mortgage interest ......................................... $1,800
Fire insurance (1-year policy) ...................... 100
Miscellaneous repairs (after renting) ........... 297
Real estate taxes imposed and paid ........... 800
Total rental income received
($550 × 11) ...................................... $6,050
Minus: Expenses
Mortgage interest ($1,800 ×
11/12) . $1,650
Fire insurance ($100 ×11/12) ......... 92
Miscellaneous repairs ................. 297
Real estate taxes ($800 ×
11/12) .... 733
Total expenses ............................ 2,772
Balance ........................................... $3,278
Minus: Depreciation
House ($39,000 × 3.182%) ......... $1,241
Dishwasher ($425 × 20%) .......... 85
Furnace ($2,000 × 2.273%) ........ 45
Total depreciation ........................ 1,371
Net rental gain for house ............. $1,907
Improvement Cost
House ......................................................... $25,000
Remodeled kitchen .................................... 4,200
Recreation room ........................................ 5,800
New roof .................................................... 1,600
Patio and deck ........................................... 2,400
Adjusted basis ......................................... $39,000
Page 15

SCHEDULE E OMB No. 1545-0074
Supplemental Income and Loss
(Form 1040) (From rental real estate, royalties, partnerships,
S corporations, estates, trusts, REMICs, etc.)
/H17075Attach to Form 1040 or Form 1041. /H17075See Instructions for Schedule E (Form 1040).
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment 
Sequence No. 13
Your social security numberName(s) shown on return
Income or Loss From Rental Real Estate and Royalties Note. Report income and expenses from your business of renting
personal property on Schedule C or C-EZ (see page E-1). Report farm rental income or loss from Form 4835 on page 2, line 39.
Show the kind and location of each rental real estate property:1
A
B
C
NoYes2
A
B
C
Properties Totals
(Add columns A, B, and C.)Income: CBA
333 Rents received
4 Royalties received 44
Expenses:
5Advertising5
6Auto and travel (see page E-2)6
7Cleaning and maintenance7
8Commissions8
9Insurance9
1010 Legal and other professional fees
11
Mortgage interest paid to banks,
etc. (see page E-2) 12
11
12
Other interest
12
13
Repairs
13
14
Supplies
14
15
Taxes
15
16
Utilities
16
1717
Other (list) /H1707518
18
1919Add lines 5 through 1819
Depreciation expense or depletion
(see page E-3)
20
20 20
21Total expenses. Add lines 19 and 2021
Income or (loss) from rental real
estate or royalty properties.
Subtract line 21 from line 3 (rents)
or line 4 (royalties). If the result is
a (loss), see page E-3 to find out
if you must file Form 6198
22
22
Deductible rental real estate loss.
Caution. Your rental real estate
loss on line 22 may be limited. See
page E-3 to find out if you must
file Form 8582. Real estate
professionals must complete line
42 on page 2
23
)() ()(23
2424 Income.  Add positive amounts shown on line 22. Do not include any losses
)(25Losses. Add royalty losses from line 22 and rental real estate losses from line 23. Enter total losses here25
26 Total rental real estate and royalty income or (loss). Combine lines 24 and 25. Enter the result here.
If Parts II, III, IV, and line 39 on page 2 do not apply to you, also enter this amount on Form 1040,
line 17. Otherwise, include this amount in the total on line 40 on page 2
26
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see Form 1040 instructions. Cat. No. 11344L Schedule E (Form 1040) 2000
Part I
Management fees
(99)
For each rental real estate property
listed on line 1, did you or your family
use it during the tax year for personal
purposes for more than the greater of:
● 14 days or
● 10% of the total days rented at
fair rental value?
(See page E-1.)
2000
Eileen Johnson 123 00 4567
Brick House
123 Main Street, Hometown, MN 56200 /H12011
6,050
92
1,650
297
733
2,772
1,371
4,143
1,907
6,050
1,650
2,772
1,371
1,907
1,907
Page 16

Eileen Johnson Rental of house 123-00-4567
2-00
5-00
39,000
2,000
1,241
45
1,371
425 200DB 85 HY5 yrs.
OMB No. 1545-0172Depreciation and Amortization4562Form
(Including Information on Listed Property)
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 67/H17075See separate instructions.
Identifying numberName(s) shown on return Business or activity to which this form relates
Election To Expense Certain Tangible Property (Section 179)
Note: If you have any “listed property,” complete Part V before you complete Part I.
$20,0001Maximum dollar limitation. If an enterprise zone business, see page 2 of the instructions1
2Total cost of section 179 property placed in service. See page 2 of the instructions2
$200,0003Threshold cost of section 179 property before reduction in limitation3
4Reduction in limitation. Subtract line 3 from line 2. If zero or less, enter -0-4
Dollar limitation for tax year. Subtract line 4 from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0-. If married
filing separately, see page 2 of the instructions
5
5
(a) Description of property (b) Cost (business use only) (c) Elected cost
6
7Listed property. Enter amount from line 277
88 Total elected cost of section 179 property. Add amounts in column (c), lines 6 and 7
9Tentative deduction. Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 89
10Carryover of disallowed deduction from 1999. See page 3 of the instructions10
11Business income limitation. Enter the smaller of business income (not less than zero) or line 5 (see instructions)11
12Section 179 expense deduction. Add lines 9 and 10, but do not enter more than line 1112
13 Carryover of disallowed deduction to 2001. Add lines 9 and 10, less line 12 /H1707513
Note: Do not use Part II or Part III below for listed property (automobiles, certain other vehicles, cellular telephones,
certain computers, or property used for entertainment, recreation, or amusement). Instead, use Part V for listed property.
MACRS Depreciation for Assets Placed in Service Only During Your 2000 Tax Year (Do not include
listed property.)
(b) Month and
year placed in
service
(c) Basis for depreciation
(business/investment use
only— see instructions)
(d) Recovery
period(a) (e) Convention (f) Method (g) Depreciation deduction
Section B—General Depreciation System (GDS) (See page 3 of the instructions.)
3-year property15a
5-year propertyb
7-year propertyc
10-year propertyd
15-year propertye
20-year propertyf
S/LMM27.5 yrs.Residential rental
property
h
S/LMM27.5 yrs.
S/LMMNonresidential real
property
i
S/LMM
Section C—Alternative Depreciation System (ADS) (See page 5 of the instructions.)
S/L16a Class life
12 yrs. S/Lb 12-year
40 yrs. MM S/Lc 40-year
Other Depreciation (Do not include listed property.) (See page 5 of the instructions.)
GDS and ADS deductions for assets placed in service in tax years beginning before 200017 17
18Property subject to section 168(f)(1) election18
ACRS and other depreciation19 19
Summary (See page 6 of the instructions.)
2020 Listed property. Enter amount from line 26
Total. Add deductions from line 12, lines 15 and 16 in column (g), and lines 17 through 20. Enter
here and on the appropriate lines of your return. Partnerships and S corporations — see instructions
21
21
22 For assets shown above and placed in service during the current year,
enter the portion of the basis attributable to section 263A costs 22
Form 4562 (2000)For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see page 9 of the instructions. Cat. No. 12906N
Part IV
Part I
Part II
Part III
/H17075Attach this form to your return.
39 yrs.
(99)
Section A—General Asset Account Election
14 If you are making the election under section 168(i)(4) to group any assets placed in service during the tax year into one
or more general asset accounts, check this box. See page 3 of the instructions /H17075
Classification of property
25-year propertyg 25 yrs. S/L
2000
Page 17

How To Get Tax Help
You can get help with unresolved tax issues,
order free publications and forms, ask tax
questions, and get more information from the
IRS in several ways. By selecting the method
that is best for you, you will have quick and
easy access to tax help.
Contacting your Taxpayer Advocate.If you
have attempted to deal with an IRS problem
unsuccessfully, you should contact your Tax-
payer Advocate.
The Taxpayer Advocate represents your
interests and concerns within the IRS by
protecting your rights and resolving problems
that have not been fixed through normal
channels. While Taxpayer Advocates cannot
change the tax law or make a technical tax
decision, they can clear up problems that re-
sulted from previous contacts and ensure that
your case is given a complete and impartial
review.
To contact your Taxpayer Advocate:
 Call the Taxpayer Advocate at
1–877–777–4778.
 Call the IRS at 1–800–829–1040.
 Call, write, or fax the Taxpayer Advocate
office in your area.
 Call 1–800–829–4059 if you are a
TTY/TDD user.
For more information, see Publication
1546, The Taxpayer Advocate Service of the
IRS.
Free tax services.To find out what services
are available, get Publication 910, Guide to
Free Tax Services. It contains a list of free tax
publications and an index of tax topics. It also
describes other free tax information services,
including tax education and assistance pro-
grams and a list of TeleTax topics.
Personal computer. With your per-
sonal computer and modem, you can
access the IRS on the Internet at
www.irs.gov. While visiting our web site, you
can select:
 Frequently Asked Tax Questions (located
under Taxpayer Help & Ed) to find an-
swers to questions you may have.
 Forms & Pubs to download forms and
publications or search for forms and
publications by topic or keyword.
 Fill-in Forms (located under Forms &
Pubs) to enter information while the form
is displayed and then print the completed
form.
 Tax Info For You to view Internal Reve-
nue Bulletins published in the last few
years.
 Tax Regs in English to search regulations
and the Internal Revenue Code (under
United States Code (USC)).
 Digital Dispatch and IRS Local News Net
(both located under Tax Info For Busi-
ness) to receive our electronic newslet-
ters on hot tax issues and news.
 Small Business Corner (located under
Tax Info For Business) to get information
on starting and operating a small busi-
ness.
You can also reach us with your computer
using File Transfer Protocol at ftp.irs.gov.
TaxFax Service. Using the phone
attached to your fax machine, you can
receive forms and instructions by
calling 703–368–9694. Follow the directions
from the prompts. When you order forms,
enter the catalog number for the form you
need. The items you request will be faxed to
you.
Phone. Many services are available
by phone.
 Ordering forms, instructions, and publi-
cations. Call 1–800–829–3676 to order
current and prior year forms, instructions,
and publications.
 Asking tax questions. Call the IRS with
your tax questions at 1–800–829–1040.
 TTY/TDD equipment. If you have access
to TTY/TDD equipment, call 1–800–829–
4059 to ask tax questions or to order
forms and publications.
 TeleTax topics. Call 1–800–829–4477 to
listen to pre-recorded messages covering
various tax topics.
Evaluating the quality of our telephone
services. To ensure that IRS representatives
give accurate, courteous, and professional
answers, we evaluate the quality of our tele-
phone services in several ways.
 A second IRS representative sometimes
monitors live telephone calls. That person
only evaluates the IRS assistor and does
not keep a record of any taxpayer's name
or tax identification number.
 We sometimes record telephone calls to
evaluate IRS assistors objectively. We
hold these recordings no longer than one
week and use them only to measure the
quality of assistance.
 We value our customers' opinions.
Throughout this year, we will be survey-
ing our customers for their opinions on
our service.
Walk-in. You can walk in to many
post offices, libraries, and IRS offices
to pick up certain forms, instructions,
and publications. Also, some libraries and IRS
offices have:
 An extensive collection of products avail-
able to print from a CD-ROM or photo-
copy from reproducible proofs.
 The Internal Revenue Code, regulations,
Internal Revenue Bulletins, and Cumula-
tive Bulletins available for research pur-
poses.
Mail. You can send your order for
forms, instructions, and publications
to the Distribution Center nearest to
you and receive a response within 10 work-
days after your request is received. Find the
address that applies to your part of the
country.
 Western part of U.S.:
Western Area Distribution Center
Rancho Cordova, CA 95743–0001
 Central part of U.S.:
Central Area Distribution Center
P.O. Box 8903
Bloomington, IL 61702–8903
 Eastern part of U.S. and foreign ad-
dresses:
Eastern Area Distribution Center
P.O. Box 85074
Richmond, VA 23261–5074
CD-ROM. You can order IRS Publi-
cation 1796, Federal Tax Products on
CD-ROM, and obtain:
 Current tax forms, instructions, and pub-
lications.
 Prior-year tax forms, instructions, and
publications.
 Popular tax forms which may be filled in
electronically, printed out for submission,
and saved for recordkeeping.
 Internal Revenue Bulletins.
The CD-ROM can be purchased from
National Technical Information Service (NTIS)
by calling 1–877–233–6767 or on the Internet
at www.irs.gov/cdorders. The first release
is available in mid-December and the final
release is available in late January.
IRS Publication 3207, The Business Re-
source Guide, is an interactive CD-ROM that
contains information important to small busi-
nesses. It is available in mid-February. You
can get one free copy by calling
1–800–829–3676.
Page 18

Index
A
 Additions ...................................... 9
Assistance (See Tax help)               
 At-risk rules ............................... 13
B
 Basis:
 Adjusted basis ...................... 10
 Decreases ............................ 11
 For depreciation ................... 10
 Increases .............................. 10
Other than cost .................... 10
Property changed to rental
use .................................. 11
C
 Casualty losses ......................... 13
 Comments ................................... 2
 Condominiums ............................. 4
 Constant-yield method ................ 4
 Cooperative apartment ............ 4, 7
D
De minimis rule ........................... 3
 Depreciation ................................ 2
Vacant rental property ............ 2
 Depreciation:
 Additions ................................. 9
 Adjusted basis ...................... 10
 Basis ..................................... 10
 Conventions ......................... 12
Declining balance method .... 11
 Figuring ................................ 11
 Improvements ......................... 9
 MACRS .................................. 9
Property changed to rental
use .............................. 9, 11
 Property classes ..................... 9
 Recovery periods ................... 9
Straight line method ............. 11
 Systems .................................. 8
Division of expenses ................... 5
 Dwelling unit:
 Defined ................................... 5
 Personal use .......................... 5
E
 Equipment rental ......................... 3
 Expenses, rental:
 Depreciation ........................... 7
How to divide ......................... 5
How to report ................... 4, 15
 Improvements ......................... 3
 Local transportation ................ 4
Not rented for profit ................ 4
Paid by tenant ........................ 2
Part of property rented ........... 5
 Pre-rental ................................ 2
Property changed to rental .... 5
 Repairs ................................... 3
Standard mileage rate ............ 4
 Travel ..................................... 4
F
Fair market value ...................... 11
 Fees:
 Loan origination ...................... 3
 Form:
 1098 ....................................... 3
 4562 ....................................... 7
 4684 ..................................... 13
 4797 ..................................... 13
 5213 ....................................... 4
 6251 ....................................... 8
 8582 ..................................... 14
Free tax services ....................... 18
G
 Gain:
 From casualty ....................... 13
H
Help (See Tax help)                         
How to report:
Casualty and theft losses ..... 13
Not rented for profit ................ 4
Rental income and expenses 15
 Rental loss ........................... 14
Schedule E (Form 1040) ...... 15
I
Improvements .................... 3, 9, 10
 Income, rental:
How to report ....................... 15
 Rent ........................................ 2
 Security deposits .................... 2
Indian reservation property ......... 9
 Insurance premiums .................... 3
 Interest expense .......................... 3
L
Lease cancellation payment ........ 2
Limits on rental losses:
 At-risk rules .......................... 13
Passive activity limits ........... 14
Personal use of rental
property ........................... 13
 Vacation homes ................... 13
 Loans:
 Origination fees ...................... 3
 Loss:
 At-risk rules .......................... 13
Casualty or theft ................... 13
 Limits on ............................... 13
Passive activity limits ........... 14
M
 Mobile home ................................ 5
Mobile home, depreciation of ...... 9
Modified accelerated cost re-
covery system (MACRS):
Alternative Depreciation Sys-
tem (ADS) ....................... 12
General depreciation system
(GDS) .............................. 11
More information (See Tax help)     
 Mortgage assumption ................ 10
N
Not rented for profit ..................... 4
P
Passive activity limits ................ 14
Personal use of rental
property: 
Division of expenses .............. 2
Figuring income and expenses 5
 Points ........................................... 3
Property changed to rental:
 Basis ..................................... 11
Division of expenses .............. 5
 Property classes .......................... 9
Property used as home (see Used
as home) ................................ 2
Publications (See Tax help)             
R
Real property business ............. 14
 Recovery periods ........................ 9
 Rent ............................................. 2
Rental expenses (see Expenses,
rental) ..................................... 2
Rental income (see Income,
rental) ..................................... 2
Rental losses (see Limits on rental
losses) .................................. 13
 Rental property:
 Condominiums ....................... 4
 Cooperatives .......................... 4
Not rented for profit ................ 4
Part of property rented ........... 5
 Personal use .......................... 5
Property changed to rental .... 5
Used as home ........................ 2
 Vacant .................................... 2
 Repairs ........................................ 3
S
 Security deposits ......................... 2
Shared equity financing
agreement .............................. 6
 Suggestions ................................. 2
T
 Tax help ..................................... 18
Tax return preparation ................. 4
 Taxes:
 Local benefit ........................... 3
 Real estate ........................... 10
 Taxpayer Advocate ................... 18
 Theft losses ............................... 13
 TTY/TDD information ................ 18
U
Used as home:
Division of expenses .............. 6
Figuring income and
deductions ......................... 7
V
 Vacation homes:
Division of expenses .............. 5
Figuring income and
deductions ......................... 7
Limit on certain expenses ...... 7
Used as home ........................ 5
W
Where to report ........................... 4
/H18549
Page 19