Userid: ________ Leading adjust: -35% ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: P463.cvt (28-Jan-2004) (Init. & date)
Filename: D:\Users\Publications 2003\Pub 463\P463-ok-to-print-version-2003.SGM
Page 1 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 463 ContentsCat. No. 11081L
Important Changes................ 2Department
of the Important Reminders.............. 2Travel,Treasury
Introduction..................... 2Internal
Revenue Entertainment, 1. Travel....................... 3Service
Traveling Away From Home........ 3
Travel to Family Home........ 3Gift, and Car Tax Home ................. 3
Temporary Assignment or Job...... 4
What Travel Expenses AreExpenses
Deductible?................ 4
Meals .................... 5
Travel in the United States...... 6
Travel Outside the UnitedFor use in preparing
States................. 7
Luxury Water Travel.......... 82003 Returns Conventions............... 9
2. Entertainment.................. 9
What Entertainment Expenses
Are Deductible?............. 10
Directly-Related Test......... 11
Associated Test............. 11
50% Limit.................... 12
Exceptions to the 50% Limit..... 13
3. Gifts........................ 13
4. Transportation................. 14
Car Expenses................. 15
Standard Mileage Rate........ 15
Actual Car Expenses......... 16
Leasing a Car.............. 23
Disposition of a Car............. 24
5. Recordkeeping................. 25
How To Prove Expenses.......... 25
What Are Adequate
Records? .............. 25
What If I Have Incomplete
Records? .............. 26
Separating and Combining
Expenses .............. 26
How Long To Keep
Records and Receipts...... 27
Examples of Records......... 27
6. How To Report................. 27
Where To Report............... 27
Vehicle Provided by Your
Employer .............. 28
Reimbursements ............... 28
Accountable Plans........... 28
Nonaccountable Plans........ 31
Rules for Independent
Contractors and Clients..... 31
Completing Forms 2106 and
2 1 0 6 – E Z .................32Get forms and other information Special Rules.............. 33
faster and easier by: Illustrated Examples.......... 33
7. How To Get Tax Help............ 39Internet • www.irs.gov or FTP • ftp.irs.gov
Appendices ..................... 41
FAX • 703–368–9694 (from your fax machine)
Index.......................... 54

Page 2 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
for business purposes. You can deduct a higher A working condition fringe benefit is any
property or service provided to you by your em-percentage if the meals take place during orImportant Changes ployer for which you could deduct the cost as anincident to any period subject to the Department
employee business expense if you had paid forof Transportation’s “hours of service” limits.Standard mileage rate.The standard mile- it.(These limits apply to certain workers who areage rate for the cost of operating your car in A qualified nonpersonal use vehicle is oneunder certain federal regulations.) The percent-2003 is 36 cents a mile for all business miles. that is not likely to be used more than minimallyage is 65% for 2003. Business meal expenses
Car expenses and use of the standard mile- for personal purposes because of its design.are covered in chapter 1.
age rate are explained in chapter 4. Delivery trucks with seating only for the driver, or
Limits that apply to employee deductions.only for the driver plus a folding jump seat, are
Special depreciation allowance.The special If you are an employee, deduct your work-re-qualified nonpersonal use vehicles.
depreciation allowance increases from 30% tolated expenses discussed in this publication asFor information on how to report your car
50% for most new vehicles acquired after May 5,a miscellaneous itemized deduction on Sched- expenses that your employer did not provide or
2003. If the 50% allowance applies, you can reimburse you for (such as when you pay for gasule A (Form 1040). Generally, the amount ofchoose to use the 30% allowance or elect out and maintenance for a car your employer pro-miscellaneous itemized deductions you can de-entirely for any class of property. See Special vides), see Vehicle Provided by Your Employerduct is limited to the amount that is more thanDepreciation Allowance in chapter 4. in chapter 6.2% of your adjusted gross income. It may be
further limited if your adjusted gross income isDepreciation limits on cars.The total sec- Who does not need to use this publication.more than $139,500 ($69,750 if you are marriedtion 179 deduction and depreciation (including Partnerships, corporations, trusts, and employ-filing separately). How to report your expensesthe special depreciation allowance) you can ers who reimburse their employees for businessis covered in chapter 6.claim on cars (other than trucks and vans) you expenses should refer to their tax form instruc-use for business purposes has increased forPhotographs of missing children.The Inter- tions and chapter 13 of Publication 535, Busi-cars first placed in service in 2003. See Depreci- nal Revenue Service is a proud partner with theness Expenses, for information on deductingation limits in chapter 4. National Center for Missing and Exploited Chil-travel, meals, entertainment, and transportation
dren. Photographs of missing children selectedexpenses.Depreciation limits on trucks and vans.Be-
by the Center may appear in this publication on If you are an employee, you will not need toginning in 2003, the total section 179 deduction
read this publication if all of the following arepages that would otherwise be blank. You canand depreciation (including the special depreci-
true.help bring these children home by looking at theation allowance) you can claim on a truck or van
photographs and calling 1–800–THE–LOSTis generally higher than the amount you can 1) You fully accounted to your employer for(1–800–843–5678)  if you recognize a child.claim for a car that is not a truck or van. Trucks your work-related expenses.and vans are passenger automobiles, including
minivans and sport utility vehicles (SUVs), that 2) You received full reimbursement for your
are built on a truck chassis. See Depreciation expenses.
Limits in chapter 4. Introduction 3) Your employer required you to return any
excess reimbursement and you did so.You may be able to deduct the ordinary andArmed Forces reservists.Beginning in 2003,
if you are a member of a reserve component of necessary business-related expenses you have4) There is no amount shown with a code “L”
the Armed Forces of the United States, you mayfor:  in box 12 of your Form W–2, Wage and
be able to deduct some of your reserve-related Tax Statement.• Travel,travel costs as an adjustment to gross income
If you meet these four conditions, there is norather than as an itemized deduction. For more• Entertainment, need to show the expenses or the reimburse-information, see Armed Forces Reservists Trav-• Gifts, or ments on your return. If you would like moreeling More Than 100 Miles From Home under
information on reimbursements and accountingSpecial Rules, in chapter 6. • Transportation. to your employer, see chapter 6.
An ordinary expense is one that is commonStandard meal allowance. The standard If you meet these conditions and yourand accepted in your field of trade, business, ormeal allowance (also referred to as the limit on employer included reimbursements onprofession. A necessary expense is one that ismeals and incidental expenses (M&IE rate)) for your Form W–2 in error, ask your em-
TIP
helpful and appropriate for your business. Anmost small localities in the United States is $30 a ployer for a corrected Form W–2.day from January 1, 2003, through September expense does not have to be required to be
30, 2003, and $31 a day from October 1, 2003,considered necessary. Volunteers. If you perform services as a
through December 31, 2003. However, the stan- volunteer worker for a qualified charity, you mayThis publication explains:dard meal allowance is higher for most major be able to deduct some of your costs as a
cities and many other localities in the continental• What expenses are deductible, charitable contribution. See Out-of-Pocket Ex-
United States. See Publication 1542, Per Diem penses in Giving Services in Publication 526,• How to report them on your return,Rates. Charitable Contributions, for information on the
• What records you need to prove your ex-These rates (allowances/limits) are also expenses you can deduct.
penses, andlisted in Appendix A of Chapter 41, Part 301 of
the Code of Federal Regulations. If you have a Comments and suggestions. We welcome• How to treat any expense reimbursementscomputer, you can find them on the Internet at your comments about this publication and youryou may receive.www.policyworks.gov/perdiem . Click on suggestions for future editions.
“2003 Domestic Per Diem Rates” for the period You can e-mail us at *taxforms@irs.gov.
Who should use this publication. YouJanuary 1, 2003, through September 30, 2003, Please put “Publications Comment” on the sub-
should read this publication if you are an em-and on “2004 Domestic Per Diem Rates” for the ject line.
ployee or a sole proprietor who has business-re-period October 1, 2003, through December 31, You can write to us at the following address:
lated travel, entertainment, gift, or transportation2003. Use of the standard meal allowance is
expenses.explained in chapter 1. Internal Revenue Service
Individual Forms and Publications BranchUsers of employer-provided vehicles.If SE:W:CAR:MP:T:Ian employer-provided vehicle was available for1111 Constitution Ave. NWyour use, you received a fringe benefit. Gener-Washington, DC 20224Important Reminders ally, your employer must include the value of the
use or availability in your income as pay. How-
ever, there are exceptions if the use of the vehi-Meal expenses when subject to “hours of We respond to many letters by telephone.
cle qualifies as a working condition fringe benefitservice” limits.Generally, you can deduct Therefore, it would be helpful if you would in-
(such as the use of a qualified nonpersonal useonly 50% of your business-related meal ex- clude your daytime phone number, including the
penses while traveling away from your tax home vehicle). area code, in your correspondence.
Page 2

Page 3 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example 2. Your family home is in Pitts-Useful Items
burgh, where you work 12 weeks a year. TheYou may want to see: Traveling Away From
rest of the year you work for the same employer
in Baltimore. In Baltimore, you eat in restaurantsPublication Home
and sleep in a rooming house. Your salary is the❏ 225 Farmer’s Tax Guide same whether you are in Pittsburgh or Balti-You are traveling away from home if:
more.❏ 529 Miscellaneous Deductions
1) Your duties require you to be away fromBecause you spend most of your working❏ 535 Business Expenses the general area of your tax home (definedtime and earn most of your salary in Baltimore,
later) substantially longer than an ordinarythat city is your tax home. You cannot deduct❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property
day’s work, and any expenses you have for meals and lodging❏ 1542 Per Diem Rates there. However, when you return to work in2) You need to sleep or rest to meet the de-Pittsburgh, you are away from your tax homemands of your work while away fromForm (and Instructions) even though you stay at your family home. Youhome.❏ Schedule A (Form 1040)Itemized can deduct the cost of your round trip between
This rest requirement is not satisfied by merelyDeductions Baltimore and Pittsburgh. You can also deduct
napping in your car. You do not have to be awayyour part of your family’s living expenses for❏ Schedule C (Form 1040)Profit or Loss from your tax home for a whole day or from duskmeals and lodging while you are living and work-From Business to dawn as long as your relief from duty is longing in Pittsburgh.
enough to get necessary sleep or rest.❏ Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040)Net Profit
From Business Tax HomeExample 1. You are a railroad conductor.❏ Schedule F (Form 1040)Profit or Loss You leave your home terminal on a regularlyTo determine whether you are traveling awayFrom Farming scheduled round-trip run between two cities andfrom home, you must first determine the locationreturn home 16 hours later. During the run, you❏ 2106 Employee Business Expenses of your tax home.have 6 hours off at your turnaround point whereGenerally, your tax home is your regular❏ 2106–EZ Unreimbursed Employee you eat two meals and rent a hotel room to getplace of business or post of duty, regardless ofBusiness Expenses necessary sleep before starting the return trip.where you maintain your family home. It in-You are considered to be away from home.❏ 4562 Depreciation and Amortization cludes the entire city or general area in which
your business or work is located.See chapter 7, How To Get Tax Help, for Example 2. You are a truck driver. You If you have more than one regular place ofinformation about getting these publications andleave your terminal and return to it later thebusiness, your tax home is your main place offorms. same day. You get an hour off at your turn-business. See Main place of business or work,around point to eat. Because you are not off tolater.get necessary sleep and the brief time off is notIf you do not have a regular or a main placean adequate rest period, you are not travelingof business because of the nature of your work,away from home. then your tax home may be the place where you
regularly live. See No main place of business orMembers of the Armed Forces. If you are awork, later.1. member of the U.S. Armed Forces on a perma-If you do not have a regular place of businessnent duty assignment overseas, you are notor post of duty and there is no place where youtraveling away from home. You cannot deductregularly live, you are considered a transientyour expenses for meals and lodging. You can-Travel (an itinerant) and your tax home is wherevernot deduct these expenses even if you have toyou work. As a transient, you cannot claim amaintain a home in the United States for yourtravel expense deduction because you areIf you temporarily travel away from your taxfamily members who are not allowed to accom-never considered to be traveling away fromhome, you can use this chapter to determine ifpany you overseas. If you are transferred fromhome.you have deductible travel expenses. one permanent duty station to another, you may
This chapter discusses: have deductible moving expenses, which areMain place of business or work.If you haveexplained in Publication 521, Moving Expenses.• Traveling away from home, more than one place of work, consider the fol-A naval officer assigned to permanent dutylowing when determining which one is your main• Temporary assignment, and aboard a ship that has regular eating and livingplace of business or work. facilities has a tax home aboard ship for travel• What travel expenses are deductible.
expense purposes. 1) The total time you ordinarily spend in eachIt also discusses the standard meal allowance, place.rules for travel inside and outside the UnitedTravel to Family HomeStates, luxury water travel, and deductible con- 2) The level of your business activity in each
vention expenses. place.If you (and your family) do not live at your tax
home (defined later), you cannot deduct the cost3) Whether your income from each place isTravel expenses defined.For tax purposes,of traveling between your tax home and your significant or insignificant.travel expenses are the ordinary and necessaryfamily home. You also cannot deduct the cost ofexpenses of traveling away from home for meals and lodging while at your tax home. Seeyour business, profession, or job. Example. You live in Cincinnati where youExample 1 that follows.An ordinary expense is one that is common have a seasonal job for 8 months each year andIf you are working temporarily in the sameand accepted in your field of trade, business, or earn $25,000. You work the other 4 months incity where you and your family live, you may beprofession. A necessary expense is one that is Miami, also at a seasonal job, and earn $9,000.considered as traveling away from home. Seehelpful and appropriate for your business. An Cincinnati is your main place of work becauseExample 2, below.expense does not have to be required to be you spend most of your time there and earn
considered necessary. most of your income there.Example 1. You are a truck driver and youYou will find examples of deductible traveland your family live in Tucson. You are em-No main place of business or work. Youexpenses in Table 1, later. ployed by a trucking firm that has its terminal inmay have a tax home even if you do not have aPhoenix. At the end of your long runs, you returnregular or main place of work. Your tax hometo your home terminal in Phoenix and spend onemay be the home where you regularly live.night there before returning home. You cannot
deduct any expenses you have for meals and Factors used to determine tax home.If
lodging in Phoenix or the cost of traveling from you do not have a regular or main place of
Phoenix to Tucson. This is because Phoenix is business or work, use the following three factors
your tax home. to determine where your tax home is. 
Chapter 1 Travel Page 3

Page 4 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
home does not change. You are considered to 1 year, even though it actually lasted less than 1
1) You perform part of your business in thebe away from home for the whole period you are year. You cannot deduct any travel expenses
area of your main home and use that away from your main place of work. You can you had in Fresno because Fresno became your
home for lodging while doing business indeduct your travel expenses if they otherwise tax home.
the area. qualify for deduction. Generally, a temporary
Example 3. The facts are the same as inassignment in a single location is one that is2) You have living expenses at your main
Example 1, except that you realistically ex-realistically expected to last (and does in facthome that you duplicate because your
pected the work in Fresno to last 9 months. Afterlast) for one year or less.business requires you to be away from
8 months, however, you were asked to remainHowever, if your assignment or job is indefi-that home.
for 7 more months (for a total actual stay of 15nite, the location of the assignment or job be-
3) You have not abandoned the area in which months).comes your new tax home and you cannot
both your historical place of lodging anddeduct your travel expenses while there.  AnInitially, you realistically expected the job inyour claimed main home are located; youassignment or job in a single location is consid-Fresno to last for only 9 months. However, duehave a member or members of your familyered indefinite if it is realistically expected to lastto changed circumstances occurring after 8living at your main home; or you often usefor more than one year, whether or not it actuallymonths, it was no longer realistic for you tothat home for lodging. lasts for more than one year. expect that the job in Fresno would last for one
If your assignment is indefinite, you mustyear or less. You can only deduct your travelIf you satisfy all three factors, your tax home
include in your income any amounts you receiveexpenses for the first 8 months. You cannotis the home where you regularly live. If you
from your employer for living expenses, even ifdeduct any travel expenses you had after thatsatisfy only two factors, you may have a tax
they are called travel allowances and you ac-time because Fresno became your tax homehome depending on all the facts and circum-
count to your employer for them. You may bewhen the job became indefinite.stances. If you satisfy only one factor, you are a
able to deduct the cost of relocating to your newtransient; your tax home is wherever you work
tax home as a moving expense. See Publicationand you cannot deduct travel expenses. Going home on days off. If you go back to
521 for more information. your tax home from a temporary assignment on
Example 1. You are single and live in Bos- your days off, you are not considered away fromException for federal crime investigations orton in an apartment you rent. You have worked home while you are in your hometown. Youprosecutions. If you are a federal employeefor your employer in Boston for a number of cannot deduct the cost of your meals and lodg-participating in a federal crime investigation oryears. Your employer enrolls you in a 12-month ing there. However, you can deduct your travelprosecution, you are not subject to the one-yearexecutive training program. You do not expect to expenses, including meals and lodging, whilerule. This means you may be able to deductreturn to work in Boston after you complete your traveling between your temporary place of worktravel expenses even if you are away from yourtraining. and your tax home. You can claim these ex-tax home for more than one year.During your training, you do not do any work penses up to the amount it would have cost youFor you to qualify, the Attorney General mustin Boston. Instead, you receive classroom and to stay at your temporary place of work.certify that you are traveling:on-the-job training throughout the United States. If you keep your hotel room during your visit
You keep your apartment in Boston and return to home, you can deduct the cost of your hotel1) For the federal government,
it frequently. You use your apartment to conduct room. In addition, you can deduct your ex-2) In a temporary duty status, andyour personal business. You also keep up your penses of returning home up to the amount you
community contacts in Boston. When you com-3) To investigate or prosecute, or providewould have spent for meals had you stayed at
plete your training, you are transferred to Lossupport services for the investigation oryour temporary place of work.
Angeles. prosecution of, a federal crime.
You do not satisfy factor (1) because you did Probationary work period.If you take a jobYou can deduct your otherwise allowable travelnot work in Boston. You satisfy factor (2) be- that requires you to move, with the understand-expenses throughout the period of certification.cause you had duplicate living expenses. You ing that you will keep the job if your work isalso satisfy factor (3) because you did not aban- satisfactory during a probationary period, the jobDetermining temporary or indefinite.Youdon your apartment in Boston as your main is indefinite. You cannot deduct any of yourmust determine whether your assignment ishome, you kept your community contacts, and expenses for meals and lodging during the pro-temporary or indefinite when you start work. Ifyou frequently returned to live in your apartment. bationary period.you expect an assignment or job to last for oneYou have a tax home in Boston. year or less, it is temporary unless there are
facts and circumstances that indicate otherwise.Example 2. You are an outside salespersonAn assignment or job that is initially temporarywith a sales territory covering several states.may become indefinite due to changed circum-What Travel ExpensesYour employer’s main office is in Newark, butstances. A series of assignments to the sameyou do not conduct any business there. Yourlocation, all for short periods but that togetherAre Deductible?work assignments are temporary, and you havecover a long period, may be considered an in-no way of knowing where your future assign-definite assignment. Once you have determined that you are travel-ments will be located. You have a room in yourThe following examples illustrate whether aning away from your tax home, you can determinemarried sister’s house in Dayton. You stay thereassignment or job is temporary or indefinite.what travel expenses are deductible.for one or two weekends a year, but you do no
You can deduct ordinary and necessary ex-work in the area. You do not pay your sister forExample 1. You are a construction worker.penses you have when you travel away fromthe use of the room. You live and regularly work in Los Angeles. Youhome on business. The type of expense you canYou do not satisfy any of the three factorsare a member of a trade union in Los Angelesdeduct depends on the facts and your circum-listed earlier. You are a transient and have nothat helps you get work in the Los Angeles area.stances.tax home. Because of a shortage of work, you took a job onTable 1 summarizes travel expenses youa construction project in Fresno. Your job wasmay be able to deduct. You may have otherscheduled to end in 8 months. The job actuallydeductible travel expenses that are not coveredlasted 10 months. there, depending on the facts and your circum-Temporary You realistically expected the job in Fresnostances.to last 8 months. The job actually did last lessAssignment or Job When you travel away from home onthan 1 year. The job is temporary and your tax
business, you should keep records ofhome is still in Los Angeles.You may regularly work at your tax home and all the expenses you have and anyRECORDS
also work at another location. It may not beExample 2. The facts are the same as in advances you receive from your employer. Youpractical to return to your tax home from thisExample 1, except that you realistically ex- can use a log, diary, notebook, or any otherother location at the end of each work day.pected the work in Fresno to last 18 months. The written record to keep track of your expenses.
Temporary assignment vs. indefinite assign-job actually was completed in 10 months. The types of expenses you need to record,
ment. If your assignment or job away from Your job in Fresno is indefinite because you along with supporting documentation, are de-
your main place of work is temporary, your tax realistically expected the work to last longer than scribed in Table 4 (see chapter 5).
Page 4 Chapter 1 Travel

Page 5 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
duties while traveling away from home onTable 1. Travel Expenses You Can Deduct
business.
This chart summarizes expenses you can deduct when you travel away from home2) The meal is business-related entertain-
for business purposes. ment.
Business-related entertainment is discussed inIF you have
chapter 2. The following discussion deals onlyexpenses for.... THEN you can deduct the cost of.......................
with meals that are not business-related enter-
Transportation Travel by airplane, train, bus, or car between your home and yourtainment.
business destination. If you were provided with a ticket or you are
Lavish or extravagant.You cannot deductriding free as a result of a frequent traveler or similar program, your
cost is zero. If you travel by ship, see Luxury Water Travel and Cruise expenses for meals that are lavish or extrava-
Ships (under Conventions) for additional rules and limits. gant. An expense is not considered lavish or
extravagant if it is reasonable based on the factsTaxi, commuter Fares for these and other types of transportation that take youand circumstances. Expenses will not be disal-bus, and airport between: lowed merely because they are more than alimousine 1) The airport or station and your hotel, and fixed dollar amount or take place at deluxe res-2) The hotel and the work location of your customers or clients, yourtaurants, hotels, nightclubs, or resorts.business meeting place, or your temporary work location.
50% limit on meals. You can figure yourBaggage and Sending baggage and sample or display material between your regularmeals expense using either of the following twoshipping and temporary work locations.
methods.
Car Operating and maintaining your car when traveling away from home
1) Actual cost.on business. You can deduct actual expenses or the standard mileage
rate, as well as business-related tolls and parking. If you rent a car2) The standard meal allowance.while away from home on business, you can deduct only the
Both of these methods are explained below. But,business-use portion of the expenses.
regardless of the method you use, you generally
Lodging and meals Your lodging and meals if your business trip is overnight or longcan deduct only 50% of the unreimbursed cost
enough that you need to stop for sleep or rest to properly perform yourof your meals.
duties. Meals include amounts spent for food, beverages, taxes, andIf you are reimbursed for the cost of yourrelated tips. See Meals for additional rules and limits. meals, how you apply the 50% limit depends on
whether your employer’s reimbursement planCleaning Dry cleaning and laundry. was accountable or nonaccountable. If you are
Telephone Business calls while on your business trip. This includes businessnot reimbursed, the 50% limit applies whether
communication by fax machine or other communication devices. the unreimbursed meal expense is for business
travel or business entertainment. Chapter 2 dis-Tips Tips you pay for any expenses in this chart. cusses the 50% limit in more detail, and chapter
6 discusses accountable and nonaccountableOther Other similar ordinary and necessary expenses related to your
plans.business travel. These expenses might include transportation to or
from a business meal, public stenographer’s fees, computer rental
fees, and operating and maintaining a house trailer.
Actual Cost
You can use the actual cost of your meals toSeparating costs.If you have one expense employee, agent, partner, or professional advi-figure the amount of your expense before reim-that includes the costs of meals, entertainment,sor. bursement and application of the 50% deductionand other services (such as lodging or transpor- limit. If you use this method, you must keepBona fide business purpose.A bona fidetation), you must allocate that expense between records of your actual cost.business purpose exists if you can prove a realthe cost of meals and entertainment and the costbusiness purpose for the individual’s presence.of other services. You must have a reasonable
Incidental services, such as typing notes or as-basis for making this allocation. For example, Standard Meal Allowancesisting in entertaining customers, are notyou must allocate your expenses if a hotel in-
enough to make the expenses deductible.cludes one or more meals in its room charge. Generally, you can use the “standard meal al-
lowance” method as an alternative to the actualTravel expenses for another individual.If a Example. Jerry drives to Chicago on busi-cost method. It allows you to use a set amountspouse, dependent, or other individual goes withness and takes his wife, Linda, with him. Linda isfor your daily meals and incidental expensesyou (or your employee) on a business trip or to anot Jerry’s employee. Linda occasionally types(M&IE), instead of keeping records of your ac-business convention, you generally cannot de-notes, performs similar services, and accompa-tual costs. The set amount varies depending onduct his or her travel expenses. nies Jerry to luncheons and dinners. The per-where and when you travel. In this publication,
formance of these services does not establish“standard meal allowance” refers to the federalEmployee. You can deduct the travel ex-
that her presence on the trip is necessary to therate for M&IE, discussed later under Amount ofpenses of someone who goes with you if that
conduct of Jerry’s business. Her expenses arestandard meal allowance. If you use the stan-person:
dard meal allowance, you still must keep rec-not deductible.
1) Is your employee, ords to prove the time, place, and businessJerry pays $115 a day for a double room. Apurpose of your travel. See the recordkeeping2) Has a bona fide business purpose for thesingle room costs $90 a day. He can deduct therules for travel in chapter 5.travel, and total cost of driving his car to and from Chicago,
but only $90 a day for his hotel room. If he uses3) Would otherwise be allowed to deduct the Incidental expenses.The term “incidental ex-
public transportation, he can deduct only histravel expenses. penses” means:
fare.
• Fees and tips given to porters, baggageBusiness associate.If a business associ- carriers, bellhops, hotel maids, stewardsate travels with you and meets the conditions inMeals or stewardesses and others on ships, and(2) and (3) above, you can deduct the travel hotel servants in foreign countries,You can deduct the cost of meals in either of theexpenses you have for that person. A business
following two situations.associate is someone with whom you could rea- • Transportation between places of lodging
sonably expect to actively conduct business. A or business and places where meals are
1) It is necessary for you to stop for substan-business associate can be a current or prospec- taken, if suitable meals cannot be ob-
tive (likely to become) customer, client, supplier, tial sleep or rest to properly perform your tained at the temporary duty site, and
Chapter 1 Travel Page 5

Page 6 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Mailing costs associated with filing travel travel in connection with investment and other 2) Regularly requires you to travel away from
vouchers and payment of employer-spon- home and, during any single trip, usuallyincome-producing property. You can also use it
sored charge card billings. involves travel to areas eligible for differentto figure your meal expenses when you travel for
standard meal allowance rates.qualifying educational purposes. You cannotIncidental expenses do not include expenses foruse the standard meal allowance to figure thelaundry, cleaning and pressing of clothing, lodg- If this applies to you, you can claim a standardcost of your meals when you travel for medicaling taxes, or the costs of telegrams or telephone meal allowance of $40 a day ($45 for travelor charitable purposes.calls. outside the continental United States) for Janu-
ary 1, 2003, through October 31, 2003 and $41 a
Amount of standard meal allowance. TheIncidental expenses only method.You can day ($46 for travel outside the continental
standard meal allowance is the federal M&IEuse an optional method (instead of actual cost) United States) for November 1, 2003, through
rate. For travel in 2003, the rate for most smallfor deducting incidental expenses only. The December 31, 2003.
localities in the United States is $30 a day fromamount of the deduction is $2 a day for inciden- Using the special rate for transportation
January 1, 2003, through September 30, 2003,tal expenses paid or incurred for travel away workers eliminates the need for you to deter-
and $31 a day from October 1, 2003, throughfrom home from January 1 through October 31, mine the standard meal allowance for every
December 31, 2003.2003, and $3 a day for travel from November 1 area where you stop for sleep or rest. If you
through December 31, 2003. You can use this choose to use the special rate for any trip, youMost major cities and many other localities in
method only if you did not pay or incur any meal must use the special rate (and not use the regu-the United States are designated as high-cost
expenses. You cannot use this method on any lar standard meal allowance rates) for all tripsareas, qualifying for higher standard meal al-
day that you use the standard meal allowance. you take that year.lowances. These rates are listed in Publication
This method is subject to the proration rules for1542. Travel for days you depart and return.Forpartial days. See Travel for days you depart and
You can also find this information onboth the day you depart for and the day youreturn, later in this chapter.
the Internet at www.policyworks.gov/ return from a business trip, you must prorate theFederal employees should refer to the perdiem. Click on “2003 Domestic Perstandard meal allowance (figure a reducedFederal Travel Regulations at Diem Rates” for the period January 1, 2003 –amount for each day). You can do so by one ofwww.policyworks.gov/ftr  forCAUTION
!
September 30, 2003, and on “2004 Domestictwo methods.changes affecting their claims for reimburse-Per Diem Rates” for the period October 1, 2003• Method 1: You can claim 3/4 of the stan-ment of these expenses. – December 31, 2003. However, you can apply dard meal allowance.the rates in effect before October 1, 2003, for50% limit may apply.If you use the standardexpenses of all travel within the United States for• Method 2: You can prorate using anymeal allowance method for meal expenses and2003 instead of the updated rates. You must method that you consistently apply andyou are not reimbursed or you are reimbursedconsistently use either the rates for the first 9 that is in accordance with reasonable busi-under a nonaccountable plan, you can generally ness practice.months of 2003 or the updated rates for thededuct only 50% of the standard meal allow-period of October 1, 2003, through Decemberance. If you are reimbursed under an accounta-31, 2003.ble plan and you are deducting amounts that are Example. Jen is employed in New Orleans
If you travel to more than one location in onemore than your reimbursements, you can de- as a convention planner. In March, her employer
day, use the rate in effect for the area where youduct only 50% of the excess amount. The 50% sent her on a 3-day trip to Washington, DC, to
stop for sleep or rest. If you work in the transpor-limit is discussed in more detail in chapter 2, and attend a planning seminar. She left her home in
tation industry, however, see Special rate foraccountable and nonaccountable plans are dis- New Orleans at 10 a.m. on Wednesday and
cussed in chapter 6. transportation workers, later. arrived in Washington, DC, at 5:30 p.m. After
spending two nights there, she flew back to NewStandard meal allowance for areas outsideThere is no optional standard lodging Orleans on Friday and arrived back home atthe continental United States.The standardamount similar to the standard meal 8:00 p.m. Jen’s employer gave her a flat amountallowance. Your allowable lodging ex-meal allowance rates do not apply to travel inCAUTION
!
to cover her expenses and included it with herpense deduction is your actual cost. Alaska, Hawaii, or any other locations outsidewages.the continental United States. The federal perUnder Method 1, Jen can claim 21/2 days ofWho can use the standard meal allowance. diem rates for these locations are publishedthe standard meal allowance for Washington,You can use the standard meal allowance monthly in the Maximum Travel Per Diem Al- DC: 3/4 of the daily rate for Wednesday andwhether you are an employee or self-employed,lowances for Foreign Areas. Friday (the days she departed and returned),and whether or not you are reimbursed for your
and the full daily rate for Thursday.You can access foreign per diem ratestraveling expenses.
Under Method 2, Jen could also use anyat www.state.gov/m/a/als/prdm.Who cannot use the standard meal allow- method that she applies consistently and that isance. You cannot use the standard meal al- in accordance with reasonable business prac-lowance if you are related to your employer as tice. For example, she could claim 3 days of thedefined next. standard meal allowance even though a federalYour employer may have these rates
employee would have to use Method 1 and beavailable, or you can purchase theRelated to employer. You are related to
limited to only 21/2 days.publication from the:your employer if: 
1) Your employer is your brother or sister, Travel in the United Stateshalf brother or half sister, spouse, ances-Superintendent of Documentstor, or lineal descendant, The following discussion applies to travel in theU.S. Government Printing Office
United States. For this purpose, the United2) Your employer is a corporation in which P.O. Box 371954
States includes the 50 states and the District ofyou own, directly or indirectly, more thanPittsburgh, PA 15250–7954
Columbia. The treatment of your travel ex-10% in value of the outstanding stock, or
You can also order it by calling the penses depends on how much of your trip was
3) Certain relationships (such as grantor, fi- Government Printing Office at business related and on how much of your trip
duciary, or beneficiary) exist between you, 1–202–512–1800  (not a toll-free occurred within the United States. See Part of
a trust, and your employer. number). Trip Outside the United States, later.
You may be considered to indirectly own stock,Special rate for transportation workers.for purposes of (2), if you have an interest in aYou can use a special standard meal allowanceTrip Primarily for Businesscorporation, partnership, estate, or trust thatif you work in the transportation industry. Youowns the stock or if a member of your family or You can deduct all of your travel expenses ifare in the transportation industry if your work:your partner owns the stock. your trip was entirely business related. If your
1) Directly involves moving people or goodsUse of the standard meal allowance for other trip was primarily for business and, while at your
by airplane, barge, bus, ship, train, ortravel.You can use the standard meal allow- business destination, you extended your stay for
truck, andance to figure your meal expenses when you a vacation, made a personal side trip, or had
Page 6 Chapter 1 Travel

Page 7 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
other personal activities, you can deduct your to the border and from the border back to Den- cussions, and from Saturday until Tuesday, you
business-related travel expenses. These ex- ver is travel in the United States, and the rules in were sightseeing. You flew back to New York,
penses include the travel costs of getting to andthis section apply. The rules under Travel arriving Wednesday afternoon. On Thursday,
from your business destination and any Outside the United States apply to your trip from you flew back to Denver.
business-related expenses at your business the border to Mexico City and back to the border. Although you were away from your home in
destination. Denver for more than a week, you were not
outside the United States for more than a week.Travel OutsideExample. You work in Atlanta and take a This is because the day you depart does notthe United Statesbusiness trip to New Orleans. On your way count as a day outside the United States.
home, you stop in Mobile to visit your parents. You can deduct your cost of the round-tripIf any part of your business travel is outside theYou spend $630 for the 9 days you are away flight between Denver and Brussels. You canUnited States, some of your deductions for thefrom home for travel, meals, lodging, and other also deduct the cost of your stay in Brussels forcost of getting to and from your destination maytravel expenses. If you had not stopped in Mo- Thursday and Friday while you conducted busi-be limited. For this purpose, the United Statesbile, you would have been gone only 6 days, and ness. However, you cannot deduct the cost ofincludes the 50 states and the District of Colum-your total cost would have been $580. You can your stay in Brussels from Saturday throughbia.deduct $580 for your trip, including the cost of Tuesday because those days were spent onHow much of your travel expenses you canround-trip transportation to and from New Orle- nonbusiness activities.deduct depends in part upon how much of yourans. The deduction for your meals is subject totrip outside the United States was business re-Exception 3 – Less than 25% of time onthe 50% limit on meals mentioned earlier.lated. personal activities.Your trip is considered
entirely for business if:
Trip Primarily for 1) You were outside the United States forTravel Entirely for Business orPersonal Reasons more than a week, andConsidered Entirely for Business
2) You spent less than 25% of the total timeIf your trip was primarily for personal reasons,You can deduct all your travel expenses of get-you were outside the United States onsuch as a vacation, the entire cost of the trip is ating to and from your business destination if yournonbusiness activities.nondeductible personal expense. However, youtrip is entirely for business or considered entirelycan deduct any expenses you have while at yourfor business. For this purpose, count both the day your tripdestination that are directly related to your busi- began and the day it ended.ness. Travel entirely for business.If you travel
A trip to a resort or on a cruise ship may be aoutside the United States and you spend theExample. You flew from Seattle to Tokyo,vacation even if the promoter advertises that it isentire time on business activities, you can de-where you spent 14 days on business and 5primarily for business. The scheduling of inci-duct all of your travel expenses. days on personal matters. You then flew back todental business activities during a trip, such as Seattle. You spent one day flying in each direc-Travel considered entirely for business.viewing videotapes or attending lectures dealing tion.Even if you did not spend your entire time onwith general subjects, will not change what is Because only 5/21 (less than 25%) of yourbusiness activities, your trip is considered en-really a vacation into a business trip. total time abroad was for nonbusiness activities,tirely for business if you meet at least one of theyou can deduct as travel expenses what it wouldfollowing four exceptions. have cost you to make the trip if you had notPart of Trip Outside Exception 1 – No substantial control. engaged in any nonbusiness activity. Thethe United States Your trip is considered entirely for business ifamount you can deduct is the cost of the
you did not have substantial control over arrang-round-trip plane fare and 16 days of meals (sub-If part of your trip is outside the United States,ing the trip. The fact that you control the timing ofject to the 50% limit), lodging, and other relateduse the rules described later in this chapteryour trip does not, by itself, mean that you haveexpenses.under Travel Outside the United States for that substantial control over arranging your trip.part of the trip. For the part of your trip that is Exception 4 – Vacation not a major con-You do not have substantial control overinside the United States, use the rules for travel sideration.Your trip is considered entirely foryour trip if you:in the United States. Travel outside the United business if you can establish that a personal
States does not include travel from one point in vacation was not a major consideration, even if1) Are an employee who was reimbursed or
the United States to another point in the United you have substantial control over arranging thepaid a travel expense allowance,
States. The following discussion can help you trip.2) Are not related to your employer, anddetermine whether your trip was entirely within
the United States. 3) Are not a managing executive.
Travel Primarily for BusinessPublic transportation.If you travel by public“Related to your employer” was defined ear-
transportation, any place in the United Stateslier in this chapter under Standard Meal Allow-If you travel outside the United States primarily
where that vehicle makes a scheduled stop is aance. for business but spend some of your time on
point in the United States. Once the vehicleA “managing executive” is an employee whoother activities, you generally cannot deduct all
leaves the last scheduled stop in the Unitedhas the authority and responsibility, without be-of your travel expenses. You can only deduct the
States on its way to a point outside the Uniteding subject to the veto of another, to decide onbusiness portion of your cost of getting to and
States, you apply the rules under Travel Outside the need for the business travel. from your destination. You must allocate the
the United States. A self-employed person generally has sub-costs between your business and other activities
stantial control over arranging business trips.to determine your deductible amount. See
Example. You fly from New York to Puerto Travel allocation rules, below.Exception 2 – Outside United States noRico with a scheduled stop in Miami. You returnmore than a week. Your trip is considered You do not have to allocate your travelto New York nonstop. The flight from New Yorkentirely for business if you were outside the expenses if you meet one of the fourto Miami is in the United States, so only the flightUnited States for a week or less, combining exceptions listed earlier under Travel
TIP
from Miami to Puerto Rico is outside the Unitedbusiness and nonbusiness activities. One weekconsidered entirely for business. In those cases,States. Because there are no scheduled stopsmeans seven consecutive days. In counting theyou can deduct the total cost of getting to andbetween Puerto Rico and New York, all of thedays, do not count the day you leave the Unitedfrom your destination.return trip is outside the United States.States, but do count the day you return to the
Travel allocation rules.If your trip outside thePrivate car.Travel by private car in the United United States.
United States was primarily for business, youStates is travel between points in the United
Example. You traveled to Brussels primarily must allocate your travel time on a day-to-dayStates, even though you are on your way to a
for business. You left Denver on Tuesday and basis between business days and nonbusinessdestination outside the United States.
flew to New York. On Wednesday, you flew from days. The days you depart from and return to the
Example. You travel by car from Denver to New York to Brussels, arriving the next morning. United States are both counted as days outside
Mexico City and return. Your travel from Denver On Thursday and Friday, you had business dis- the United States.
Chapter 1 Travel Page 7

Page 8 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To figure the deductible amount of your United States and the denominator is the total plane fare and other travel-related expenses
round-trip travel expenses, use the following number of days you spend outside the United (such as food during the trip) are $800 from New
fraction. The numerator (top number) is the total States. York to Paris, you can deduct travel costs of
number of business days outside the United $489 (
11/18 × $800), plus the full $900 for the
Example. You live in New York. On May 4States. The denominator (bottom number) is the expenses you had in Paris.
you flew to Paris to attend a business confer-total number of travel days outside the United
Other methods. You can use another methodence that began on May 5. The conferenceStates.
of counting business days if you establish that itended at noon on May 14. That evening you flew
more clearly reflects the time spent on otherCounting business days. Your business to Dublin where you visited with friends until the
than business activities outside the Uniteddays include transportation days, days yourafternoon of May 21, when you flew directly
States.presence was required, days you spent on busi-home to New York. The primary purpose for the
ness, and certain weekends and holidays. trip was to attend the conference.
If you had not stopped in Dublin, you wouldTransportation day.Count as a business Travel Primarily for Personalhave arrived home the evening of May 14. Youday any day you spend traveling to or from a Reasonsdid not meet any of the exceptions that wouldbusiness destination. However, if because of aallow you to consider your travel entirely fornonbusiness activity you do not travel by a direct If you travel outside the United States primarilybusiness. May 4 through May 14 (11 days) areroute, your business days are the days it would for vacation or for investment purposes, the en-business days and May 15 through May 21 (7take you to travel a reasonably direct route to tire cost of the trip is a nondeductible personaldays) are nonbusiness days.your business destination. Extra days for side expense. If you spend some time attending briefYou can deduct the cost of your meals (sub-trips or nonbusiness activities cannot be professional seminars or a continuing educationject to the 50% limit), lodging, and othercounted as business days. program, you can deduct your registration feesbusiness-related travel expenses while in Paris.and other expenses you have that are directlyPresence required. Count as a business You cannot deduct your expenses while inrelated to your business.day any day your presence is required at aDublin. You also cannot deduct 7/18 of what it
particular place for a specific business purpose.would have cost you to travel round-trip betweenExample. The university from which youCount it as a business day even if you spendNew York and Dublin. graduated has a continuing education programmost of the day on nonbusiness activities. You paid $450 to fly from New York to Paris,for members of its alumni association. This pro-$200 to fly from Paris to Dublin, and $500 to flyDay spent on business. If your principal gram consists of trips to various foreign coun-from Dublin back to New York. Round trip airfareactivity during working hours is pursuit of your tries where academic exercises andfrom New York to Dublin would have been $850.trade or business, count the day as a business conferences are set up to acquaint individuals inYou figure the deductible part of your airday. Also, count as a business day any day you most occupations with selected facilities in sev-travel expenses by subtracting 7/18 of theare prevented from working because of circum- eral regions of the world. However, none of theround-trip fare and other expenses you wouldstances beyond your control. conferences are directed toward specific occu-have had in traveling directly between New Yorkpations or professions. It is up to each partici-Certain weekends and holidays. Count and Dublin ($850 × 7/18 = $331) from your totalpant to seek out specialists and organizationalweekends, holidays, and other necessary expenses in traveling from New York to Paris tosettings appropriate to his or her occupationalstandby days as business days if they fall be-Dublin and back to New York ($450 + $200 +interests.tween business days. But if they follow your$500 = $1,150). Three-hour sessions are held each day overbusiness meetings or activity and you remain atYour deductible air travel expense is $819a 5-day period at each of the selected overseasyour business destination for nonbusiness or($1,150 − $331). facilities where participants can meet with indi-personal reasons, do not count them as busi- vidual practitioners. These sessions are com-Nonbusiness activity at, near, or beyondness days. posed of a variety of activities includingbusiness destination.If you had a vacation
workshops, mini-lectures, role playing, skill de-or other nonbusiness activity at, near, or beyondExample 1. Your tax home is New York velopment, and exercises. Professional confer-your business destination, you must allocateCity. You travel to Quebec, where you have a ence directors schedule and conduct thepart of your travel expenses to the nonbusinessbusiness appointment on Friday. You have an- sessions. Participants can choose those ses-activity.other appointment on the following Monday. Be- sions they wish to attend.The part you must allocate is the amount itcause your presence was required on both You can participate in this program since youwould have cost you to travel between the pointFriday and Monday, they are business days. are a member of the alumni association. Youwhere travel outside the United States beginsBecause the weekend is between business and your family take one of the trips. You spendand your business destination and a return todays, Saturday and Sunday are counted as about 2 hours at each of the planned sessions.the point where travel outside the United Statesbusiness days. This is true even though you use The rest of the time you go touring and sightsee-ends.the weekend for sightseeing, visiting friends, or ing with your family. The trip lasts less than 1You determine the nonbusiness portion ofother nonbusiness activity. week.that expense by multiplying it by a fraction. The
Your travel expenses for the trip are notnumerator of the fraction is the number of non-Example 2. If, in Example 1, you had no
deductible since the trip was primarily a vaca-business days during your travel outside thebusiness in Quebec after Friday, but stayed until
tion. However, registration fees and any otherUnited States and the denominator is the totalMonday before starting home, Saturday and
incidental expenses you have for the fivenumber of days you spend outside the UnitedSunday would be nonbusiness days.
planned sessions you attended that are directlyStates.
related and beneficial to your business are de-Nonbusiness activity on the way to or from None of your travel expenses for nonbusi-
ductible business expenses. These expensesyour business destination.If you stopped ness activities at, near, or beyond your business
should be specifically stated in your records tofor a vacation or other nonbusiness activity ei-destination are deductible.
ensure proper allocation of your deductible busi-ther on the way from the United States to your
ness expenses.business destination, or on the way back to theExample. Assume that the dates are the
United States from your business destination, same as in the previous example but that in-
you must allocate part of your travel expenses to stead of going to Dublin for your vacation, you fly
Luxury Water Travel
the nonbusiness activity. to Venice, Italy, for a vacation.
The part you must allocate is the amount it You cannot deduct any part of the cost of If you travel by ocean liner, cruise ship, or other
would have cost you to travel between the point your trip from Paris to Venice and return to Paris. form of luxury water transportation for business
where travel outside the United States begins In addition, you cannot deduct 7/18 of the airfare purposes, there is a daily limit on the amount
and your nonbusiness destination and a return and other expenses from New York to Paris and you can deduct. The limit is twice the highest
to the point where travel outside the United back to New York. federal per diem rate allowable at the time of
States ends. You can deduct 
11/18 of the round-trip plane your travel. (Generally, the federal per diem is
You determine the nonbusiness portion of fare and other travel expenses from New York to the amount paid to federal government employ-
that expense by multiplying it by a fraction. The Paris, plus your meals, lodging, and any other ees for daily living expenses when they travel
numerator of the fraction is the number of non- business expenses you had in Paris. (Assume away from home, but in the United States, for
business days during your travel outside the these expenses total $900). If the round-trip business purposes.)
Page 8 Chapter 1 Travel

Page 9 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Daily limit on luxury water travel.The high- only if your attendance is connected to your ownYou can deduct these expenses only if all
trade or business. five of the following requirements are met.est federal per diem rate allowed and the daily
limit for luxury water travel in 2003 is shown in
Convention agenda. The convention agenda 1) The convention, seminar, or meeting is di-the following table.
or program generally shows the purpose of therectly related to your trade or business.
convention. You can show your attendance atHighest Daily Limit 2) The cruise ship is a vessel registered in2003 Federal on Luxury the convention benefits your trade or businessthe United States.Dates Per Diem Water Travel by comparing the agenda with the official duties
and responsibilities of your position. The agenda3) All of the cruise ship’s ports of call are inJan. 1 – Sep. 30 $258 $516
does not have to deal specifically with your offi-the United States or in possessions of theOct. 1 – Dec. 31 $259 $518
cial duties and responsibilities; it will be enoughUnited States.
if the agenda is so related to your position that itExample. Caroline, a travel agent, traveled 4) You attach to your return a written state-shows your attendance was for business pur-by ocean liner from New York to London, Eng- ment signed by you that includes informa-poses.land, on business in May. Her expense for the tion about:
6-day cruise was $3,500. Caroline’s deduction
a) The total days of the trip (not includingfor the cruise cannot exceed $3,096 (6 days × Conventions Held Outside the days of transportation to and from$516 daily limit). the North American Area the cruise ship port),
Meals and entertainment.If your expenses b) The number of hours each day that youYou cannot deduct expenses for attending afor luxury water travel include separately stated devoted to scheduled business activi-convention, seminar, or similar meeting heldamounts for meals or entertainment, those ties, andoutside the North American area unless:amounts are subject to the 50% limit on meals
c) A program of the scheduled businessand entertainment before you apply the daily1) The meeting is directly related to your
activities of the meeting.limit. For a discussion of the 50% limit, seetrade or business, and
chapter 2. 2) It is as reasonable to hold the meeting5) You attach to your return a written state-
outside the North American area as in it.ment signed by an officer of the organiza-Example. In the previous example,
tion or group sponsoring the meeting thatCaroline’s luxury water travel had a total cost ofIf the meeting meets these requirements, you
includes:$3,500. Of that amount, $1,600 was separatelyalso must satisfy the rules for deducting ex-
stated as meals and entertainment. Caroline,penses for business trips in general, discusseda) A schedule of the business activities ofwho is self-employed, is not reimbursed for anyearlier under Travel Outside the United States. each day of the meeting, andof her travel expenses. Caroline figures her de-North American area. The North American b) The number of hours you attended theductible travel expenses as follows. area includes the following locations. scheduled business activities.
Meals and entertainment...... $1,600 American Samoa Johnston Island50% limit................ × .50 Antigua and Barbuda1 Kingman ReefAllowable meals & entertainment $  800 Baker Island Marshall IslandsOther travel expenses....... +  1,900 Barbados MexicoAllowable cost before the daily limit.... $2,700 Bermuda Micronesia
Daily limit for May 2003...... $5 1 6 Canada Midway Islands
Times number of days....... × 6 Costa Rica Northern Mariana
Maximum luxury water travel deduction $3,096Dominica Islands 2.Dominican Republic PalauAmount of allowable deduction..... $2,700 Grenada Palmyra
Guam Puerto RicoCaroline’s deduction for her cruise is limited to
Guyana Saint Lucia$2,700, even though the limit on luxury water EntertainmentHonduras Trinidad and Tobagotravel is higher. Howland Island USA
Jamaica U.S. Virgin Islands
Not separately stated.If your meal or en- You may be able to deduct business-related
Jarvis Island Wake Islandtertainment charges are not separately stated or entertainment expenses you have for entertain-
are not clearly identifiable, you do not have to ing a client, customer, or employee. The rules1Antigua and Barbuda are included in this list only forallocate any portion of the total charge to meals and definitions are summarized in Table 2.expenses incurred in attending conventions that began
or entertainment. after February 9, 2003. You can deduct entertainment expenses
only if they are both ordinary and necessary and
Reasonableness test. The following factorsmeet one of the following two tests.
Exceptions are taken into account to determine if it was
1) Directly-related test.reasonable to hold the meeting outside the
The daily limit on luxury water travel (discussedNorth American area. 2) Associated test.earlier) does not apply to expenses you have to
attend a convention, seminar, or meeting on1) The purpose of the meeting and the activi-Both of these tests are explained later under
board a cruise ship. See Cruise Ships under ties taking place at the meeting. What Entertainment Expenses Are Deductible.
Conventions Held Outside the North American An ordinary expense is one that is common2) The purposes and activities of the spon-Area. and accepted in your field of trade, business, orsoring organizations or groups.
profession. A necessary expense is one that is
3) The homes of the active members of theConventions helpful and appropriate for your business. An
sponsoring organizations and the places atexpense does not have to be required to be
which other meetings of the sponsoring or-You can deduct your travel expenses when you considered necessary.
ganizations or groups have been or will beattend a convention if you can show that your The amount you can deduct for enter-held.attendance benefits your trade or business. You tainment expenses may be limited.cannot deduct the travel expenses for your fam-4) Other relevant factors you may present. Generally, you can deduct only 50% ofCAUTION
!
ily. your unreimbursed entertainment expenses.If the convention is for investment, political, This limit is discussed later under 50% Limit.social, or other purposes unrelated to your trade
Cruise Shipsor business, you cannot deduct the expenses.
Club dues and membership fees. You can-
Your appointment or election as a dele-You can deduct up to $2,000 per year of yournot deduct dues (including initiation fees) for
gate does not, in itself, determineexpenses of attending conventions, seminars,membership in any club organized for:
whether you can deduct travel ex- or similar meetings held on cruise ships. AllCAUTION
!
penses. You can deduct your travel expensesships that sail are considered cruise ships. 1) Business,
Chapter 2 Entertainment Page 9

Page 10 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2) Pleasure, place at deluxe restaurants, hotels, nightclubs,
or resorts.What Entertainment3) Recreation, or
Allocating between business and4) Other social purpose. Expenses nonbusiness. If you entertain business and
This rule applies to any membership organiza- nonbusiness individuals at the same event, youAre Deductible? must divide your entertainment expenses be-tion if one of its principal purposes is either:
tween business and nonbusiness. You can de-This section explains different types of entertain-1) To conduct entertainment activities for duct only the business part. If you cannotment expenses that you may be able to deduct.members or their guests, or establish the part of the expense for each per-It also explains the directly-related test and theson participating, allocate the expense to each2) To provide members or their guests withassociated test. participant on a pro rata basis.access to entertainment facilities, dis-Entertainment. Entertainment includes anycussed later. Example. You entertain a group of individu-activity generally considered to provide enter-
als that includes yourself, three business pros-The purposes and activities of a club, not itstainment, amusement, or recreation. Examples
pects, and seven social guests. Only 4/11 of theinclude entertaining guests at nightclubs; at so-name, will determine whether or not you can
expense qualifies as a business entertainmentcial, athletic, and sporting clubs; at theaters; atdeduct the dues. You cannot deduct dues paid
expense. You cannot deduct the expenses forsporting events; on yachts; or on hunting, fish-to: the seven social guests because those costs areing, vacation, and similar trips.
nonbusiness expenses.Entertainment also may include meeting per-1) Country clubs,
sonal, living, or family needs of individuals, suchTrade association meetings.You can de-2) Golf and athletic clubs, as providing meals, a hotel suite, or a car toduct entertainment expenses that are directlycustomers or their families.3) Airline clubs, related to and necessary for attending business
meetings or conventions of certain exempt orga-A meal as a form of entertainment.Enter-4) Hotel clubs, and nizations if the expenses of your attendance aretainment includes the cost of a meal you provide
5) Clubs operated to provide meals under cir- related to your active trade or business. Theseto a customer or client, whether the meal is a
cumstances generally considered to be organizations include business leagues, cham-part of other entertainment or by itself. A meal
conducive to business discussions. bers of commerce, real estate boards, tradeexpense includes the cost of food, beverages,
associations, and professional associations.taxes, and tips for the meal. To deduct an
entertainment-related meal, you or your em-Entertainment tickets.Generally, you cannotployee must be present when the food or bever-Entertainment facilities.Generally, you can- deduct more than the face value of an entertain-ages are provided.not deduct any expense for the use of an enter- ment ticket, even if you paid a higher price. Fortainment facility. This includes expenses for You cannot claim the cost of your mealexample, you cannot deduct service fees you
depreciation and operating costs such as rent, both as an entertainment expense andpay to ticket agencies or brokers or any amount
utilities, maintenance, and protection. as a travel expense. over the face value of the tickets you pay toCAUTION
!
scalpers.An entertainment facility is any property you
Meals sold in the normal course of yourown, rent, or use for entertainment. Examples Exception for events that benefit charita-business are not considered entertain-include a yacht, hunting lodge, fishing camp, ble organizations.Different rules apply whenment.
TIP
swimming pool, tennis court, bowling alley, car, the cost of a ticket to a sports event benefits a
charitable organization. You can take into ac-airplane, apartment, hotel suite, or home in aDeduction may depend on your type of count the full cost you pay for the ticket, even if itvacation resort. business. Your kind of business may deter-is more than the face value, if all of the followingmine if a particular activity is considered enter-Out-of-pocket expenses.You can deduct conditions apply. tainment. For example, if you are a dressout-of-pocket expenses, such as for food and
designer and have a fashion show to introduce1) The event’s main purpose is to benefit abeverages, catering, gas, and fishing bait, that
your new designs to store buyers, the show qualified charitable organization.you provided during entertainment at a facility.
generally is not considered entertainment. ThisThese are not expenses for the use of an enter- 2) The entire net proceeds go to the charity.is because fashion shows are typical in yourtainment facility. However, these expenses arebusiness. But, if you are an appliance distributor3) The event uses volunteers to perform sub-subject to the directly-related and associatedand hold a fashion show for the spouses of yourstantially all the event’s work.tests and to the 50% limit, all discussed later.retailers, the show generally is considered en-
tertainment. The 50% limit on entertainment does
not apply to any expense for a packageGift or entertainment.Any item that might beSeparating costs.If you have one expense deal that includes a ticket to such aconsidered either a gift or entertainment gener-
TIP
that includes the costs of entertainment, andcharitable sports event.ally will be considered entertainment. However,other services (such as lodging or transporta-
if you give a customer packaged food or bever-tion), you must allocate that expense betweenExample 1. You purchase tickets to a golfages that you intend the customer to use at athe cost of entertainment and the cost of othertournament organized by the local volunteer fireservices. You must have a reasonable basis forlater date, treat it as a gift. company. All net proceeds will be used to buymaking this allocation. For example, you mustIf you give a customer tickets to a theater new fire equipment. The volunteers will run theallocate your expenses if a hotel includes enter-performance or sporting event and you do not go tournament. You can deduct the entire cost oftainment in its lounge on the same bill with yourwith the customer to the performance or event, the tickets as a business expense if they other-room charge.you have a choice. You can treat the tickets as wise qualify as an entertainment expense.
Taking turns paying for meals or entertain-either a gift or entertainment, whichever is to
ment. If a group of business acquaintancesExample 2. You purchase tickets to a col-your advantage.
take turns picking up each others’ meal or enter-lege football game through a ticket broker. AfterYou can change your treatment of the ticketstainment checks without regard to whether anyhaving a business discussion, you take a clientat a later date by filing an amended return.business purposes are served, no member ofto the game. Net proceeds from the game go to
Generally, an amended return must be filedthe group can deduct any part of the expense.colleges that qualify as charitable organizations.
within 3 years from the date the original return However, since the colleges also pay individualsLavish or extravagant expenses.You can-was filed or within 2 years from the time the tax to perform services, such as coaching andnot deduct expenses for entertainment that arewas paid, whichever is later. recruiting, you can only use the face value of thelavish or extravagant. An expense is not consid-tickets in determining your business deduction.If you go with the customer to the event, youered lavish or extravagant if it is reasonable
must treat the cost of the tickets as an entertain-considering the facts and circumstances. Ex-Skyboxes and other private luxury boxes.If
ment expense. You cannot choose, in this case,penses will not be disallowed just because they you rent a skybox or other private luxury box for
to treat the tickets as a gift. are more than a fixed dollar amount or take more than one event at the same sports arena,
Page 10 Chapter 2 Entertainment

Page 11 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
to business than to entertainment. However, if
the business discussion is only incidental to the
entertainment, the entertainment expenses do
not meet the directly-related test.
You do not have to show that business
income or other business benefit actu-
ally resulted from each entertainment
TIP
expense.
Clear business setting.If the entertainment
takes place in a clear business setting and is for
your business or work, the expenses are consid-
ered directly related to your business or work.
The following situations are examples of enter-
tainment in a clear business setting. 
1) Entertainment in a hospitality room at a
convention where business goodwill is cre-
ated through the display or discussion of
business products.
2) Entertainment that is mainly a price rebate
on the sale of your products (such as a
restaurant owner providing an occasional
free meal to a loyal customer).
3) Entertainment of a clear business nature
occurring under circumstances where
there is no meaningful personal or social
relationship between you and the persons
entertained. An example is entertainment
of business and civic leaders at the open-
ing of a new hotel or play when the pur-
pose is to get business publicity rather
than to create or maintain the goodwill of
the persons entertained.
Expenses not considered directly related.
Entertainment expenses generally are not con-
sidered directly related if you are not there or in
situations where there are substantial distrac-
tions that generally prevent you from actively
conducting business. The following are exam-
Table 2. When Are Entertainment Expenses Deductible?
Definitions
Tests to be met
Other rules
General rule You can deduct ordinary and necessary expenses to entertain a
client, customer, or employee if the expenses meet the
directly-related test or the associated test.
● Entertainment includes any activity generally considered to
provide entertainment, amusement, or recreation, and includes
meals provided to a customer or client.
● An ordinary expense is one that is common and accepted in your
field of business, trade, or profession.
● A necessary expense is one that is helpful and appropriate,
although not necessarily required, for your business.
Directly-related test
● Entertainment took place in a clear business setting, or
● Main purpose of entertainment was the active conduct of
business, and
You had more than a general expectation of getting income or
some other specific business benefit.
Associated test
● Entertainment is associated with your trade or business, and
● Entertainment directly precedes or follows a substantial business
discussion.
● You cannot deduct the cost of your meal as an entertainment
expense if you are claiming the meal as a travel expense.
● You cannot deduct expenses that are lavish or extravagant under
the circumstances.
● You generally can deduct only 50% of your unreimbursed
entertainment expenses (see 50% Limit).
You did engage in business with the person during the
entertainment period, and
ples of situations where there are substantialyou generally cannot deduct more than the price tion to the amounts allowable for the skybox,
distractions. of a nonluxury box seat ticket. subject to the requirements and limits that apply.
The amounts separately stated for food andTo determine whether a skybox has been 1) A meeting or discussion at a nightclub,beverages must be reasonable. You cannot in-rented for more than one event, count each theater, or sporting event.flate the charges for food and beverages togame or other performance as one event. For
2) A meeting or discussion during what is es-avoid the limited deduction for skybox rentals.example, renting a skybox for a series of playoff
sentially a social gathering, such as agames is considered renting it for more than one
cocktail party.event. All skyboxes you rent in the same arena,Directly-Related Test
along with any rentals by related parties, are 3) A meeting with a group that includes per-
considered in making this determination. To meet the directly-related test for entertain-sons who are not business associates at
ment expenses (including entertainment-relatedRelated parties include: places such as cocktail lounges, country
meals), you must show that: clubs, golf clubs, athletic clubs, or vacation
1) Family members (spouses, ancestors, and resorts.
1) The main purpose of the combined busi-lineal descendants),
ness and entertainment was the active2) Parties who have made a reciprocal ar- Associated Testconduct of business,rangement involving the sharing of
2) You did engage in business with the per-skyboxes, Even if your expenses do not meet the
son during the entertainment period, anddirectly-related test, they may meet the associ-3) Related corporations, ated test.3) You had more than a general expectation4) A partnership and its principal partners, To meet the associated test for entertain-of getting income or some other specificand ment expenses (including entertainment-relatedbusiness benefit at some future time.meals), you must show that the entertainment is:5) A corporation and a partnership with com-Business is generally not considered to bemon ownership. 1) Associated with the active conduct of yourthe main purpose when business and entertain-
trade or business, andment are combined on hunting or fishing trips, or
Example. You pay $3,000 to rent a 10-seaton yachts or other pleasure boats. Even if you2) Directly before or after a substantial busi-skybox at Team Stadium for three baseballshow that business was the main purpose, youness discussion (defined later).games. The cost of regular nonluxury box seatsgenerally cannot deduct the expenses for the
at each event is $20 a seat. You can deductuse of an entertainment facility. See Entertain-
(subject to the 50% limit) $600 ((10 seats × $20 ment facilities earlier in this chapter. Associated with trade or business.Gener-each) × 3 events). You must consider all the facts, including theally, an expense is associated with the active
nature of the business transacted and the rea-Food and beverages in skybox seats.If conduct of your trade or business if you can
sons for conducting business during the enter-expenses for food and beverages are separately show that you had a clear business purpose for
tainment. It is not necessary to devote more timestated, you can deduct these expenses in addi- having the expense. The purpose may be to get
Chapter 2 Entertainment Page 11

Page 12 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. You entertain a customer. The
cost is an ordinary and necessary business ex-
pense and is allowed under the entertainment
rules. The customer’s spouse joins you because
it is impractical to entertain the customer without
the spouse. You can deduct the cost of enter-
taining the customer’s spouse. If your spouse
joins the party because the customer’s spouse
is present, the cost of the entertainment for your
spouse is also deductible.
50% Limit
In general, you can deduct only 50% of your
business-related meal and entertainment ex-
penses. (If you are subject to the Department of
Transportation’s “hours of service” limits, you
can deduct a higher percentage. See Individuals
subject to “hours of service” limits, later.)
The 50% limit applies to employees or their
employers, and to self-employed persons (in-
cluding independent contractors) or their clients,
depending on whether the expenses are reim-
bursed.
Figure A summarizes the general rules ex-
plained in this section.
The 50% limit applies to business meals or
entertainment expenses you have while:
1) Traveling away from home (whether eating
alone or with others) on business,
2) Entertaining customers at your place of
business, a restaurant, or other location, or
3) Attending a business convention or recep-
tion, business meeting, or business lunch-
eon at a club.
Included expenses. Expenses subject to the
50% limit include:
1) Taxes and tips relating to a business meal
or entertainment activity,
Figure A. Does the 50% Limit Apply to Your Expenses?
All employees and self-employed persons can use this chart.
Were your meal and entertainment expenses reimbursed?
(Count only reimbursements your employer did not
include in box 1 of your Form W-2. If self-employed,
count only reimbursements from clients or customers that
are not included on Form 1099–MISC, Miscellaneous
Income.)
If an employee, did you adequately account
to your employer under an accountable plan?
If self-employed, did you provide the payer
with adequate records? (See chapter 6.)
Did your expenses exceed the reimbursement?
For the amount reimbursed... For the excess amount...
Your meal and entertainment
expenses are NOT subject to
the 50% limit. However, since
the reimbursement was not
treated as wages or as other
taxable income, you cannot
deduct the expenses.
Your meal and
entertainment expenses
ARE subject to
the 50% limit.
/H17074
/H17074
/H17076
/H17074
/H17074
/H17075
/H17074
/H17074
Yes
No
No
Yes
YesNo
There are exceptions to these rules. See Exceptions to the 50% Limit.
Start Here
new business or to encourage the continuation held directly before or after the business discus-2) Cover charges for admission to a night-of an existing business relationship. sion. club,
If the entertainment and the business discus-Substantial business discussion.Whether 3) Rent paid for a room in which you hold asion are not held on the same day, you musta business discussion is substantial depends on dinner or cocktail party, andconsider the facts of each case to see if thethe facts of each case. A business discussion
4) Amounts paid for parking at a sportsassociated test is met. Among the facts to con-will not be considered substantial unless you
arena.sider are the place, date, and duration of thecan show that you actively engaged in the dis-
business discussion. If you or your businesscussion, meeting, negotiation, or other business However, the cost of transportation to and fromassociates are from out of town, you must alsotransaction to get income or some other specific a business meal or a business-related entertain-
consider the dates of arrival and departure, andbusiness benefit. ment activity is not subject to the 50% limit.
the reasons the entertainment and the discus-The meeting does not have to be for any
Application of 50% limit.The 50% limit onspecified length of time, but you must show thatsion did not take place on the same day.
meal and entertainment expenses applies if thethe business discussion was substantial in rela-
expense is otherwise deductible and is not cov-Example. A group of business associatestion to the meal or entertainment. It is not neces-
ered by one of the exceptions discussed later.sary that you devote more time to business thancomes from out of town to your place of busi-
The 50% limit also applies to certain mealto entertainment. You do not have to discussness to hold a substantial business discussion.and entertainment expenses that are not busi-business during the meal or entertainment.If you entertain those business guests on theness related. It applies to meal and entertain-evening before the business discussion, or onMeetings at conventions.You are consid- ment expenses you have for the production ofthe evening of the day following the businessered to have a substantial business discussion if income, including rental or royalty income. Itdiscussion, the entertainment generally is con-you attend meetings at a convention or similar also applies to the cost of meals included insidered to be held directly before or after theevent, or at a trade or business meeting spon- deductible educational expenses.discussion. The expense meets the associatedsored and conducted by a business or profes-
When to apply the 50% limit.You apply thetest.sional organization. However, your reason for
50% limit after determining the amount thatattending the convention or meeting must be to
would otherwise qualify for a deduction. You firstfurther your trade or business. The organizationExpenses for spouses.You generally cannothave to determine the amount of meal and en-that sponsors the convention or meeting mustdeduct the cost of entertainment for your spousetertainment expenses that would be deductibleschedule a program of business activities that isor for the spouse of a customer. However, youunder the other rules discussed in this publica-the main activity of the convention or meeting.can deduct these costs if you can show that yoution.
had a clear business purpose, rather than aDirectly before or after business discussion.
personal or social purpose, for providing theIf the entertainment is held on the same day as Example 1. You spend $100 for a
the business discussion, it is considered to be entertainment. business-related meal. If $40 of that amount is
Page 12 Chapter 2 Entertainment

Page 13 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
not allowable because it is lavish and extrava- or use of facilities to the public. For example, if If you and your spouse both give gifts, both of
gant, the remaining $60 is subject to the 50%you run a nightclub, your expense for the enter-you are treated as one taxpayer. It does not
limit. Your deduction cannot be more than $30tainment you furnish to your customers, such asmatter whether you have separate businesses,
(50% × $60). a floor show, is not subject to the 50% limit.are separately employed, or whether each of
you has an independent connection with the5 – Charitable sports event.You are notExample 2. You purchase two tickets to a recipient. If a partnership gives gifts, the partner-subject to the 50% limit if you pay for a packageconcert and give them to a client. You pur- ship and the partners are treated as one tax-deal that includes a ticket to a qualified charita-chased the tickets through a ticket agent. You payer.ble sports event. For the conditions the sportspaid $150 for the two tickets, which had a faceevent must meet, see Exception for events thatvalue of $60 each ($120 total). Your deduction Example. Bob Jones sells products to Localbenefit charitable organizations under Entertain-cannot be more than $60 (50% × $120). Company. He and his wife, Jan, gave Localment tickets, earlier. Company three cheese packages to thank them
for their business. They paid $80 for each pack-Exceptions to the 50% LimitIndividuals subject to “hours of service”
age, or $240 total. Three of Local Company’slimits.You can deduct a higher percentage ofGenerally, business-related meal and entertain- executives took the packages home for theiryour meal expenses while traveling away fromment expenses are subject to the 50% limit. families’ use. Bob and Jan have no independentyour tax home if the meals take place during orFigure A can help you determine if the 50% limit business relationship with any of the executives’incident to any period subject to the Departmentapplies to you. other family members. They can deduct a totalof Transportation’s “hours of service” limits. The
of $75 ($25 limit × 3) for the cheese packages.percentage is 65% for 2003, and it graduallyExpenses not subject to 50% limit.Your
increases to 80% by the year 2008.meal or entertainment expense is not subject to
Incidental costs.Incidental costs, such asthe 50% limit if the expense meets one of theIndividuals subject to the Department of
engraving on jewelry, or packaging, insuring,following exceptions. Transportation’s “hours of service” limits include
and mailing, are generally not included in deter-the following persons. 1 – Employee’s reimbursed expenses.If mining the cost of a gift for purposes of the $25you are an employee, you are not subject to the1) Certain air transportation workers (such aslimit.50% limit on expenses for which your employerpilots, crew, dispatchers, mechanics, andA cost is incidental only if it does not addreimburses you under an accountable plan. Ac-control tower operators) who are undersubstantial value to the gift. For example, thecountable plans are discussed in chapter 6. Federal Aviation Administration regula-cost of gift wrapping is an incidental cost. How-
tions.2 – Self-employed. If you are self-em- ever, the purchase of an ornamental basket for
ployed, your deductible meal and entertainment packaging fruit is not an incidental cost if the2) Interstate truck operators and bus driversexpenses are not subject to the 50% limit if all value of the basket is substantial compared towho are under Department of Transporta-three of the following requirements are met. the value of the fruit.tion regulations.
1) You have these expenses as an indepen-3) Certain railroad employees (such as engi-Exceptions. The following items are not con-dent contractor. neers, conductors, train crews, dispatch-sidered gifts for purposes of the $25 limit. ers, and control operations personnel) who2) Your customer or client reimburses you or
are under Federal Railroad Administrationgives you an allowance for these ex- 1) An item that costs $4 or less and:regulations.penses in connection with services you
a) Has your name clearly and perma-perform. 4) Certain merchant mariners who are under nently imprinted on the gift, andCoast Guard regulations.3) You provide adequate records of these ex-
b) Is one of a number of identical itemspenses to your customer or client. (See
you widely distribute.chapter 5.)
Examples include pens, desk sets, andIn this case, your client or customer is sub-
plastic bags and cases.ject to the 50% limit on the expenses.
2) Signs, display racks, or other promotionalExample. You are a self-employed attorney material to be used on the business prem-3.who adequately accounts for meal and enter- ises of the recipient.tainment expenses to a client who reimburses
you for these expenses. You are not subject to
the directly-related or associated test, nor are Gift or entertainment.Any item that might be
Giftsyou subject to the 50% limit. If the client can considered either a gift or entertainment gener-
deduct the expenses, the client is subject to the ally will be considered entertainment. However,
If you give gifts in the course of your trade or50% limit. if you give a customer packaged food or bever-
business, you can deduct all or part of the cost.If you (the contractor) have expenses for ages that you intend the customer to use at a
This chapter explains the limits and rules formeals and entertainment related to providing later date, treat it as a gift.
deducting the costs of gifts.services for a client but do not adequately ac- If you give a customer tickets to a theater
count for and seek reimbursement from the cli- performance or sporting event and you do not go$25 limit.You can deduct no more than $25ent for those expenses, you are subject to the with the customer to the performance or event,for business gifts you give directly or indirectly todirectly-related or associated test and to the you have a choice. You can treat the cost of theany one person during your tax year. A gift to a50% limit. tickets as either a gift expense or an entertain-company that is intended for the eventual per-ment expense, whichever is to your advantage.3 – Advertising expenses. You are not sonal use or benefit of a particular person or asubject to the 50% limit if you provide meals, You can change your treatment of the ticketslimited class of people will be considered anentertainment, or recreational facilities to the at a later date by filing an amended return.indirect gift to that particular person or to thegeneral public as a means of advertising or Generally, an amended return must be filedindividuals within that class of people who re-promoting goodwill in the community. For exam- within 3 years from the date the original returnceive the gift.ple, neither the expense of sponsoring a televi- was filed or within 2 years from the time the taxIf you give a gift to a member of a customer’ssion or radio show nor the expense of was paid, whichever is later.family, the gift is generally considered to be andistributing free food and beverages to the gen- If you go with the customer to the event, youindirect gift to the customer. This rule does noteral public is subject to the 50% limit. must treat the cost of the tickets as an entertain-apply if you have a bona fide, independent busi-
ment expense. You cannot choose, in this case,ness connection with that family member and4 – Sale of meals or entertainment.You
to treat the cost of the tickets as a gift expense.the gift is not intended for the customer’s even-are not subject to the 50% limit if you actually
tual use.sell meals, entertainment, goods and services,
Chapter 3 Gifts Page 13

Page 14 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
transportation between your home and the tem-
porary location, regardless of distance.
If your employment at a work location is
realistically expected to last (and does in fact
last) for 1 year or less, the employment is tempo-
rary unless there are facts and circumstances
that would indicate otherwise.
If your employment at a work location is
realistically expected to last for more than 1 year
or if there is no realistic expectation that the
employment will last for 1 year or less, the em-
ployment is not temporary, regardless of
whether it actually lasts for more than 1 year. If
employment at a work location initially is realisti-
cally expected to last for 1 year or less, but at
some later date the employment is realistically
expected to last more than 1 year, that employ-
ment will be treated as temporary (unless there
are facts and circumstances that would indicate
otherwise) until your expectation changes. It will
not be treated as temporary after the date you
determine it will last more than 1 year.
If the temporary work location is beyond the
general area of your regular place of work and
you stay overnight, you are traveling away from
home. You may have deductible travel ex-
penses as discussed in chapter 1.
No regular place of work.If you have no
regular place of work but ordinarily work in the
metropolitan area where you live, you can de-
duct daily transportation costs between home
and a temporary work site outside that metro-
politan area.
Generally, a metropolitan area includes the
area within the city limits and the suburbs that
are considered part of that metropolitan area.
You cannot deduct daily transportation costs
between your home and temporary work sites
within your metropolitan area. These are non-
deductible commuting expenses.
Two places of work.If you work at two places
in one day, whether or not for the same em-
ployer, you can deduct the expense of getting
from one workplace to the other. However, if for
some personal reason you do not go directly
from one location to the other, you cannot de-
duct more than the amount it would have cost
you to go directly from the first location to the
second.
Figure B. When Are Transportation Expenses Deductible?
/H17074
/H17076 /H17075
/H17073
/H17074
/H17073
/H17073
/H17074/H17075
/H17073
/H17074
/H17073
Temporary
work location
Home Regular or
main job
Always
deductible
Always
deductible
Second job
Never deductible
Never deductible
Deductible if you have aregular or main job
at another location
Always deductible
Most employees and self-employed persons can use this chart.
(Do not use this chart if your home is your principal place of business.
See Office in the home. )
Home: The place where you reside. Transportation expenses between your home and
your main or regular place of work are personal commuting expenses.
Regular or main job: Your principal place of business. If you have more than one job,
you must determine which one is your regular or main job. Consider the time you
spend at each, the activity you have at each, and the income you earn at each.
Temporary work location: A place where your work assignment is realistically
expected to last (and does in fact last) one year or less. Unless you have a regular
place of business, you can only deduct your transportation expenses to a temporary
work location outside
 your metropolitan area.
Second job: If you regularly work at two or more places in one day, whether or not
for the same employer, you can deduct your transportation expenses of getting from
one workplace to another. You cannot deduct your transportation costs between your
home and a second job on a day off from your main job.
Transportation expenses you have in going• Getting from your home to a temporary
between home and a part-time job on a day offworkplace when you have one or more
from your main job are commuting expenses.regular places of work. These temporary
4. You cannot deduct them.workplaces can be either within the area
of your tax home or outside that area.Armed Forces reservists.A meeting of an
Transportation expenses do not include ex-Armed Forces reserve unit is a second place of
penses you have while traveling away frombusiness if the meeting is held on a day on whichTransportation
home overnight. Those expenses are travel ex-you work at your regular job. You can deduct the
penses which are discussed in chapter 1. How-expense of getting from one workplace to theThis chapter discusses expenses you can de-ever, if you use your car while traveling awayother as just discussed under Two places ofduct for business transportation when you arefrom home overnight, use the rules in this chap-work.not traveling away from home as defined inter to figure your car expense deduction. SeeYou usually cannot deduct the expense if thechapter 1. These expenses include the cost ofCar Expenses, later. reserve meeting is held on a day on which youtransportation by air, rail, bus, taxi, etc., and the do not work at your regular job. In this case, yourcost of driving and maintaining your car.Illustration of transportation expenses.Fig- transportation generally is a nondeductible com-Transportation expenses include the ordi-ure B illustrates the rules that apply for deduct-muting expense. However, you can deduct yournary and necessary costs of all of the following.ing transportation expenses when you have atransportation expenses if the location of the
regular or main job away from your home. Youmeeting is temporary and you have one or more• Getting from one workplace to another in
may want to refer to it when deciding whetherregular places of work.the course of your business or profession
you can deduct your transportation expenses.If you ordinarily work in a particular metropol-when you are traveling within the city or
itan area but not at any specific location and thegeneral area that is your tax home. Tax
Temporary work location.If you have one orreserve meeting is held at a temporary locationhome is defined in chapter 1.
more regular work locations away from youroutside that metropolitan area, you can deduct• Visiting clients or customers. home and you commute to a temporary work your transportation expenses.
location in the same trade or business, you can• Going to a business meeting away from If you travel away from home overnight to
deduct the expenses of the daily round-tripyour regular workplace. attend a guard or reserve meeting, you can
Page 14 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 15 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
deduct your travel expenses. These expensesExamples of deductible transportation.The ment equals the expense, you have no
deduction to report on your tax return.are discussed in chapter 1. following examples show when you can deduct
A “qualified reimbursement” is the reim-transportation expenses based on the locationIf you travel more than 100 miles away from
bursement you receive that meets both of theof your work and your home.home in connection with your performance of
following conditions. services as a member of the reserves, you may
Example 1. You regularly work in an officebe able to deduct some of your reserve-related 1) It is given as an equipment maintenancein the city where you live. Your employer sendstravel costs as an adjustment to gross income allowance (EMA) to employees of the U.S.you to a one-week training session at a differentrather than as an itemized deduction. For more Postal Service.office in the same city. You travel directly frominformation, see Armed Forces Reservists Trav-
your home to the training location and returneling More Than 100 Miles From Home under 2) It is at the rate contained in the 1991 col-
each day. You can deduct the cost of your dailySpecial Rules, in chapter 6. lective bargaining agreement. Any later
round-trip transportation between your home agreement cannot increase the qualified
Commuting expenses. You cannot deduct and the training location. reimbursement amount by more than the
the costs of taking a bus, trolley, subway, or taxi, rate of inflation.
Example 2. Your principal place of businessor of driving a car between your home and your See your employer for information on your reim-is in your home. You can deduct the cost ofmain or regular place of work. These costs are bursement.personal commuting expenses. You cannot de- round-trip transportation between your qualify-
duct commuting expenses no matter how faring home office and your client’s or customer’s If you are a rural mail carrier and re-
your home is from your regular place of work.place of business. ceived a qualified reimbursement, you
You cannot deduct commuting expenses even if cannot use the standard mileage rate.CAUTION
!
Example 3. You have no regular office, andyou work during the commuting trip.
you do not have an office in your home. In this
Standard Mileage RateExample. You had a telephone installed incase, the location of your first business contact
your car. You sometimes use that telephone tois considered your office. Transportation ex-You may be able to use the standard mileagemake business calls while commuting to andpenses between your home and this first contactrate to figure the deductible costs of operatingfrom work. Sometimes business associates rideare nondeductible commuting expenses. Trans-your car for business purposes. For 2003, thewith you to and from work, and you have aportation expenses between your last businessstandard mileage rate is 36 cents a mile for allbusiness discussion in the car. These activitiescontact and your home are also nondeductiblebusiness miles. This rate is adjusted periodi-do not change the trip from personal to busi-commuting expenses. Although you cannot de-cally.ness. You cannot deduct your commuting ex-duct the costs of these trips, you can deduct the
penses. costs of going from one client or customer to If you use the standard mileage rate for
another. a year, you cannot deduct your actualParking fees.Fees you pay to park your car
car expenses for that year. You cannotat your place of business are nondeductible
CAUTION
!
deduct the special depreciation allowance (andcommuting expenses. You can, however, de-
you do not need to make the election not toduct business-related parking fees when visiting
claim the allowance), depreciation, or lease pay-a customer or client. Car Expenses
ments, maintenance and repairs, gasoline (in-
Advertising display on car.Putting display cluding gasoline taxes), oil, insurance, andIf you use your car for business purposes, youmaterial that advertises your business on your vehicle registration fees. See Choosing theordinarily can deduct car expenses. You gener-car does not change the use of your car from standard mileage rate and Standard mileageally can use one of the two following methods topersonal use to business use. If you use this car rate not allowed, later.figure your deductible expenses.for commuting or other personal uses, you still You generally can use the standard mileagecannot deduct your expenses for those uses.• Standard mileage rate. rate whether or not you are reimbursed and
Car pools. You cannot deduct the cost of whether or not any reimbursement is more or• Actual car expenses.
using your car in a nonprofit car pool. Do not less than the amount figured using the standard
include payments you receive from the passen- mileage rate. See chapter 6 for more informationIf you use actual expenses to figure your de-
gers in your income. These payments are con- on reimbursements.duction for a car you lease, there are rules that
sidered reimbursements of your expenses. affect the amount of your lease payments that
Choosing the standard mileage rate.If youHowever, if you operate a car pool for a profit,you can deduct. See Leasing a Car, later.
want to use the standard mileage rate for a caryou must include payments from passengers in In this publication, “car” includes a van,you own, you must choose to use it in the firstyour income. You can then deduct your carpickup, or panel truck. For the definition of “car”year the car is available for use in your business.expenses (using the rules in this publication).for depreciation purposes, see Car defined Then in later years, you can choose to use eitherunder Actual Car Expenses, later.Hauling tools or instruments. Hauling the standard mileage rate or actual expenses.tools or instruments in your car while commuting If you want to use the standard mileage rateYou may be entitled to a tax credit forto and from work does not make your car ex- for a car you lease, you must use it for the entirean electric vehicle or a deduction frompenses deductible. However, you can deduct lease period. For leases that began on or beforegross income for a part of the cost of aany additional costs you have for hauling tools or
TIP
December 31, 1997, the standard mileage rateclean-fuel vehicle that you place in service dur-instruments (such as for renting a trailer you tow must be used for the entire portion of the leaseing the year. The vehicle must meet certainwith your car). period (including renewals) that is after 1997.requirements, and you do not have to use it inUnion members’ trips from a union hall.If If you choose to use the standard mileageyour business to qualify for the credit or theyou get your work assignments at a union hall rate, you are considered to have chosen not todeduction. However, you must reduce your ba-and then go to your place of work, the costs of use the depreciation methods discussed later.sis for depreciation of the electric vehicle orgetting from the union hall to your place of work This is because the standard mileage rate in-clean-fuel vehicle property by the amount of theare nondeductible commuting expenses. Al- cludes an allowance for depreciation that is notcredit or deduction you claim. See Depreciationthough you need the union to get your work expressed in terms of years. If you change to theDeduction, later, under Actual Car Expenses.assignments, you are employed where you actual expenses method in a later year, butFor more information on electric or clean-fuelwork, not where the union hall is located. before your car is fully depreciated, you have tovehicles, see chapter 12 of Publication 535.estimate the remaining useful life of the car and
Office in the home.If you have an office in use straight line depreciation. For more informa-
Rural mail carriers.If you are a rural mailyour home that qualifies as a principal place of tion about depreciation included in the standard
carrier, you may be able to treat the qualifiedbusiness, you can deduct your daily transporta- mileage rate, see Exception under Methods of
reimbursement you received as your allowabletion costs between your home and another work depreciation under Depreciation Deduction,
expense. Because the qualified reimbursementlocation in the same trade or business. (See later.
Publication 587, Business Use of Your Home, is treated as paid under an accountable plan,
for information on determining if your home of-your employer should not include the reimburse-Standard mileage rate not allowed. You
fice qualifies as a principal place of business.)ment in your income. And, since the reimburse-cannot use the standard mileage rate if you:
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 15

Page 16 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you use a home equity loan to and use your car in that business, see Interest,
1) Use the car for hire (such as a taxi), purchase your car, you may be able toearlier, under Standard Mileage Rate.
deduct the interest. See Publication2) Use two or more cars at the same time (as
TIP
Taxes paid on your car.If you are an em-936, Home Mortgage Interest Deduction, forin fleet operations), ployee, you can deduct personal property taxesmore information. paid on your car if you itemize deductions. Enter3) Claimed a depreciation deduction for the
the amount paid on line 7 of Schedule A (Formcar using any method other than straightPersonal property taxes.If you itemize your
1040).line, for example, MACRS (as discusseddeductions on Schedule A (Form 1040), you can
You cannot deduct sales taxes, even if youlater under Methods of depreciation under deduct on line 7 state and local personal prop-
use your car 100% for business. Sales taxes areDepreciation Deduction), erty taxes on motor vehicles. You can take this
part of your car’s basis and are recovereddeduction even if you use the standard mileage4) Claimed a section 179 deduction (dis- through depreciation. See Special Depreciationrate or if you do not use the car for business.cussed later) on the car, Allowance and Depreciation Deduction, later.If you are self-employed and use your car in
5) Claimed the special depreciation allow-your business, you can deduct the business partFines and collateral.You cannot deduct finesance (discussed later) on the car, of state and local personal property taxes onand collateral you pay for traffic violations.
motor vehicles on Schedule C, Schedule C–EZ,6) Claimed actual car expenses after 1997 Casualty and theft losses.If your car is dam-or Schedule F (Form 1040). If you itemize yourfor a car you leased, or aged, destroyed, or stolen, you may be able todeductions, you can include the remainder of
7) Are a rural mail carrier who received a deduct part of the loss that is not covered byyour state and local personal property taxes on
qualified reimbursement. (See Rural mail insurance. See Publication 547, Casualties, Di-the car on Schedule A (Form 1040).
carriers under Car Expenses, earlier.) sasters, and Thefts, for information on deducting
Parking fees and tolls.In addition to usinga loss on your car.
the standard mileage rate, you can deduct anyTwo or more cars. If you own two or more Depreciation and section 179 deductions.business-related parking fees and tolls. (Parkingcars that are used for business at the same time, Generally, the cost of a car, plus sales tax andfees that you pay to park your car at your placeyou cannot use the standard mileage rate for the improvements, is a capital expense. Becauseof work are nondeductible commuting ex-business use of any car. However, you may be the benefits last longer than one year, you gen-penses.)able to deduct your actual expenses for operat- erally cannot deduct a capital expense. How-ing each of the cars in your business. See Actual Sale, trade-in, or other disposition.If you ever, you can recover this cost through theCar Expenses, later, for information on how tosell, trade in, or otherwise dispose of your car,section 179 deduction (the deduction allowed byfigure your deduction. you may have a gain or loss on the transactionsection 179 of the Internal Revenue Code), theYou are not using two or more cars for busi-or an adjustment to the basis of your new car.special depreciation allowance, and deprecia-ness at the same time if you alternate using (useSee Disposition of a Car, later. tion deductions. Depreciation allows you to re-at different times) the cars for business. cover the cost over more than one year byThe following examples illustrate the rules deducting part of it each year. The section 179Actual Car Expensesfor when you can and cannot use the standard deduction, special depreciation allowance, andmileage rate for two or more cars. If you do not use the standard mileage rate, youthe depreciation deduction are discussed later.
may be able to deduct your actual car expenses.Generally, there are limits on these deduc-Example 1. Marcia, a salesperson, owns a tions. Special rules apply if you use your carIf you qualify to use both methods, youcar and a van that she alternates using for call- 50% or less in your work or business.may want to figure your deduction bothing on her customers. She can use the standard You can claim a section 179 deduction, theways to see which gives you a largermileage rate for the business mileage of the car
TIP
special depreciation allowance, and use a de-deduction.and the van. preciation method other than straight line only ifActual car expenses include: you do not use the standard mileage rate toExample 2. Tony uses his own pickup truck figure your business-related car expenses in thein his landscaping business. During the year, heDepreciation Lease Registration year you first place a car in service.Licenses payments feestraded in his old truck for a newer one. Tony can If you claim either a section 179 deduction,Gas Insurance Repairsuse the standard mileage rate for the business the special depreciation allowance, or deprecia-Oil Garage rent Tiresmileage of both the old and the new trucks. tion using a method other than straight line for itsTolls Parking fees
estimated useful life in the year you first place aExample 3. Chris owns a repair shop and If you have fully depreciated a car that youcar in service, you cannot use the standardan insurance business. He uses his pickup truckstill use in your business, you can continue tomileage rate on that car in any future year.for the repair shop and his car for the insuranceclaim your other actual car expenses. Continue
business. No one else uses either the truck orto keep records, as explained later in chapter 5.Car defined.For depreciation purposes, a car
the car for business purposes. Chris can use the is any four-wheeled vehicle (including a truck orBusiness and personal use.If you use yourstandard mileage rate for the business use of van) that is made primarily for use on publiccar for both business and personal purposes,the truck and the car. streets, roads, and highways. Its unloaded grossyou must divide your expenses between busi-vehicle weight (gross vehicle weight in the caseness and personal use. You can divide yourExample 4. Maureen owns a car and a van of a truck or van) must not be more than 6,000expense based on the miles driven for eachthat are both used in her housecleaning busi- pounds. A car includes any part, component, orpurpose.ness. Her employees use the van and she uses other item that is physically attached to it or is
the car to travel to the various customers. Mau- usually included in the purchase price.Example. You are a sales representativereen cannot use the standard mileage rate for A car does not include: for a clothing firm and drive your car 20,000the car or the van. This is because both vehicles
miles during the year: 12,000 miles for business1) An ambulance, hearse, or combinationare used in Maureen’s business at the same
and 8,000 miles for personal use. You can claimambulance-hearse used directly in a busi-time. She must use actual expenses for both
only 60% (12,000 ÷ 20,000) of the cost of oper-ness, orvehicles.
ating your car as a business expense.
2) A vehicle used directly in the business ofInterest.If you are an employee, you cannotEmployer-provided vehicle.If you use a ve- transporting persons or property for pay ordeduct any interest paid on a car loan. Thishicle provided by your employer for businesshire.applies even if you use the car 100% for busi-purposes, you can deduct your actual un-ness as an employee. 3) A truck or van that is a qualified nonper-reimbursed car expenses. You cannot use theHowever, if you are self-employed and use sonal use vehicle.standard mileage rate. See Vehicle Provided byyour car in your business, you can deduct thatYour Employer in chapter 6.part of the interest expense that represents your Trucks and vans. For purposes of depreci-
business use of the car. For example, if you useInterest on car loans.If you are an employee, ation, the term “trucks and vans” refers to pas-
your car 60% for business, you can deduct 60% you cannot deduct any interest paid on a car senger automobiles that are built on a truck
of the interest on Schedule C (Form 1040). You loan. This interest is treated as personal interest chassis, including minivans and sport utility ve-
cannot deduct the rest of the interest expense. and is not deductible. If you are self-employed hicles (SUVs) that are built on a truck chassis.
Page 16 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 17 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Electric car.For purposes of depreciation, cussed later) you can claim for a qualifying the election by filing an amended return within
the term “electric car” refers to passenger auto- property. six months of the due date of the return (exclud-
mobiles designed to be propelled primarily by ing extensions). Attach the appropriate election
Limit on cost of qualifying property.Gen-electricity and built by an original equipment form (2106 or 4562) to it and print “Filed pursu-
erally, you can choose to treat up to $100,000 ofmanufacturer. ant to section 301.9100–2” on the amended
the cost of qualifying property as a section 179return. File the amended return at the sameMore information. See Special Deprecia- deduction in 2003. address you filed the original return.tion Allowance, later, for more information on Once made, the choice can be changed onlyLimit on total section 179 and depreciationhow to depreciate your vehicle. with the consent of the Internal Revenue Servicedeductions. Generally, the total amount ofQualified nonpersonal use vehicles. (IRS).section 179 and depreciation deductions thatThese are vehicles that by their nature are notyou can claim for a qualified car that you ac-Reduction in business use.To be eligible tolikely to be used more than a minimal amount forquired after December 31, 2002, and beforeclaim the section 179 deduction, you must usepersonal purposes. They include trucks andMay 6, 2003, cannot be more than $7,660. If youyour car more than 50% for business or work invans that have been specially modified so thatacquired a qualified car after May 5, 2003, thethe year you acquired it. If your business use ofthey are not likely to be used more than a mini-limit is $10,710. The limit is $3,060 if you electthe car is 50% or less in a later tax year duringmal amount for personal purposes, such as bynot to claim the special depreciation allowancethe recovery period, you have to recapture (in-installation of permanent shelving and paintingfor the car or the car is not qualified property asclude in income) in that later year any excessthe vehicle to display advertising or theexplained later under Special Depreciation Al-depreciation. Any section 179 deductioncompany’s name. lowance. The limit is reduced if your businessclaimed on the car is included in calculating theuse of the car is less than 100%. See Deprecia- excess depreciation. For information on this cal-tion Limits, later, for more information.
Section 179 Deduction culation, see Excess depreciation later in this
chapter under Car Used 50% or Less for Busi-Example. In the earlier example underThe section 179 deduction allows you to treat ness.More than 50% business use requirement, Peterpart or all of the business cost of a car as a
had a car with a qualifying cost (for purposes ofcurrent expense rather than taking depreciation Dispositions.If you dispose of a car on whichthe section 179 deduction) of $11,700. How-deductions over a number of years. you had claimed the section 179 deduction, theever, Peter’s total section 179 and depreciationamount of that deduction is treated as a depreci-The limit on total section 179 and de-deduction is limited. If Peter claims the specialation deduction for recapture purposes. Youpreciation deductions (discussed later)depreciation deduction (discussed later), the to-treat any gain on the disposition of the propertymay reduce or eliminate any benefit
TIP
tal of the two deductions cannot be more thanas ordinary income up to the amount of thefrom claiming the section 179 deduction. $4,596 ($7,660 limit x 60% business use).section 179 deduction and any allowable depre-You can claim the section 179 deduction If Peter had purchased the car after May 5,ciation (unless you establish the amount actuallyonly in the year you place the car in service. For2003, then the total section 179 and deprecia-allowed). For information on the disposition of athis purpose, a car is placed in service when it tion deduction could not be more than $6,426car, see Disposition of a Car, later.is ready and available for a specific use, whether($10,710 limit × 60% business use). If Peter’s
in a trade or business, a tax-exempt activity, acar does not qualify for the special depreciation
personal activity, or for the production of in-allowance or Peter elects not to claim the allow-Special Depreciation Allowancecome. Even if you are not using the property, it isance, the total of the two deductions cannot be
in service when it is ready and available for itsmore than $1,836 ($3,060 x 60% business use).The special depreciation allowance is a deduc-
specific use. tion equal to 30% (or 50%, depending on whenCost of car.For purposes of the section 179you acquired the property) of the depreciableA car first used for personal purposes cannotdeduction, the cost of the car does not includebasis of qualified property. If your car qualifiesqualify for the deduction in a later year when itsany amount figured by reference to any otherfor this deduction, you must reduce the car’suse changes to business. property held by you at any time. For example, ifadjusted basis by the amount of the allowance,you buy (for cash and a trade-in) a new car toExample. In 2002 you bought a new car and unless you elect not to claim the allowance, asuse in your business, your cost for purposes ofplaced it in service for personal purposes. This discussed later. You figure the amount of thethe section 179 deduction does not include youryear, you began to use it for business. Changing special depreciation allowance after any sectionadjusted basis in the car you trade in for the newits use to business use does not qualify the cost 179 deduction you choose to claim, but beforecar. Your cost includes only the cash you paid.of your car for a section 179 deduction this year. figuring your regular depreciation deduction
Basis of car for depreciation.The amountHowever, you can claim a depreciation deduc- under MACRS.
of the section 179 deduction reduces your basistion for the business use of the car. See Depreci- For a car that is qualified property purchased
in your car. If you choose the section 179 deduc-ation Deduction, later. before May 6, 2003, the allowance is a deduc-
tion, you must subtract the amount of the deduc-tion equal to 30%  of the car’s depreciable basis.
More than 50% business use requirement. tion from the cost of your car. The resultingFor a car that is qualified property purchased
You must use the property more than 50% for amount is the basis in your car that you use toafter May 5, 2003, the allowance is a deduction
business to claim any section 179 deduction. Iffigure your depreciation deduction. equal to 50%  of the car’s depreciable basis.
you used the property more than 50% for busi- You can claim the special depreciation allow-When to choose. If you want to take the sec-ness, multiply the cost of the property by the ance only for the year the qualified property istion 179 deduction, you must make the choice inpercentage of business use. The result is the placed in service.the tax year you both purchase the car andcost of the property that can qualify for the sec-place it in service for business or work.tion 179 deduction. Qualified property.Qualified property in-
cludes a car (See Car defined earlier, underHow to choose. Employees use Form 2106 to
Example. Peter purchased a car in April Actual Car Expenses.) that meets all of the fol-make this choice and report the section 179
2003 for $19,500 and he used it 60% for busi- lowing requirements.deduction. All others use Form 4562.
ness. The total cost of Peter’s car that qualifiesFile the appropriate form with either of the1) You bought the car new after Septemberfor the section 179 deduction is $11,700 following. 10, 2001 (after May 5, 2003, to be eligible($19,500 cost × 60% business use). But see
• Your original tax return filed for the yearfor the 50% special depreciation allow-Limit on total section 179 and depreciation de-
the property was placed in service ance).ductions, discussed later.
(whether or not you file it timely). 2) You placed the car in service for businessLimits. There are limits on: • An amended return filed no later than thein 2003, and
due date (including extensions) for your1) The total cost of qualifying property you 3) You used the car more than 50% in areturn for the year the property was placedcan choose to treat as a section 179 de- qualified business use.in service.duction, and For more information on other depreciable prop-
2) The total amount of the section 179 deduc- If you timely filed your return for the year erty that may qualify for the special depreciation
tion plus the depreciation deduction (dis- without making the election, you still can make allowance, see Publication 946.
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 17

Page 18 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. Bob bought a new car in June within 6 months of the due date of the original (but not below zero) by a set rate per mile for all
2003 for $20,000 and placed it in service imme- return (not including extensions). Attach the miles for which you used the standard mileage
diately, using it 75% for business. Bob’s car is election statement to the amended return. On rate. The rate per mile varies depending on the
qualified property. the amended return, write “Filed pursuant to year(s) you used the standard mileage rate. For
section 301.9100-2.” the rate(s) to use, see Depreciation adjustmentBob chooses not to take a section 179 de-
when you used the standard mileage rate underduction for the car. Bob first must figure the car’s
Disposition of a Car, later.depreciable basis, which is $15,000 ($20,000 ×
Depreciation Deduction This reduction of basis is in addition to those75%). He then figures the special depreciation
basis adjustments described later under Unad-allowance of $7,500 ($15,000 × 50%). If you use actual car expenses to figure yourjusted basis. You must use your adjusted basisThe remaining depreciable basis of $7,500deduction for a car you own and use in yourin your car to figure your depreciation deduction.($15,000 − $7,500) is depreciated using business, you can claim a depreciation deduc-For additional information on the straight lineMACRS (200% declining balance method, tion: that is, you can deduct a certain amountmethod of depreciation, see Publication 946.half-year convention) and results in a deductioneach year as a recovery of your cost or otherof $1,500 ($7,500 × 20%), for a total deprecia-basis in your car. You cannot use the standardMore-than-50%-use test. Generally, yoution deduction for 2003 of $9,000 ($7,500 +mileage rate if you decide to take a depreciationmust use your car more than 50% for qualified$1,500). However, Bob’s depreciation deductiondeduction in the year you first place the car inbusiness use (defined next) during the year tois limited to $8,033 ($10,710 × 75%), as dis- service. use MACRS. You must meet thiscussed next. In addition, you may be able to claim themore-than-50%-use test each year of the recov-
special depreciation allowance for new cars pur-ery period (6 years under MACRS) for your car.Depreciation limit.The general limit on your
chased and placed in service in 2003. See Spe- If your business use is 50% or less, you mustdepreciation deduction for a car purchased after
cial Depreciation Allowance earlier. use the straight line method to depreciate yourMay 5, 2003, is $10,710. It is $11,010 for a truck
You generally need to know the followingcar. This is explained later under Car Used 50%or van and $32,030 for an electric car.
things about the car you intend to depreciate.or Less for Business.However, if you use a car less than 100% in
your business or work, the general limit must be1) Your basis in the car. Qualified business use.A qualified businessreduced by multiplying the limit by the percent- use is any use in your trade or business. It does2) The date you place the car in service.age of business and investment use during the not include use for the production of incomeyear. 3) The method of depreciation and recov- (investment use). However, you do combine For cars that do not qualify for (or for whichery period you will use. your business and investment use to computeyou choose not to claim) the special deprecia- your depreciation deduction for the tax year.tion allowance, the limit is $3,060 ($3,360 forBasis. Your basis in a car for figuring depreci-trucks and vans, $9,080 for electric cars). See Use of your car by another person.Do notation is generally its cost. This includes anyDepreciation Limits later. treat any use of your car by another person asamount you borrow or pay in cash, other prop-use in your trade or business unless that useerty, or services.Election not to claim the special depreciation meets one of the following three conditions. Generally, you figure depreciation using yourallowance. You can elect not to claim the basis. However, in some situations (such as usespecial depreciation allowance for a car that is 1) It is directly connected with your business.of the straight line method) you will use yourqualified property. For a car purchased after 2) It is properly reported by you as income toadjusted basis (your basis reduced by deprecia-May 5, 2003, you can elect to claim the 30% the other person (and, if you have to, yoution allowed or allowable in earlier years). Forallowance instead of the 50% allowance, or not withhold tax on the income).one of these situations see Exception underto deduct any special depreciation allowance atMethods of depreciation, later.all. 3) It results in a payment of fair market rent.If you change the use of a car from personalTo make an election, attach a statement to This includes any payment to you for theto business, your basis for depreciation is theyour timely filed return (including extensions) use of your car.lesser of the fair market value or your adjustedindicating the class of property for which you arebasis in the car on the date of conversion. Addi-making the election and that, for such class: Business use changes. If you used your cartional rules concerning basis are discussed latermore than 50% in qualified business use in the• You are electing not to claim the 30% spe-in this chapter under Unadjusted basis. year you placed it in service, but 50% or less in acial allowance for qualified property ac-
Placed in service.You generally place a carlater year (including the year of disposition), youquired before May 6, 2003,
in service when it is available for use in yourhave to change to the straight line method of• You are electing to claim the 30% specialwork or business, in an income-producing activ-depreciation. See Qualified business use 50%allowance instead of the 50% special al-ity, or in a personal activity. Depreciation beginsor less in a later year under Car Used 50% orlowance for qualified property acquired af-when the car is placed in service for use in yourLess for Business, later.ter May 5, 2003, or work or business or for the production of income.Property does not cease to be usedFor purposes of computing depreciation, if• You are electing not to claim any special more than 50% in qualified businessyou first start using the car only for personal useallowance for qualified property acquired use by reason of a transfer at death.
TIP
and later convert it to business use, you placeafter May 5, 2003.
the car in service on the date of conversion.
Use for more than one purpose.If you useIf you elect not to claim the special deprecia-Car placed in service and disposed of inyour car for more than one purpose during thetion allowance or to claim the 30% allowance,the same year. If you place a car in servicetax year, you must allocate the use to the vari-rather than the 50% allowance, for a car that isand dispose of it in the same tax year, youous purposes. You do this on the basis of mile-qualified property, the election also applies tocannot claim any depreciation deduction for thatage. Figure the percentage of qualified businessany other 5-year property placed in service dur-car. use by dividing the number of miles you driveing the same year.
your car for business purposes during the yearMethods of depreciation.Generally, you fig-
Unless you elect not to claim the spe- by the total number of miles you drive the carure depreciation on cars using the Modified Ac-
cial depreciation allowance, you must during the year for any purpose.celerated Cost Recovery System (MACRS).
reduce the car’s adjusted basis by theCAUTION
!
MACRS is discussed later in this chapter.
amount of the allowance, even if the allowance Change from personal to business use.If
Exception. If you used the standard mile-was not claimed. you change the use of a car from 100% personal
age rate in the first year of business use anduse to business use during the tax year, you
When to make election. Generally, you change to the actual expenses method in a latermay not have mileage records for the time
must make the election on a timely filed taxyear, you cannot depreciate your car under thebefore the change to business use. In this case,
return (including extensions) for the year inMACRS rules. You must use straight line depre-you figure the percentage of business use for
which you place the property in service. ciation over the estimated remaining useful lifethe year as follows. 
However, if you timely filed your return for the of the car.
year without making the election, you can still To figure depreciation under the straight line 1) Determine the percentage of business use
make the election by filing an amended return method, you must reduce your basis in the car for the period following the change. Do this
Page 18 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 19 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
by dividing business miles by total miles basis in the old car plus any additional payment 2) The total of the amounts actually allowable
you make. as depreciation during those years.driven during that period.
Traded car used only for business.If you For information about figuring depreciation, see2) Multiply the percentage in (1) by a fraction.
trade in a car that you used only in your businessModified Accelerated Cost Recovery SystemThe numerator (top number) is the number
for another car that will be used only in your(MACRS) , which follows Example 2, later.of months the car is used for business and
business, your original basis in the new car isthe denominator (bottom number) is 12.
Example 1. In March, Mark traded his 1999your adjusted basis in the old car, plus any
van (placed in service in 1999) for a new 2003additional amount you pay for the new car.Example. You use a car only for personal model. He used the old van 75% for businesspurposes during the first 6 months of the year.Example 1. Paul trades in a car that has an and he used the new van 75% for business inDuring the last 6 months of the year, you driveadjusted basis of $3,000 for a new car. In addi- 2003. Mark claimed actual expenses (includingthe car a total of 15,000 miles of which 12,000tion, he pays cash of $17,000 for the new car. $8,494 depreciation expense) for the businessmiles are for business. This gives you a busi-His original basis of the new car is $20,000 (his use of the old van since 1999. He did not claim aness use percentage of 80% (12,000 ÷ 15,000) $3,000 adjusted basis in the old car plus the section 179 deduction for the old or the new van.for that period. Your business use for the year is$17,000 cash paid). Paul’s unadjusted basisMark paid $12,800 for the 1999 van in June40% (80% × 6/12). would be the same unless he claims the section1999. He paid an additional $9,800 when he
179 deduction, special depreciation allowance,acquired the 2003 van. Mark was allowed 1/2 ofLimits. The amount you can claim for sectionor has other increases or decreases to his origi-the depreciation deduction amount (which is in-179 and depreciation deductions may be limited.nal basis. cluded in the $8,494 depreciation expense total)The maximum amount you can claim depends for his old van for 2003, the year of disposition,on the year in which you placed your car inExample 2. In July 2000, Marcia purchasedas explained later under Disposition of a Car.service. You have to reduce the maximum a car for $26,000 and placed it in service forMark does not claim the special depreciationamount if you did not use the car exclusively for100% use in her business. She did not claim aallowance.business. See Depreciation Limits, later. section 179 deduction. Marcia’s unadjusted ba-Mark figures the unadjusted basis for depre-sis for the car was $26,000. For 2000 throughciating his new van as shown next.Unadjusted basis. You use your unadjusted2002, Marcia figured her depreciation deduction
basis (often referred to as your basis or yourusing the MACRS depreciation chart for thoseCost of old van $12,800
basis for depreciation) to figure your deprecia-years. Less: Total depreciation allowed on the
tion using the MACRS depreciation chart, ex- business cost of old van, $9,600In September 2003, Marcia traded that car in
($12,800 × 75%), from 1999 – 2003− 8,494plained later under Modified Accelerated Costand paid $14,200 cash for a new car to be used
Adjusted basis of old van beforeRecovery System (MACRS). Your unadjusted 100% in her business. Marcia is allowed
trade-in adjustment $ 4,306one-half of the MACRS depreciation amountbasis for figuring depreciation is your original
figured for 2003 for her old car. (See Dispositionbasis increased or decreased by certain Trade-in adjustment:of a Car, later.) Marcia does not claim either theamounts. Depreciation at 100% business use:
special depreciation allowance or the sectionTo figure your unadjusted basis, begin with 2003 — ($12,800 × .1152) × 1/2 $  737
179 deduction. (Limit: $1,775)your car’s original basis, which generally is its
2002 — 12,800 × .1152 1,475Marcia figures her basis in the new car ascost. Cost includes sales taxes, destination
(Limit: $1,775)follows.charges, and dealer preparation. Increase your 2001 — 12,800 × .192 2,458basis by any substantial improvements you (Limit: $2,950)Cost of old car $26,000make to your car, such as adding air condition- 2000 — 12,800 × .32 4,096Less: Total depreciation alloweding or a new engine. Decrease your basis by any (Limit: $5,000)from 2000 through 2003 − 12,408
deductible casualty loss, section 179 deduction, 1999 — 12,800 × .20 2,560
(Limit: $3,060)special depreciation allowance, diesel fuel taxAdjusted basis of old car and basis of
Total $11,326part of new car that must be depreciatedcredit, gas guzzler tax, clean-fuel vehicle deduc-
Less: Actual depreciationover the remaining recovery periodtion, and qualified electric vehicle credit. See allowed − 8,494using the same depreciation method $13,592Publication 535 for more information on the Excess of 100% over actual $ 2,832clean-fuel vehicle deduction and the qualifiedAdditional basis (cash paid) for new car Less: Lesser of excess amount ($2,832)electric vehicle credit. that is treated as newly purchased or adjusted basis of old vanMACRS property + 14,200If your business use later falls to 50% ($4,306) − 2,832
or less, you may have to recaptureTotal basis of new car $27,792 Unadjusted basis of part of new van(include in your income) any excessCAUTION
!
that must be depreciated over thedepreciation. See Car Used 50% or Less for Traded car used partly in business.If you remaining recovery period usingBusiness, later, for more information. trade in a car that you used partly in your busi-the same depreciation method $1,474
If you acquired the car by gift or inheritance,ness for a new car that you will use in your
see Publication 551, Basis of Assets, for infor- Additional basis (cash paid) for new vanbusiness, you must make a “trade-in” adjust-
that is treated as newly purchasedmation on your basis in the car. ment for the personal use of the old car. ThisMACRS property $9,800adjustment has the effect of reducing your basisImprovements. A major improvement to a
in your old car, but not below zero, for purposescar is treated as a new item of 5-year recovery
of figuring your depreciation deduction for theproperty. It is treated as placed in service in the Example 2. Rob paid $15,000 for a new carnew car. (This adjustment is not used, however,year the improvement is made. It does not mat- that he placed in service in 2000. He used itwhen you determine the gain or loss on the laterter how old the car is when the improvement is partly for business in 2000 (9,600 businessdisposition of the new car. See Publication 544,added. Follow the same steps for depreciating miles of 15,000 total miles), 2001 (12,000 busi-Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets, for in-the improvement as you would for depreciating ness miles of 16,000 total miles), and 2002formation on how to report the disposition ofthe original cost of the car. However, you must (14,400 miles of 18,000 total miles). He used theyour car.)treat the improvement and the car as a whole standard mileage rate in those years to claim theTo figure the unadjusted basis of your newwhen applying the limits on the depreciation business use of his car. (See Depreciation ad-car for depreciation, first add to your adjusteddeductions. Your car’s depreciation deduction justment when you used the standard mileagebasis in the old car any additional amount youfor the year (plus any section 179 deduction, rate under Disposition of a Car, later.)pay for the new car. Then subtract from that totalspecial depreciation allowance, and deprecia-
the excess, if any, of: On January 2, 2003, Rob traded in this cartion on any improvements) cannot be more than
and paid an additional $6,000 for his new car.the depreciation limit that applies for that year.1) The total of the amounts that would haveRob figures the unadjusted basis for his new carSee Depreciation Limits, later. been allowable as depreciation during theas shown next.Effect of trade-in on basis.When you tax years before the trade if 100% of the
trade an old car for a new one, your originaluse of the car had been business and in-Cost of old car $15,000
basis in the new car is generally your adjustedvestment use, over Less: Total depreciation allowed:
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 19

Page 20 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2002 — 14,400 mi. × .15 $2,160 when that method provides an equal or the remaining recovery period. See Figuring the
2001 — 12,000 mi. × .15 1,800 greater deduction. Deduction Without Using the Tables in chapter 42000 — 9,600 mi. × .14 1,344 − 5,304 of Publication 946.3) The straight line method (SL) over aAdjusted basis of old car
before trade-in adjustment $9,696 5-year recovery period. In future years, do not use the chart in
this edition of the publication. Instead,
Trade-in adjustment: If you use Table 3 (discussed later use the chart in the publication or the
TIP
Depreciation at 100% business use: under MACRS depreciation chart) to form instructions for those future years.2002 — 18,000 mi. × .15 $2,700 determine your depreciation rate for
TIP
2001 — 16,000 mi. × .15 2,400 Disposition of car during recovery period.2003, you do not need to determine in what year2000 — 15,000 mi. × .14 2,100 If you dispose of the car before the end of theusing the straight line method provides an equalTotal $7,200 recovery period, you are generally allowed a halfor greater deduction. This is because the chartLess: Actual depreciation
year of depreciation in the year of dispositionallowed − 5,304 has the switch to the straight line method built
unless you purchased the car during the lastExcess of 100% over actual $1,896 into its rates.
quarter of a year. See Depreciation deductionLess: Lesser of excess amount Before choosing a method, you may wish tofor the year of disposition under Disposition of a($1,896) or adjusted basis consider the following facts. Car, later, for information on how to figure theof old car ($9,696) − 1,896
depreciation allowed in the year of disposition.1) Using the straight line method provides
Unadjusted basis of part of new car equal yearly deductions throughout the re-How to use the 2003 chart.To figure yourthat must be depreciated over the covery period. depreciation deduction for 2003, find the per-remaining recovery period using
centage in the column of the chart based on thethe same depreciation method $7,800 2) Using the declining balance methods pro-
vides greater deductions during the earlier date that you first placed the car in service and
Additional basis (cash paid) for new recovery years with the deductions gener-the depreciation method that you are using. Mul-car that is treated as newly ally getting smaller each year. tiply the unadjusted basis of your car (definedpurchased MACRS property  $6,000 earlier) by that percentage to determine the
MACRS depreciation chart.A 2003 MACRS amount of your depreciation deduction. If you
Depreciation Chart and instructions are includedprefer to figure your depreciation deduction with-Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery Systemin this chapter as Table 3. Using this table willout the help of the chart, see Publication 946. (MACRS). The Modified Accelerated Cost Re-make it easy for you to figure the 2003 deprecia-covery System (MACRS) is the name given to Your deduction cannot be more thantion deduction for your car. A similar chart ap-the tax rules for getting back (recovering) the maximum depreciation limit forpears in the Instructions for Form 2106.through depreciation deductions the cost of cars. See Depreciation Limits, later.CAUTION
!
property used in a trade or business or to pro- You may have to use the tables in
duce income. Publication 946 instead of using this
The maximum amount you can deduct is Example. Phil bought a used truck in Febru-MACRS Depreciation Chart.CAUTION
!
limited, depending on the year you placed your ary 2002 to use exclusively in his landscape
You must use the Depreciation Tables incar in service. See Depreciation Limits, later. business. He paid $6,200 for the truck with noPublication 946 rather than the 2003 MACRS trade-in. Phil did not claim any section 179 de-Recovery period. Under MACRS, cars are Depreciation Chart in this publication if any oneduction, and he chose to use the 200% DBclassified as 5-year property. You actually de-of the following three conditions applies to you.method to get the largest depreciation deductionpreciate the cost of a car, truck, or van over a in the early years.1) You file your return on a fiscal year basis.period of 6 calendar years. This is because your
Phil used the MACRS depreciation chart incar is generally treated as placed in service in2) You file your return for a short tax year2002 to find his percentage. The unadjustedthe middle of the year and you claim deprecia-(less than 12 months). basis of his truck equals its cost because Philtion for one-half of both the first year and the
used it exclusively for business. He multiplied3) During the year, all of the following condi-sixth year.
the unadjusted basis of his truck, $6,200, by thetions apply.Depreciation deduction for certain Indian percentage that applied, 20%, to figure his 2002reservation property.Shorter recovery peri- a) You placed some property in servicedepreciation deduction of $1,240.ods are provided under MACRS for qualified from January through September. In 2003, Phil used the truck for personalIndian reservation property placed in service on purposes when he repaired his father’s cabin.b) You placed some property in serviceIndian reservations after 1993 and before 2005.
His records show that the business use of hisfrom October through December.The recovery period that applies for a
truck was 90% in 2003. Phil used Table 3 to findbusiness-use car is 3 years instead of 5 years.c) Your basis in the property you placed inhis percentage. Reading down the first columnHowever, the depreciation limits, discussed service from October through Decem-for the date placed in service and across to thelater, will still apply. ber (excluding nonresidential real prop-200% DB column, he locates his percentage,For more information on the qualifications forerty, residential rental property, and32%. He multiplies the unadjusted basis of histhis shorter recovery period and the percent- property placed in service and disposedtruck, $5,580 ($6,200 cost × 90% business use),ages to use in figuring the depreciation deduc-of in the same year) was more than by 32% to figure his 2003 depreciation deduc-tion, see chapter 4 of Publication 946. 40% of your total bases in all propertytion of $1,786.you placed in service during the year.Depreciation methods. You can use one
of the following three methods to depreciate
your car. Depreciation in future years.If you use
Depreciation Limits
the percentages from the chart, you generally1) The 200% declining balance method There are limits on the amount you can deductmust continue to use them for the entire recov-(200% DB) over a 5-year recovery period for depreciation of your car, truck or van, orery period of your car. However, you cannotthat switches to the straight line method electric car. The section 179 deduction is treatedcontinue to use the chart if your basis in your carwhen that method provides an equal or as depreciation for purposes of the limits. Theis adjusted because of a casualty. In that case,greater deduction. maximum amount you can deduct each yearfor the year of the adjustment and the remaining
depends on the year you place the car in serv-2) The 150% declining balance method recovery period, figure the depreciation without
ice. These limits are shown in the following ta-(150% DB) over a 5-year recovery period the chart using your adjusted basis in the car at
bles.that switches to the straight line method the end of the year of the adjustment and over
Page 20 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 21 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Maximum Maximum In 2003, Karl figures his special depreciation
Depreciation Deduction Depreciation Deduction for allowance of $6,477 (($25,400 × 85%) × 30%).
for Cars Electric Cars Placed in Service Karl then figures his MACRS deduction by firstAfter August 5, 1997 figuring his unadjusted basis of $15,113Date 4th & (($25,400 × 85%) − $6,477), and then multiply-Placed 1st 2nd 3rd Later Date 4th & ing it by the MACRS rate from Table 3 to getIn Service Year Year Year Years  Placed 1st 2nd 3rd Later $3,023 ($15,113 × 20%). Karl’s total deprecia-In Service Year Year Year Years5/06/2003 – $10,7101 $4,900 $2,950 $1,775 tion for 2003 is $9,500 ($6,477 + $3,023). How-12/31/2003 5/06/2003 – $32,0301 $14,600 $8,750 $5,225 ever, Karl’s deduction is limited to $6,511. This12/31/20031/01/2003 – 7,6602 4,900 2,950 1,775 is the depreciation limit ($7,660) multiplied by
5/05/2003 1/01/2003 – 22,8802 14,600 8,750 5,225 the business use percentage (85%).
5/05/2003 Karl continues to use his car 85% for busi-2002 7,660 2 4,900 2,950 1,775
ness. Depreciation in the next four years contin-2002 22,980 2 14,700 8,750 5,3252001 7,660 3 4,900 2,950 1,775 ues to be subject to deduction limits. Karl figures2001 23,080 3 14,800 8,850 5,3252000 3,060 4,900 2,950 1,775 his depreciation limits for those years as follows.
2000 9,280 14,800 8,850 5,3251999 3,060 5,000 2,950 1,775
Year Limit x Business Use Depreciation1999 9,280 14,900 8,950 5,3251998 3,160 5,000 2,950 1,775
2004 $ 4,900 × 85% $ 4,1651998 9,380 15,000 8,950 5,4251997 3,160 5,000 3,050 1,775 2005 2,950 × 85% 2,5081997 9,480 15,100 9,050 5,425 2006, 2007 1,775 × 85% 1,5091996 3,060 4,900 2,950 1,775
1$22,880 if you acquired the car before 5/6/2003. $9,080 ifIn 2008, using the rate from Table 3, Karl’s1995 3,060 4,900 2,950 1,775 the car is not qualified property or if you elect not to
MACRS deduction is $871 ($15,113 × 5.76%).claim any special depreciation allowance.1$7,660 if you acquire the car before 5/6/2003. $3,060 if
Since that amount is less than the depreciationthe car is not qualified property or if you elect not to2$9,180 if the car is not qualified property or if you electclaim any special depreciation allowance. limit of $1,509 ($1,775 × 85%), Karl’s deprecia-not to claim the special depreciation allowance.
tion deduction for 2008 is $871.2$3,060 if the car is not qualified property or if you elect3$9,280 if you acquire the car before 9/11/2001, the car isnot to claim the special depreciation allowance. If Karl continues to use his car for businessnot qualified property, or you elect not to claim the
special depreciation allowance. after 2008, he can continue to claim a deprecia-3$3,060 if you acquired the car before 9/11/2003, the car
is not qualified property, or you elect not to claim the tion deduction for his unrecovered basis. How-
special depreciation allowance. The examples throughout this chapterever, he cannot deduct more than $1,775
illustrate gas-fueled cars. multiplied by his business use percentage. SeeTrucks and vans. For 2003, the maximum Deductions in years after the recovery period,
CAUTION
!
depreciation deductions for trucks and vans and later.passenger vehicles such as minivans and sportCar used less than full year.The deprecia-utility vehicles that are built on a truck chassis Section 179 deduction.The section 179 de-tion limits are not reduced if you use a car forare generally higher than those for cars. For duction is treated as a depreciation deduction. Ifless than a full year. This means that you do nottrucks and vans placed in service before 2003, you place a car that is not a truck, van, or electricreduce the limit when you either place a car inuse the Maximum Depreciation Deduction for vehicle in service in 2003, use it only for busi-service or dispose of a car during the year.Cars table. ness, and choose the section 179 deduction, theHowever, the depreciation limits are reduced if
combined section 179 and depreciation deduc-Maximum you do not use the car exclusively for business
Depreciation Deduction tion for that car for 2003 is limited to $10,710and investment purposes. See Reduction forfor Trucks and Vans ($7,660 if you purchased the car before May 6,personal use, later.
2003, and $3,060 if you elect not to claim theDate 4th & special depreciation allowance for the car or theExample. Marie purchased a car in June Placed 1st 2nd 3rd Later car is not qualified property).2003 for $20,000 to use exclusively in her busi-In Service Year Year Year Years
ness. She does not claim the section 179 deduc-2003 $11,010 *† $5,400 $3,250 $1,975 Example. On September 4, 2003, Jacktion, but she does claim the special depreciationbought a used car for $10,000 and placed it in*If the special depreciation allowance does not apply orallowance, and she chooses the 200% DByou make the election not to claim the special service. He used it 80% for his business and hemethod of depreciation.depreciation allowance, the first year limit is $3,360. chooses to take a section 179 deduction for theMarie figures her special depreciation allow-†If the truck or van is acquired before 5/06/03, the truck or car.
van is qualified property, and you claim the specialance of $10,000 (20,000 × 50%). Before applying the limit, Jack figures hisdepreciation allowance for the truck or van, the Marie’s MACRS depreciation (using the ratemaximum section 179 deduction to be $8,000.maximum deduction is $7,960.
from Table 3) is $2,000 (($20,000 − $10,000) × This is the cost of his qualifying property (up to
20%) for a total depreciation deduction ofthe maximum $100,000 amount) multiplied byExceptions for clean-fuel cars.There are
$12,000 ($2,000 + $10,000). However, the max-his business use ($10,000 × 80%).two exceptions to the depreciation limits for
imum amount she can deduct for depreciation isJack then figures that his section 179 deduc-cars. They are effective after August 5, 1997, for
$10,710. (See Deductions in years after the re-tion for 2003 is limited to $2,448 (80% ofcars that run on clean fuel. Clean-fuel cars are
covery period, later.) $3,060). He then has an unadjusted basis ofdiscussed in chapter 12 of Publication 535. The
$5,552 (($10,000 × 80%) − $2,448) for determin-exceptions follow.
ing his depreciation deduction. Since he hasReduction for personal use.The deprecia-
1) Amounts you pay for retrofit parts and already reached the maximum limit for 2003,tion limits are reduced based on your percent-
components to modify a car to run on Jack will use the unadjusted basis to figure hisage of personal use. If you use a car less than
clean fuel are not subject to the deprecia- depreciation deduction for 2004.100% in your business or work, you must deter-
tion limit on cars. Only the cost of the carmine the depreciation deduction limit by multi-before modification is subject to the limit. Deductions in years after the recoveryplying the limit amount by the percentage ofperiod. If the depreciation limits apply to yourbusiness and investment use during the tax2) If you place a car in service after August 5, car, you may have unrecovered basis in your caryear.1997, that was produced to run on electric- at the end of the recovery period. If you continueity, your depreciation limit is increased. to use your car for business, you can deduct thatExample. In April 2003, Karl, an outsideThe amounts are shown in the following unrecovered basis after the recovery perioddental supply salesman, purchased a new cartables. ends.for $25,400 to make sales calls in a territory that
extends 200 miles around his home base. He Unrecovered basis. This is your cost or
uses his car 85% for his business. Karl does notother basis in the car reduced by any clean-fuel
claim the section 179 deduction but, he doesvehicle deduction, electric vehicle credit, and
claim the special depreciation allowance, and hedepreciation and section 179 deductions that
chooses the 200% DB method to figure his de-would have been allowable if you had used the
preciation deduction. car 100% for business and investment use.
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 21

Page 22 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 3.
If you claim actual expenses for your car, use the chart below
to find the depreciation method and percentage to use for your
2003 return. If your car was placed in service before 1987, see
the depreciation chart in the Form 2106 instructions.
First, using the left column, find the date you first placed the
car in service. Then select the depreciation method and
percentage from column (a), (b), or (c) following the rules
explained in this chapter.
For cars placed in service before 2003, you must use the same
method you used on last year’s return unless a decline in your
business use requires you to change to the straight line
method. (See Car Used 50% or Less for Business. )
Multiply the unadjusted basis of your car by your business use
percentage. Multiply the result by the percentage you found in
the chart to find the amount of your depreciation deduction for
2003. (Also see Depreciation Limits.)
If you placed your car in service after September of any year and you placed other business property in service during the
same year, you may have to use the Jan. 1—Sept. 30 percentage i nstead of the Oct. 1—Dec. 31 percentage for your car.
To find out if this applies to you, determine: 1) the basis of all business property you placed in service after September of t hat year
and 2) the basis of all business property you placed in service during that entire year. If the basis of the property placed in  service
after September is not more than 40% of the basis of all property (certain property is excluded) placed in service for the enti re
year, use the percentage for Jan. 1—Sept. 30 for figuring depreciation for your car. See Which Convention Applies? in chapter 4 of
Publication 946 for more details.
Example. You buy machinery (basis of $32,000) in May 2003 and a new van (basis of $20,000) in October 2003, both used 100% in
your business. You use the percentage for Jan. 1—Sept. 30, 2003, to figure the depreciation for your van. This is because the
$20,000 basis of the property (van) placed in service after September is not more than 40% of the basis of all property placed in
service during the year (40% /H11003($32,000 + 20,000) = $20,800).
Date Placed In Service 200% Declining
Balance (200% DB)
1 
150% Declining
Balancing (150% DB)
1
Straight Line
(SL)
Oct. 1 — Dec. 31, 2003
Jan. 1 — Sept. 30, 2003
Oct. 1 — Dec. 31, 2002
Jan. 1 — Sept. 30, 2002
Oct. 1 — Dec. 31, 2001
2
Jan. 1 — Sept. 30, 2001
Oct. 1 — Dec. 31, 2000
Jan. 1 — Sept. 30, 2000
Oct. 1 — Dec. 31, 1999
Jan. 1 — Sept. 30, 1999
Oct. 1 — Dec. 31, 1998
Jan. 1 — Sept. 30, 1998
Prior to 1998
3
200 DB 5.0%
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
200 DB
20.0
38.0
32.0
22.8
19.2
13.68
11.52
10.94
11.52
9.58
5.76
150 DB 3.75%
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
150 DB
15.0
28.88
25.5
20.21
17.85
16.4
16.66
16.41
16.66
14.35
8.33
SL 2.5%
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
SL
10.0
20.0
20.0
20.0
20.0
20.0
20.0
20.0
20.0
17.5
10.0
(b)(a) (c)
1
You can use this column only if the business use of your car is more than 50%.
3
If your car was subject to the maximum limits for depreciation and you have unrecovered basis in the car, you can continue to c laim depreciation. See
Deductions in years after the recovery period under Depreciation Limits.
2003 MACRS Depreciation Chart
(Use to Figure Depreciation for 2003.)
2
If you made the election under Notice 2001-70 to use the higher percentage rate for vehicles placed in service January 1 throug h September 30, 2001,
use the percentage rate shown for vehicles placed in service January 1 through September 30, 2001.
MACRS MACRS Maximum Deprec.The recovery period.For 5-year property, amount you can deduct each year is determined
Year % Amount Deduction Allowedyour recovery period is 6 calendar years. A partby the date you placed the car in service and
year’s depreciation is allowed in the first calen- 1997 20.00 $5,720 $3,160 $ 3,160your business-use percentage. For example, no
1998 32.00 9,152 5,000 5,000dar year, a full year’s depreciation is allowed indeduction is allowed for a year you use your car1999 19.20 5,491 3,050 3,050each of the next 4 calendar years, and a part100% for personal purposes. 2000 11.52 3,295 1,775 1,775year’s depreciation is allowed in the 6th calen- 2001 11.52 3,295 1,775 1,775dar year. Example. In May 1997, Bob bought and 2002 5.76 1,647 1,775 1,647
Under MACRS, your recovery period is the placed in service a car that he used exclusivelyTotal $16,535 $16,407
same whether you use declining balance orin his business. The car cost $28,600. Bob didAt the end of 2002, Bob had an unrecoveredstraight line depreciation. You determine yournot claim a section 179 deduction for the car. Hebasis in the car of $12,193. This was theunrecovered basis in the 7th year after youcontinued to use the car 100% in his business$28,600 original basis of his car less theplaced the car in service. throughout the recovery period (1997 through$16,407 depreciation deductions allowed during
2002). For those years, Bob used Table 3 andHow to treat unrecovered basis.If you the recovery period.
the Maximum Depreciation Deduction for Carscontinue to use your car for business after the Bob continued to use the car 100% for busi-
table (as explained earlier) to compute his de-recovery period, you can claim a depreciation ness in 2003. He can claim a depreciation de-
preciation deductions as shown in the followingdeduction in each succeeding tax year until you duction of $1,775 (the maximum allowed for
recover your full basis in the car. The maximumtable. each subsequent year) for the year. If he contin-
Page 22 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 23 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ues to use the car 100% for business in 2004 For the year the business use drops to 50%Leasing a Car
and later years, Bob can deduct the lesser ofor less and all later years in the recovery period,
$1,775 or his remaining unrecovered basis in If you lease a car, truck, or van that you use inyou must use the straight line depreciation
each of those years until his deductions total the your business, you can use the standard mile-method over a 5-year recovery period. In addi-
$10,418 unrecovered basis ($12,193 − $1,775 age rate or actual expenses to figure your de-tion, for the year your business use drops to
claimed in 2003). ductible expense. This section explains how to50% or less, you must recapture (include in your
If Bob’s business use of the car was less figure actual expenses for a leased car, truck, orgross income) any excess depreciation (dis-
than 100% during any year, his depreciation van.cussed later). You also increase the adjusteddeduction would be less than the maximum basis of your car by the same amount. Deductible payments. You can deduct theamount allowable for that year. However, in de-
part of each lease payment that is for the use oftermining his unrecovered basis in the car, heExample. In June 2000, you purchased athe car in your business. You cannot deduct anywould still reduce his original basis by the maxi-car for exclusive use in your business. You metpart of a lease payment that is for personal usemum amount allowable. Bob’s unrecovered ba-the more-than-50%-use test for the first 3 yearsof the car, such as commuting.sis at the beginning of 2003 would be $12,065of the recovery period (2000 through 2002) butYou must spread any advance payments($28,600 – $16,535) in this example. This isfailed to meet it in the fourth year (2003). Youover the entire lease period. You cannot deducttrue even if his actual depreciation deduction fordetermine your depreciation for 2003 using 20%any payments you make to buy a car, even if theany year was less than the maximum amount(from column (c) of Table 3). You also will havepayments are called lease payments.shown. to determine and include in your gross incomeIf you lease a car for 30 days or more, you
any excess depreciation, discussed next. may have to reduce your lease payment deduc-
tion by an “inclusion amount.”Car Used 50% or Less Excess depreciation. You must include
for Business any excess depreciation in your gross income
and add it to your car’s adjusted basis for theInclusion AmountsIf you use your car 50% or less for qualifiedfirst tax year in which you do not use the carbusiness use (defined earlier under Deprecia- more than 50% in qualified business use. UseIf you lease a car that you use in your businesstion Deduction) either in the year the car isForm 4797, Sales of Business Property, to fig-for a lease term of 30 days or more, you mayplaced in service or in a later year, special rulesure and report the excess depreciation in yourhave to include an inclusion amount in yourapply. The rules that apply in these two situa-gross income. income for each tax year you lease the car. Totions are explained in the following paragraphs.
do this, you do not add an amount to income.Excess depreciation is: (For this purpose, “car” was defined earlier
Instead, you reduce your deduction for yourunder Actual Car Expenses and includes certain
1) The amount of the depreciation deductions lease payment. (This reduction has an effecttrucks and vans and electric cars.)
similar to the limit on the depreciation deductionallowable for the car (including any sectionQualified business use 50% or less in year you would have on the car if you owned it.)179 deduction claimed and any special de-placed in service.If you use your car 50% or The inclusion amount is a percentage of partpreciation allowance claimed) for tax yearsless for qualified business use (defined earlier of the fair market value of the leased car multi-in which you used the car more than 50%under Depreciation Deduction) in the year the plied by the percentage of business and invest-in qualified business use, minuscar is placed in service, the following three spe- ment use of the car for the tax year. It is prorated
cial rules apply. 2) The amount of the depreciation deductions for the number of days of the lease term in the
that would have been allowable for thosetax year.1) You cannot take the section 179 deduc- years if you had not used the car more The inclusion amount applies to each taxtion. than 50% in qualified business use for theyear that you lease the car if the fair market
year you placed it in service. This means2) You cannot take the special depreciation value (defined next) of the car when the lease
allowance. the amount of depreciation figured using began was more than the amounts shown in the
the straight line method. following table.3) You must figure depreciation using the
straight line method over a 5-year recovery
Year Lease Began Fair Market Value*Example. On June 25, 2000, you bought aperiod. You must continue to use the
straight line method even if your percent-car for $11,000 and placed it in service. You did2003 $ 18,000
age of business use increases to more 1999 – 2002  15,500not claim the section 179 deduction. You used
1997 – 1998 15,800than 50% in a later year. the car exclusively in qualified business use for
1995 – 1996 15,5002000, 2001, and 2002. For those years, youInstead of making the computation yourself, 1994 14,600used the appropriate MACRS Depreciationyou can use column (c) of Table 3 to find the 1993 14,300
Chart to figure depreciation deductions totaling1992 13,700percentage to use.
$7,832 ($2,200 for 2000, $3,520 for 2001, and 1991 13,400
1987 – 1990 12,800$2,112 for 2002) under the 200% DB method.Example. On May 22, 2003, Dan bought a
car for $15,000. He used it 40% for his consult-During 2003, you used the car 50% for busi-*For 2003, the fair market value for trucks and vans ising business. Because he did not use the carness and 50% for personal purposes. Since you$18,500 and for electric cars it is $53,000.
more than 50% for business, Dan cannot takedid not meet the more-than-50%-use test, you
any section 179 deduction or the special depre-must include in gross income for 2003 yourFair market value.Fair market value is theciation allowance and he must use the straightexcess depreciation determined as follows.price at which the property would change handsline method over a 5-year recovery period to between a buyer and a seller, neither having torecover the cost of his car. Total depreciation claimed: $7,832 buy or sell, and both having reasonable knowl-(MACRS 200% DB method)Dan deducts $600 in 2003. This is the lesser edge of all the necessary facts. Sales of similarMinus total depreciation allowable:of: property around the same date may be helpful in(Straight line method)
figuring the fair market value of the property.2000 — 10% of $11,000...... $1,1001) $600 (($15,000 cost × 40% business use)
Figure the fair market value on the first day of2001 — 20% of $11,000...... 2,200× 10% recovery percentage (from column 2002 — 20% of $11,000...... 2,200 5,500 the lease term. If the capitalized cost of a car is(c), Table 3)), or Excess depreciation $2,332 specified in the lease agreement, use that
2) $1,224 ($3,060 maximum limit × 40% busi- amount as the fair market value.In 2003, using Form 4797, you figure andness use). report the $2,332 excess depreciation you mustFiguring the inclusion amount. Inclusion
include in your gross income. Your adjustedQualified business use 50% or less in a later amounts are listed in Appendix A for cars, in
basis in the car is also increased by $2,332.year. If you use your car more than 50% in Appendix B for trucks and vans, and in Appendix
Your 2003 depreciation deduction is $1,100qualified business use in the tax year it is placed C  for electric cars leased after August 5, 1997. If
($11,000 (unadjusted basis) × 50% (businessin service but the business use drops to 50% or the fair market value of the car is $100,000 or
use percentage) × 20% (from column (c) of Ta-less in a later year, you can no longer use an less, use the appropriate appendix (depending
accelerated depreciation method for that car.ble 3 on the line for Jan. 1— Sept. 30, 2000)). on the year you first placed the car in service) to
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 23

Page 24 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tax Dollar Business Inclusion Depreciation adjustment when you used thedetermine the inclusion amount. If the fair mar-
year amount Proration use amount standard mileage rate.If you used the stan-ket value is more than $100,000, see the Reve-
dard mileage rate for the business use of yournue Procedure(s) identified in the footnote of the2002 $ 59 138/365 100% $ 22
car, depreciation was included in that rate. The2003 128 309/365 100% 108appendices for the inclusion amount. Revenue
rate of depreciation that was allowed in the stan-Procedures are available at most IRS offices
dard mileage rate is shown in the chart thatand many local libraries. Leased car changed from personal to busi-follows. You must reduce your basis in your carness use. If you lease a car for personal useFor each tax year during which you lease the (but not below zero) by the amount of this depre-and, in a later year, change it to business use,car for business, determine your inclusion ciation.you must determine the car’s fair market valueamount by following these three steps. on the date of conversion. Then figure the inclu-These rates do not apply for any year in
sion amount using the rules explained earlier which the actual expenses method1) Locate the appendix that applies to you.under Figuring the inclusion amount. Use the was used.
TIP
To find the inclusion amount, do the follow-fair market value on the date of conversion.ing. Depreciation
Example. In March 2001, Janice leased a Year(s) Rate per Milea) Find the line that includes the fair mar-
car for 4 years for personal use. On June 1,ket value of the car on the first day of 2003 $ .16
2003, she started working as a self-employed 2001 –  2002 .15the lease term. advertising consultant and started using the 2000 .14
b) Go across the line to the column for theleased car for business purposes. Her records1994 –  1999 .12
tax year in which the car is used under 1992 –  1993 .11 1/2show that her business use for June 1 through
1989 –  1991 .11the lease to find the dollar amount. ForDecember 31 was 60%. To figure her inclusion
1988 .10 1/2the last tax year of the lease, use theamount for 2003, Janice obtained an appraisal1987 .10from an independent car leasing company thatdollar amount for the preceding year. 1986 .09showed the fair market value of her 2001 car on1983 –  1985 .082) Prorate the dollar amount from (1)(b) for June 1, 2003, was $18,650. Using Appendix 1982 .07 1/2
A–7, Janice computed her inclusion amount forthe number of days of the lease term in- 1980 –  1981 .07
2003 as shown in the following table.cluded in the tax year.
For tax years after 1989, the depreciation3) Multiply the prorated amount from (2) byTax Dollar Business Inclusion rates apply to all business miles. For tax yearsthe percentage of business and invest- year amount Proration use amount before 1990, the depreciation rates apply to thement use for the tax year. This is your2003 $ 12 214/365 60% $4 first 15,000 miles.inclusion amount.
Example. In 1998, you bought a car for ex-Reporting inclusion amounts.For informa- clusive use in your business. The car costExample. On January 17, 2002, you leasedtion on reporting inclusion amounts, employees$18,000. From 1998 through 2003, you used thea car for 3 years and placed it in service for useshould see Car rentals under Completing Forms standard mileage rate to figure your car expensein your business. The car had a fair market value2106 and 2106–EZ in chapter 6. Sole proprie-deduction. You drove your car 14,100 miles inof $32,250 on the first day of the lease term. Youtors should see the instructions for Schedule C1998, 16,300 miles in 1999, 15,600 miles inuse the car 75% for business and 25% for per-(Form 1040) and farmers should see the instruc-2000, 16,700 miles in 2001, 15,100 miles intions for Schedule F (Form 1040).sonal purposes during each year of the lease. 2002, and 14,900 miles in 2003. Your deprecia-Assuming you continue to use the car 75% for tion is figured as follows.business, you use Appendix A–6 to arrive at the
following inclusion amounts for each year of the Year Miles x Rate Depreciation
Disposition of a Carlease: 1998 14,100 × .12 $ 1,692
1999 16,300 × .12 1,956Tax Dollar Business Inclusion If you dispose of your car, you may have a2000 15,600 × .14 2,184year amount Proration use amount taxable gain or a deductible loss. The portion of2001 16,700 × .15 2,505
any gain that is due to depreciation (including2002 $80 349/365 75% $ 76 2002 15,100 × .15 2,265
2003 175 365/365 75% 131 any section 179 or clean-fuel vehicle deduction)2003 14,900 × .16 2,384
2004 260 366/366 75% 195 Total depreciation $12,986that you claimed on the car will be treated as
2005 260 16/365 75% 9 ordinary income. However, you may not have toAt the end of 2003, your adjusted basis in the carrecognize a gain or loss if you dispose of the carFor each year of the lease that you deduct lease is $5,014 ($18,000 − $12,986).because of a casualty, theft, or trade-in.payments, you must reduce your deduction byThis section gives some general informationDepreciation deduction for the year ofthe inclusion amount computed for that year.about dispositions of cars. For information ondisposition.If you deduct actual car ex-how to report the disposition of your car, seepenses and you dispose of your car before thePublication 544.Leased car changed from business to per- end of its recovery period, you are allowed a
sonal use. If you lease a car for business use reduced depreciation deduction for the year ofCasualty or theft.For a casualty or theft, aand, in a later year, change it to personal use, disposition.gain results when you receive insurance or otherfollow the rules explained earlier under Figuring To figure the reduced depreciation deductionreimbursement that is more than your adjustedthe inclusion amount. For the tax year in which for a car disposed of in 2003, first determine thebasis in your car. If you then spend all of theyou stop using the car for business, use the depreciation deduction for the full year usingproceeds to acquire replacement property (adollar amount for the previous tax year. Prorate Table 3.new car or repairs to the old car) within a speci-the dollar amount for the number of days in the If you used a Date Placed in Service line forfied period of time, you do not recognize anylease term that fall within the tax year. Jan. 1—Sept. 30, you can deduct one-half ofgain. Your basis in the replacement property is
the depreciation amount figured for the full year.its cost minus any gain that is not recognized.Example. On August 16, 2002, Will leased Figure your depreciation deduction for the fullSee Publication 547 for more information.an electric car with a fair market value of year using the rules explained in this chapter
$58,600 for 3 years. He used the car exclusively and deduct 50% of that amount with your otherTrade-in. When you trade in an old car for a
in his own data processing business. On No- actual car expenses.new one, the transaction is considered a
vember 5, 2003, Will closed his business and If you used a Date Placed in Service line forlike-kind exchange. Generally, no gain or loss is
went to work for a company where he is not Oct. 1—Dec. 31, you can deduct a percentagerecognized. (For exceptions, see chapter 1 of
required to use a car for business. Using Appen- of the depreciation amount figured for the fullPublication 544.) In a trade-in situation, your
dix C–6, Will computed his inclusion amount for year. The percentage you use is determined bybasis in the new property is generally your ad-
2002 and 2003 as shown in the following table the month you disposed of the car. Figure yourjusted basis in the old property plus any addi-
and reduced his deductions for lease payments depreciation deduction for the full year using thetional amount you pay. (See Unadjusted basis,
by those amounts. rules explained in this chapter and multiply theearlier.)
Page 24 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 25 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
result by the percentage from the following table If you keep timely and accurate rec- ered adequate. This is because written evidence
for the month that you disposed of the car. ords, you will have support to show the is more reliable than oral evidence alone. How-
IRS if your tax return is ever examined. ever, if you prepare a record in a computerRECORDS
Month Percentage You will also have proof of expenses that your memory device with the aid of a logging pro-
employer may require if you are reimbursed gram, it is considered an adequate record.
Jan., Feb., March............ 12.5%
April, May, June............. 37.5% under an accountable plan. These plans are
July, Aug., Sept.............. 62.5% discussed in chapter 6 under Reimbursements. What Are AdequateOct., Nov., Dec.............. 87.5%
Records?
Do not use this table if you are a fiscal You should keep the proof you need in an ac-year filer. See Sale or Other Disposi- count book, diary, statement of expense, or sim-tion Before the Recovery Period EndsCAUTION
! How To Prove ilar record. You should also keep documentaryin chapter 4 of Publication 946. evidence that, together with your record, willExpenses support each element of an expense.
Table 4 is a summary of records you need to
Documentary evidence. You generally mustprove each expense discussed in this publica-
have documentary evidence, such as receipts,tion. You must be able to prove the elements
canceled checks, or bills, to support your ex-listed across the top portion of the chart. You
penses.prove them by having the information and re-5.
ceipts (where needed) for the expenses listed inException. Documentary evidence is notthe first column. needed if any of the following conditions apply.
You cannot deduct amounts that you 1) You have meals or lodging expenses whileapproximate or estimate.Recordkeeping traveling away from home for which youCAUTION
!
account to your employer under an ac-
If you deduct travel, entertainment, gift, or trans- countable plan, and you use a per diem
portation expenses, you must be able to prove You should keep adequate records to prove allowance method that includes meals
(substantiate) certain elements of expense. This your expenses or have sufficient evidence that and/or lodging. (Accountable plans and
chapter discusses the records you need to keep will support your own statement. You must gen- per diem allowances are discussed in
to prove these expenses. erally prepare a written record for it to be consid- chapter 6.)
Table 4. How To Prove Certain Business Expenses
IF you have
expenses
for:
Travel
Entertainment
Gifts
Transportation
Amount Time
Place or
Description
Business Purpose and
Business Relationship
THEN you must keep records that show details of the following elements.
Cost of each separate expense
for travel, lodging, and meals.
Incidental expenses may be
totaled in reasonable categories
such as taxis, daily meals for
traveler, etc.
Dates you
left and
returned for
each trip
and number
of days
spent on
business.
Destination or area
of your travel
(name of city, town,
or other
designation).
Cost of each separate expense.
Incidental expenses such as
taxis, telephones, etc., may be
totaled on a daily basis.
Date of
entertainment.
(Also see
Business
Purpose.)
Name and address
or location of place
of entertainment.
Type of
entertainment if not
otherwise apparent.
(Also see Business
Purpose.)
Cost of the gift. Date of the
gift.
Description of the
gift.
Date of the
expense.
For car
expenses,
the date of
the use of
the car.
Your business
destination.
Cost of each separate expense.
For car expenses, the cost of
the car and any improvements,
the date you started using it for
business, the mileage for each
business use, and the total miles
for the year.
Purpose:
 Business purpose for the expense
or the business benefit gained or expected
to be gained.
Relationship:
 N/A
Purpose: Business purpose for the expense
or the business benefit gained or expected
to be gained.
Relationship:
 Occupations or other
information (such as names, titles, or other
designations) about the recipients that
shows their business relationship to you.
For entertainment, you must also prove that
you or your employee was present if the
entertainment was a business meal.
For entertainment, the nature of the
business discussion or activity. If the
entertainment was directly before or after a
business discussion: the date, place, nature,
and duration of the business discussion,
and the identities of the persons who took
part in both the business discussion and the
entertainment activity.
Purpose: Business purpose for the expense.
Relationship: N/A
Chapter 5 Recordkeeping Page 25

Page 26 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2) Your expense, other than lodging, is less route, you do not have to give a written explana- which an expense is made, you cannot get a
than $75. tion of the business purpose for traveling that receipt. This applies if all the following are true.
route. You can satisfy the requirements by re-3) You have a transportation expense for 1) You were unable to obtain evidence for ancording the length of the delivery route once, thewhich a receipt is not readily available. element of the expense or use that com-date of each trip at or near the time of the trips,
pletely satisfies the requirements ex-and the total miles you drove the car during theAdequate evidence. Documentary evi- plained earlier under What Are Adequatetax year. You could also establish the date ofdence ordinarily will be considered adequate if it Records.each trip with a receipt, record of delivery, orshows the amount, date, place, and essentialother documentary evidence. 2) You are unable to obtain evidence for ancharacter of the expense.
element that completely satisfies the twoFor example, a hotel receipt is enough toConfidential information.You do not need to rules listed earlier under What if I Havesupport expenses for business travel if it has allput confidential information relating to an ele-Incomplete Records.of the following information. ment of a deductible expense (such as the
3) You have presented other evidence for theplace, business purpose, or business relation-1) The name and location of the hotel. element that is the best proof possibleship) in your account book, diary, or other re-
2) The dates you stayed there. under the circumstances.cord. However, you do have to record the
information elsewhere at or near the time of the3) Separate amounts for charges such as expense and have it available to fully prove thatDestroyed records. If you cannot produce alodging, meals, and telephone calls. element of the expense. receipt because of reasons beyond your control,
A restaurant receipt is enough to prove an you can prove a deduction by reconstructing
expense for a business meal if it has all of the your records or expenses. Reasons beyondWhat If I Have Incompletefollowing information. your control include fire, flood, and other casu-Records? alty.1) The name and location of the restaurant.
If you do not have complete records to prove an
2) The number of people served. Separating and Combiningelement of an expense, then you must prove the
element with: 3) The date and amount of the expense. Expenses
If a charge is made for items other than food and1) Your own written or oral statement con-This section explains when expenses must bebeverages, the receipt must show that this is thetaining specific information about the ele-kept separate and when expenses can be com-case. ment, and bined.
Canceled check. A canceled check, to- 2) Other supporting evidence that is sufficientSeparating expenses. Each separate pay-gether with a bill from the payee, ordinarily es-to establish the element. ment is generally considered a separate ex-tablishes the cost. However, a canceled checkIf the element is the description of a gift, orpense. For example, if you entertain a customerby itself does not prove a business expensethe cost, time, place, or date of an expense, theor client at dinner and then go to the theater, thewithout other evidence to show that it was for asupporting evidence must be either direct evi-dinner expense and the cost of the theater tick-business purpose. dence or documentary evidence. Direct evi-ets are two separate expenses. You must record
dence can be written statements, or the oralthem separately in your records.Duplicate information.You do not have to
testimony of your guests or other witnesses set-record information in your account book or other Season or series tickets.If you buy sea-ting forth detailed information about the element.record that duplicates information shown on a son or series tickets for business use, you mustDocumentary evidence can be receipts, paidreceipt as long as your records and receipts treat each ticket in the series as a separate item.bills, or similar evidence.complement each other in an orderly manner. To determine the cost of individual tickets, divideIf the element is either the business relation-You do not have to record amounts your the total cost (but not more than face value) byship of your guests or the business purpose ofemployer pays directly for any ticket or other the number of games or performances in thethe amount spent, the supporting evidence cantravel item. However, if you charge these items series. You must keep records to show whetherbe circumstantial, rather than direct. For exam-to your employer, through a credit card or other- you use each ticket as a gift or entertainment.ple, the nature of your work, such as makingwise, you must keep a record of the amounts Also, you must be able to prove the cost ofdeliveries, provides circumstantial evidence ofyou spend. nonluxury box seat tickets if you rent a skybox orthe use of your car for business purposes. In-other private luxury box for more than one event.Timely-kept records.You should record thevoices of deliveries establish when you used theSee Entertainment tickets in chapter 2.elements of an expense or of a business use atcar for business.
or near the time of the expense or use and Combining items. You can make one dailySampling. You can keep an adequate recordsupport it with sufficient documentary evidence. entry in your record for reasonable categories offor parts of a tax year and use that record toA timely-kept record has more value than a expenses. Examples are taxi fares, telephoneprove the amount of business or investment usestatement prepared later when generally there is calls, or other incidental travel costs. Mealsfor the entire year. You must demonstrate bya lack of accurate recall. should be in a separate category. You can in-other evidence that the periods for which anYou do not need to write down the elements clude tips for meal-related services with theadequate record is kept are representative ofof every expense on the day of the expense. If costs of the meals.the use throughout the tax year.you maintain a log on a weekly basis that ac- Expenses of a similar nature occurring dur-
counts for use during the week, the log is consid- ing the course of a single event are considered aExample. You use your car to visit the of-ered a timely-kept record. single expense. For example, if during entertain-fices of clients, meet with suppliers and otherIf you give your employer, client, or customer ment at a cocktail lounge, you pay separately forsubcontractors, and pick up and deliver items toan expense account statement, it can also be each serving of refreshments, the total expenseclients. There is no other business use of theconsidered a timely-kept record. This is true if for the refreshments is treated as a single ex-car, but you and your family use the car foryou copy it from your account book, diary, state- pense.personal purposes. You keep adequate recordsment of expense, or similar record.
Car expenses. You can account for severalduring the first week of each month that show
Proving business purpose.You must gener- uses of your car that can be considered part of athat 75% of the use of the car is for business.
ally provide a written statement of the business single use, such as a round trip or uninterruptedInvoices and bills show that your business use
purpose of an expense. However, the degree of business use, with a single record. Minimal per-continues at the same rate during the later
proof varies according to the circumstances in sonal use, such as a stop for lunch on the wayweeks of each month. Your weekly records are
each case. If the business purpose of an ex- between two business stops, is not an interrup-representative of the use of the car each month
pense is clear from the surrounding circum- tion of business use.and are sufficient evidence to support the per-
stances, then you do not need to give a writtencentage of business use for the year.
Example. You make deliveries at severalexplanation.
Exceptional circumstances.You can satisfy different locations on a route that begins and
Example. If you are a sales representative the substantiation requirements with other evi- ends at your employer’s business premises and
who calls on customers on an established sales dence if, because of the nature of the situation in that includes a stop at the business premises
Page 26 Chapter 5 Recordkeeping

Page 27 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
between two deliveries. You can account for can only include 50% of your meals andExamples of Records
entertainment on that line.these using a single record of miles driven.
Examples of records that show the informationSee your forms instructions for more informationGift expenses.You do not always have toyou need to keep for different types of expenseson how to complete your tax return.record the name of each recipient of a gift. Aare included in this publication as Table 6 andgeneral listing will be enough if it is evident that Both self-employed and an employee. IfTable 7. They are part of the illustrated exam-you are not trying to avoid the $25 annual limit you are both self-employed and an employee,ples shown at the end of chapter 6.on the amount you can deduct for gifts to any you must keep separate records for each busi-one person. For example, if you buy a large ness activity. Report your business expenses fornumber of tickets to local high school basketball self-employment on Schedule C, C–EZ, or Fgames and give one or two tickets to each of (Form 1040), as discussed earlier. Report yourmany customers, it is usually enough to record a business expenses for your work as an em-general description of the recipients. ployee on Form 2106 or 2106–EZ, as discussed
6. next.Allocating total cost.If you can prove the
Employees. If you are an employee, you gen-total cost of travel or entertainment but you can-
erally must complete Form 2106 to deduct yournot prove how much it cost for each person who
travel, transportation, and entertainment ex-participated in the event, you may have to allo-How To Report
penses. However, you can use the shorter Formcate the total cost among you and your guests
2106–EZ instead of Form 2106 if you meet all 3on a pro rata basis. To do so, you must establishThis chapter explains where and how to reportof the following conditions.the number of persons who participated in thethe expenses discussed in this publication. Itevent. discusses reimbursements and how to treat 1) You are an employee deducting expensesAn allocation would be needed, for example,them under accountable and nonaccountable attributable to your job.if you did not have a business relationship withplans. It also explains rules for independent con-2) You were not reimbursed by your em-all of your guests. See Allocating between busi-tractors and clients, fee-basis officials, certainployer for your expenses (amounts in-ness and nonbusiness in chapter 2. performing artists, Armed Forces reservists, andcluded in box 1 of your Form W–2 are notcertain disabled employees. The chapter endsconsidered reimbursements).If your return is examined.If your return iswith illustrations of how to report travel, enter-
examined, you may have to provide additionaltainment, gift, and car expenses on Forms 21063) If you claim car expenses, you use the
information to the IRS. This information could beand 2106–EZ. standard mileage rate.
needed to clarify or to establish the accuracy or
For more information on how to report yourreliability of information contained in your rec-
expenses on Forms 2106 and 2106–EZ, seeords, statements, testimony, or documentary
Completing Forms 2106 and 2106–EZ, later.evidence before a deduction is allowed. Where To Report
Gifts. If you did not receive any reimburse-
ments (or the reimbursements were all includedHow Long To Keep This section provides general information on
in box 1 of your Form W–2), the only businesswhere to report the expenses discussed in thisRecords and Receipts
expense you are claiming is for gifts, and thepublication.
Special Rules discussed later do not apply toYou must keep records as long as they may be
Self-employed. You must report your incomeyou, do not complete Form 2106 or 2106–EZ.needed for the administration of any provision of
and expenses on Schedule C or C–EZ (Form Instead, claim the amount of your deductiblethe Internal Revenue Code. Generally, this
1040) if you are a sole proprietor, or on Sched-gifts directly on line 20 of Schedule A (Formmeans you must keep records that support your
ule F (Form 1040) if you are a farmer. You do not1040).deduction (or an item of income) for 3 years from
use Form 2106 or 2106–EZ.the date you file the income tax return on which Statutory employees. If you received aIf you claim car or truck expenses, you mustthe deduction is claimed. A return filed early is Form W–2 and the “Statutory employee” box inprovide certain information on the use of yourconsidered filed on the due date. For a more box 13 was checked, report your income andvehicle. You provide this information on Sched-complete explanation of how long to keep rec- expenses related to that income on Schedule Cule C, Schedule C–EZ, or  Form 4562.ords, get Publication 583, Starting a Business or C–EZ (Form 1040). Do not complete Formand Keeping Records. If you file Schedule C: 2106 or 2106–EZ.
You must keep records of the business use Statutory employees include full-time life in-1) Report your travel expenses, exceptof your car for each year of the recovery period. surance salespersons, certain agent or commis-meals, on line 24a,See More-than-50%-use test in chapter 4 under sion drivers, traveling salespersons, and certain
Depreciation Deduction. 2) Report your meals (actual cost or standardhomeworkers.
meal allowance) and entertainment on line If you are entitled to a reimbursementReimbursed for expenses. Employees who 24b (The 50% limit is figured on line 24c.),from your employer but you do notgive their records and documentation to their3) Report your gift expenses and transporta- claim it,   you cannot claim a deductionCAUTION
!
employers and are reimbursed for their ex- tion expenses, other than car expenses,for the expenses to which that unclaimed reim-penses generally do not have to keep copies ofon line 27, and bursement applies.this information. However, you may have to
prove your expenses if any of the following con-4) Report your car expenses on line 9. Com-Reimbursement for personal expenses. Ifditions apply. plete Part IV of the form unless you haveyour employer reimburses you for nondeduct-to file Form 4562 for depreciation or amor-ible personal expenses, such as for vacation1) You claim deductions for expenses that tization. trips, your employer must report the reimburse-are more than reimbursements. ment as wage income in box 1 of your FormIf you file Schedule C–EZ, report the total of
W–2. You cannot deduct personal expenses.2) Your expenses are reimbursed under a all business expenses on line 2. You can only
nonaccountable plan. include 50% of your meals and entertainment inIncome-producing property. If you havethat total. If you include car expenses, you must3) Your employer does not use adequate ac- travel or transportation expenses related toalso complete Part III of the form.counting procedures to verify expense ac- income-producing property, report your deducti-
If you file Schedule F:counts. ble expenses on the form appropriate for that
activity.4) You are related to your employer as de-1) Report your car expenses on line 12. At-For example, if you have rental real estatefined under Standard Meal Allowance in tach Form 4562 and provide informationincome and expenses, report your expenses onchapter 1. on the use of your car in Part V of FormSchedule E, Supplemental Income and Loss.4562.Reimbursements, adequate accounting, and See Publication 527, Residential Rental Prop-
nonaccountable plans are discussed in chapter2) Report all other business expenses dis-erty, for more information on the rental of real
6. cussed in this publication on line 34. You estate. If you have deductible investment-re-
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 27

Page 28 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
lated transportation expenses, report them on standing that you will pay your own expenses. In 3) You return any excess reimbursement
line 22 of Schedule A (Form 1040). this situation, you have no reimbursement or within 120 days after the expense was
allowance arrangement, and you do not have topaid or incurred.
read this section on reimbursements. Instead,Vehicle Provided by 4) You are given a periodic statement (atsee Completing Forms 2106 and 2106–EZ,Your Employer least quarterly) that asks you to either re-later, for information on completing your tax re-turn or adequately account for outstandingturn.If your employer provides you with a car, you advances and you comply within 120 days
may be able to deduct the actual expenses ofReimbursement, allowance, or advance.A of the statement.
operating that car for business purposes. Thereimbursement or other expense allowance ar-
amount you can deduct depends on the amountrangement is a system or plan that an employerEmployee meets accountable plan rules.Ifthat your employer included in your income anduses to pay, substantiate, and recover the ex-you meet the three rules for accountable plans,the business and personal miles you drove dur-penses, advances, reimbursements, and your employer should not include any reim-ing the year. You cannot use the standard mile-amounts charged to the employer for employeebursements in your income in box 1 of yourage rate. business expenses. Arrangements include perForm W–2. If your expenses equal your reim-diem and car allowances.Value reported on Form W–2. Your em- bursement, you do not complete Form 2106.A per diem allowance is a fixed amount ofployer can figure and report either the actual You have no deduction since your expensesdaily reimbursement your employer gives youvalue of your personal use of the car or the value and reimbursement are equal.for your lodging, meals, and incidental expensesof the car as if you used it only for personalwhen you are away from home on business. If your employer included reimburse-purposes (100% income inclusion). Your em-(The term “incidental expenses” is defined in ments in box 1 of your Form W–2 andployer must separately state the amount if 100%chapter 1 under Standard Meal Allowance.) A you meet all three rules for accounta-
TIP
of the annual lease value was included in yourcar allowance is an amount your employer givesble plans, ask your employer for a correctedincome. If you are unsure of the amount in-you for the business use of your car. Form W–2.cluded in your Form W–2, ask your employer.Your employer should tell you what method
Full value included in your income.You can of reimbursement is used and what records youAccountable plan rules not met. Even
deduct the value of the business use of anmust provide. though you are reimbursed under an accounta-
employer-provided car if your employer reported ble plan, some of your expenses may not meetEmployers. If you are an employer and you100% of the value of the car in your income. On all three rules. Those expenses that fail to meetreimburse employee business expenses, howyour 2003 Form W–2, the amount of the value all three rules for accountable plans are treatedyou treat this reimbursement on yourwill be included in box 1, Wages, tips, other as having been reimbursed under a nonac-employee’s Form W–2 depends in part oncompensation, and box 12. countable plan (discussed later).whether you have an accountable plan. Reim-To claim your expenses, complete Part II,bursements treated as paid under an accounta-Reimbursement of nondeductibleSections A and C, of Form 2106. Enter yourble plan, as explained next, are not reported asexpenses. You may be reimbursed underactual expenses on line 23 of Section C andpay. Reimbursements treated as paid underyour employer’s accountable plan for expensesinclude the entire value of the employer-pro-nonaccountable plans, as explained later, arerelated to that employer’s business, some ofvided car on line 25. Complete the rest of thereported as pay. See Publication 15, Circular E,which are deductible as employee business ex-form. Employer’s Tax Guide, for information on em-penses and some of which are not deductible.
Less than full value included in your income.ployee pay. The reimbursements you receive for the nonde-
If less than the full annual lease value of the car ductible expenses do not meet rule (1) for ac-
was included on your Form W–2, this means countable plans, and they are treated as paidAccountable Plansthat your Form W–2 only includes the value of under a nonaccountable plan.
your personal use of the car. Do not enter thisTo be an accountable plan, your employer’s
value on your Form 2106; it is not deductible. Example. Your employer’s plan reimbursesreimbursement or allowance arrangement must
If you paid any actual costs (that your em- you for travel expenses while away from homeinclude all three of the following rules.
ployer did not provide or reimburse you for) to on business and also for meals when you work
1) Your expenses must have a business con-operate the car, you can deduct the business late at the office, even though you are not away
nection — that is, you must have paid orportion of those costs. Examples of costs that from home. The part of the arrangement that
incurred deductible expenses while per-you may have are gas, oil, and repairs. Com- reimburses you for the nondeductible meals
forming services as an employee of yourplete Part II, Sections A and C, of Form 2106. when you work late at the office is treated as
employer.Enter your actual costs on line 23 of Section C paid under a nonaccountable plan.
and leave line 25 blank. Complete the rest of the2) You must adequately account to your em- The employer makes the decisionform. ployer for these expenses within a reason- whether to reimburse employees
able period of time. under an accountable plan or a nonac-
TIP
countable plan. If you are an employee who3) You must return any excess reimburse-
receives payments under a nonaccountablement or allowance within a reasonable pe-Reimbursements plan, you cannot convert these amounts to pay-riod of time.
ments under an accountable plan by voluntarilyThis section explains what to do when you re-“Adequate accounting” and “returning ex-accounting to your employer for the expensesceive an advance or are reimbursed for any ofcess reimbursements” are discussed later.and voluntarily returning excess reimburse-the employee business expenses discussed inAn excess reimbursement or allowance  is ments to the employer.this publication. any amount you are paid that is more than the
If you received an advance, allowance, orbusiness-related expenses that you adequately
reimbursement for your expenses, how you re-accounted for to your employer. Adequate Accountingport this amount and your expenses depends onThe definition of reasonable period of time
whether the reimbursement was paid to youdepends on the facts and circumstances of yourOne of the three rules for an accountable plan isunder an accountable plan or a nonaccountablesituation. However, regardless of the facts andthat you must adequately account to your em-plan. circumstances of your situation, actions thatployer for your expenses. You adequately ac-This section explains the two types of plans,take place within the times specified in the fol-count by giving your employer a statement ofhow per diem and car allowances simplify prov-lowing list will be treated as taking place within aexpense, an account book, a diary, or a similaring the amount of your expenses, and the taxreasonable period of time. record in which you entered each expense at ortreatment of your reimbursements and ex- near the time you had it, along with documentarypenses. It also covers rules for independent1) You receive an advance within 30 days ofevidence (such as receipts) of your travel, mile-contractors. the time you have an expense. age, and other employee business expenses.
(See Table 4 in chapter 5 for details you need toNo reimbursement. You are not reimbursed 2) You adequately account for your expenses
enter in your record and documents you need toor given an allowance for your expenses if you within 60 days after they were paid or in-
prove certain expenses.)are paid a salary or commission with the under- curred.
Page 28 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 29 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You must account for all amounts you re- are traveling away from home in a particular You can use either of the following methods
ceived from your employer during the year as area. The rates are different for different loca- to figure the federal M&IE for that day.
advances, reimbursements, or allowances. This tions. Your employer should have these rates
1) Method 1:includes amounts you charged to your employer available. (Employers can get Publication 1542,
by credit card or other method. You must give which gives the rates in the continental Uniteda) For the day you depart, add 3/4 of theyour employer the same type of records and States for the current year.) standard meal allowance amount forsupporting information that you would have toThe standard meal allowance.The stan- that day.give to the IRS if the IRS questioned a deductiondard meal allowance (discussed in chapter 1) ison your return. You must pay back the amount of b) For the day you return, add 3/4 of thethe federal rate for meals and incidental ex-any reimbursement or other expense allowance standard meal allowance amount forpenses (M&IE). The rate for most small localitiesfor which you do not adequately account or that the preceding day.in the United States is $30 a day from January 1,is more than the amount for which you ac-2003, through September 30, 2003, and $31 a2) Method 2: Prorate the standard meal al-counted. day from October 31, 2003, through December lowance using any method that you con-31, 2003. Most major cities and many other sistently apply and that is in accordancelocalities qualify for higher rates. The rates for allPer Diem and Car Allowances with reasonable business practice. For ex-localities within the continental United States areample, an employer can treat 2 full days oflisted in Publication 1542. You can also find thisIf your employer reimburses you for your ex- per diem (that includes M&IE) paid forinformation on the Internet atpenses using a per diem or a car allowance, you travel away from home from 9 a.m. of onewww.policyworks.gov/perdiem.can generally use the allowance as proof for the day to 5 p.m. of the next day as being noYou receive an allowance only for meals andamount of your expenses. A per diem or car more than the federal rate. This is trueincidental expenses when your employer doesallowance satisfies the adequate accounting re- even though a federal employee would beone of the following. quirements for the amount of your expenses limited to a reimbursement of M&IE for
only if all four of the following conditions apply. only 11/2 days of the federal M&IE rate.1) Provides you with lodging (furnishes it in
kind).1) Your employer reasonably limits payments The standard mileage rate.This is a setof your expenses to those that are ordinary2) Reimburses you, based on your receipts,rate per mile that you can use to compute yourand necessary in the conduct of the tradefor the actual cost of your lodging. deductible car expenses. For 2003, the standardor business. mileage rate is 36 cents a mile for all business3) Pays the hotel, motel, etc., directly for your2) The allowance is similar in form to and not miles. This rate is adjusted periodically.lodging.more than the federal rate (defined later). Fixed and variable rate (FAVR).This is an4) Does not have a reasonable belief that you3) You prove the time (dates), place, and allowance your employer may use to reimbursehad (or will have) lodging expenses, suchbusiness purpose of your expenses to your car expenses. Under this method, youras when you stay with friends or relativesyour employer (as explained in Table 4) employer pays an allowance that includes aor sleep in the cab of your truck.within a reasonable period of time. combination of payments covering fixed and va-
5) Figures the allowance on a basis similar toriable costs, such as a cents-per-mile rate to4) You are not related to your employer (asthat used in computing your compensa-cover your variable operating costs (such asdefined under Standard Meal Allowance in tion, such as number of hours worked orgas, oil, etc.) plus a flat amount to cover yourchapter 1). If you are related to your em-miles traveled. fixed costs (such as depreciation (or lease pay-ployer, you must be able to prove your ments), insurance, etc.). If your employerexpenses to the IRS even if you have al-High-low rate.This is a simplified methodchooses to use this method, your employer willready adequately accounted to your em-of computing the federal per diem rate for travelrequest the necessary records from you.ployer and returned any excess within the continental United States. It elimi-reimbursement. nates the need to keep a current list of the perReporting your expenses with a per diem or
diem rate for each city. car allowance.If your reimbursement is in theIf the IRS finds that an employer’s travel allow-
form of an allowance received under an ac-Under the high-low method, the per diemance practices are not based on reasonably
countable plan, the following two facts affectamount for travel during January through Octo-accurate estimates of travel costs (including rec-
your reporting.ber of 2003 is $204 (including $45 for M&IE) forognition of cost differences in different areas for
certain high-cost locations. All other areas haveper diem amounts), you will not be considered to
1) The federal rate.a per diem amount of $125 (including $35 forhave accounted to your employer. In this case,
M&IE). (Employers can get Publication 1542you must be able to prove your expenses to the 2) Whether the allowance or your actual ex-
(Revised February 2003), which gives the areasIRS. penses were more than the federal rate.
eligible for the $204 per diem amount under the
The following discussions explain where to re-The federal rate.The federal rate can be fig-high-low method for all or part of this period.)
port your expenses depending upon how theured using any one of the following methods. Effective November 1, 2003, the peramount of your allowance compares to the fed-
diem rate for certain high-cost loca-1) For per diem amounts: eral rate.
tions increased to $207 (including $46CAUTION
!
Allowance LESS than or EQUAL to the fed-a) The regular federal per diem rate.for M&IE). The rate for all other locations in-eral rate.If your allowance is less than orcreased to $126 (including $36 for M&IE). How-b) The standard meal allowance. equal to the federal rate, the allowance will notever, an employer can continue to use the lowerbe included in box 1 of your Form W–2. You doc) The high-low rate. rates described in the preceding paragraph fornot need to report the related expenses or thethe remainder of 2003 if those rates and loca-allowance on your return if your expenses are2) For car expenses: tions are used consistently during Novemberequal to or less than the allowance.and December for all employees. Employersa) The standard mileage rate. However, if your actual expenses are morewho did not use the high-low method during the
than your allowance, you can complete Formfirst 10 months of 2003 cannot begin to use itb) A fixed and variable rate (FAVR). 2106 and deduct the excess amount on Sched-before 2004. See Revenue Procedure 2003–80
ule A (Form 1040). If you are using actual ex-for more information.For per diem amounts, use the rate in penses, you must be able to prove to the IRS the
effect for the area where you stop forProrating the standard meal allowance ontotal amount of your expenses and reimburse-
sleep or rest. partial days of travel.The standard meal al-ments for the entire year. If you are using the
TIP
lowance is for a full 24-hour day of travel. If youstandard meal allowance or the standard mile-
Regular federal per diem rate.The regular travel for part of a day, such as on the days youage rate, you do not have to prove that amount.
federal per diem rate is the highest amount that depart and return, you must prorate the full-day
the federal government will pay to its employees M&IE rate. This rule also applies if your em-Example 1. In April, Jeremy takes a 2-day
for lodging, meals, and incidental expenses (or ployer uses the regular federal per diem rate or business trip to Denver. The federal rate for
meals and incidental expenses only) while they the high-low rate. Denver is $158 per day. As required by his
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 29

Page 30 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form 2106 or claim any of your expenses on
your return.
However, if your actual expenses are more
than the federal rate, you can complete Form
2106 and deduct those excess expenses. You
must report on Form 2106 your reimbursements
up to the federal rate (as shown in box 12 of your
Form W–2) and all your expenses. You should
be able to prove these amounts to the IRS.
Example 1. Laura lives and works in Austin.
Her employer sent her to Albuquerque for 2 days
on business. Laura’s employer paid the hotel
directly for her lodging and reimbursed Laura
$50 a day ($100 total) for meals and incidental
expenses. Laura’s actual meal expenses were
not more than the federal rate for Albuquerque,
which is $42 per day.
Her employer included the $16 that was
more than the federal rate (($50 − $42) × 2) in
box 1 of Laura’s Form W–2. Her employer
shows $84 ($42 a day × 2) in box 12 of her Form
W–2. This amount is not included in Laura’s
income. Laura does not have to complete Form
2106; however, she must include the $16 in her
gross income as wages (by reporting the total
amount shown in box 1 of her Form W–2).
Example 2. Joe also lives in Austin and
works for the same employer as Laura. In May
the employer sent Joe to San Diego for 4 days
and paid the hotel directly for Joe’s hotel bill. The
employer reimbursed Joe $60 a day for his
meals and incidental expenses. The federal rate
for San Diego is $50 a day.
Joe can prove that his actual meal expenses
totaled $325. His employer’s accountable plan
will not pay more than $60 a day for travel to San
Diego, so Joe does not give his employer the
records that prove that he actually spent $325.
However, he does account for the time, place,
and business purpose of the trip. This is Joe’s
only business trip this year.
Joe was reimbursed $240 ($60 × 4 days),
which is $40 more than the federal rate of $200
($50 × 4 days). The employer includes the $40
as income on Joe’s Form W–2 in box 1. The
employer also enters $200 in box 12 of Joe’s
Form W–2.
Table 5.
IF the type of reimbursement (or
other expense allowance)
arrangement is under:
An accountable plan with:
Actual expense reimbursement: 
Adequate accounting made and
excess returned
The excess amount as
wages in box 1.
No amount.
THEN the employer
reports on Form W-2:
No amount.
Actual expense reimbursement:
Adequate accounting and return of
excess both required but
 excess
not returned
Per diem or mileage allowance
up to the federal rate:
Adequate accounting made and
excess returned
Per diem or mileage allowance
up to the federal rate:
Adequate accounting and return of
excess both required but
 excess
not returned
A nonaccountable plan with:
No reimbursement plan:
Either adequate accounting or
return of excess, or both, not
required by plan
No amount.
The excess amount as
wages in box 1.
The amount up to the
federal rate is reported
only in box 12—it is not
reported in box 1.
The entire amount as
wages in box 1.
The entire amount as
wages in box 1.
No amount.
All expenses and
reimbursements only if
excess expenses are
claimed. Otherwise,
form is not filed.
All expenses.
All expenses.
* You may be able to use Form 2106-EZ. See Completing Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ.
Reporting Travel, Entertainment, Gift,
and Car Expenses and Reimbursements
AND the employee
reports on
Form 2106: *
Per diem or mileage allowance
exceeds the federal rate:
Adequate accounting up to the
federal rate only and
 excess not
returned
The excess amount as
wages in box 1.
The amount up to the
federal rate is reported
only in box 12—it is not
reported in box 1.
All expenses (and
reimbursements
reported on Form W-2,
box 12) only if expenses
in excess of the federal
rate are claimed.
Otherwise, form is not
filed.
No amount.
Joe completes Form 2106 to figure his de-
employer’s accountable plan, he accounts forExample 3. Nicole drives 10,000 miles aductible expenses. He enters the total of his
year for business. Under her employer’s ac-the time (dates), place, and business purpose of actual expenses for the year ($325) on Form
countable plan, she accounts for the timethe trip. His employer reimburses him $158 a 2106. He also enters the reimbursements that
(dates), place, and business purpose of eachday ($316 total) for living expenses. Jeremy’s were not included in his income ($200). His total
trip. Her employer pays her a mileage allowancedeductible expense, before the 50% limit, isliving expenses in Denver are not more than
$125. After he figures the 50% limit on his un-of 20 cents a mile.$158 a day.
reimbursed meals and entertainment, he willSince Nicole’s $3,600 expenses computedJeremy’s employer does not include any of include the balance, $63, as an itemized deduc-under the standard mileage rate (10,000 miles ×the reimbursement on his Form W–2 and Jer- tion.36 cents) are more than her $2,000 reimburse-emy does not deduct the expenses on his return.
ment (10,000 miles × 20 cents), she itemizes herExample 3. Debbie drives 10,000 miles fordeductions to claim the excess expenses. Ni-Example 2. In June, Matt takes a 2-day business. Under her employer’s accountable
cole completes Form 2106 (showing all of herbusiness trip to Boston. Matt’s employer uses plan, she gets reimbursed 38 cents a mile, which
expenses and reimbursements) and entersthe high-low method to reimburse employees. is 2 cents a mile more than the standard mileage
$1,600 ($3,600 − $2,000) as an itemized deduc-Since Boston is a high-cost area, Matt is given rate.
tion.an advance of $204 a day ($408 total) for his Debbie’s employer must include the reim-
bursement amount up to the standard mileagelodging, meals, and incidental expenses. Matt’sAllowance MORE than the federal rate.If
rate, $3,600 (10,000 miles × 36 cents), in box 12actual expenses totaled $550. your allowance is more than the federal rate,of her Form W–2. That amount is not taxable.your employer must include the allowanceSince Matt’s $550 of expenses are more Her employer must also include $200 (10,000amount up to the federal rate in box 12 of yourthan his $408 advance, he includes the excess miles × 2 cents) in box 1 of her Form W–2. ThisForm W–2. This amount is not taxable. How-expenses when he itemizes his deductions. Matt is the reimbursement that is more than the stan-ever, the excess allowance will be included incompletes Form 2106 (showing all of his ex- dard mileage rate.box 1 of your Form W–2. You must report thispenses and reimbursements). He must also al- If Debbie’s expenses are equal to or lesspart of your allowance as if it were wage income.locate his reimbursement between his meals than the standard mileage rate, she would not
and other expenses as discussed later underIf your actual expenses are less than orcomplete Form 2106. If her expenses are more
equal to the federal rate, you do not completeCompleting Forms 2106 and 2106–EZ. than the standard mileage rate, she would com-
Page 30 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 31 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
plete Form 2106 and report her total expenses meet one or more of the three rules listed earlier You are considered an independent contrac-
and reimbursement (shown in box 12 of her under Accountable Plans. tor if you are self-employed and you perform
Form W–2). She would then claim the excess services for a customer or client.In addition, even if your employer has an
expenses as an itemized deduction. accountable plan, the following payments will be
treated as being paid under a nonaccountable
Accounting to Your Clientplan:
Returning Excess
If you received a reimbursement or an allow-Reimbursements 1) Excess reimbursements you fail to return
ance for travel, entertainment, or gift expensesto your employer, and
Under an accountable plan, you are required to that you incurred on behalf of a client, you
2) Reimbursement of nondeductible ex-return any excess reimbursement or other ex- should provide an adequate accounting of these
penses related to your employer’s busi-pense allowances for your business expenses expenses to your client. If you do not account toness. See Reimbursement ofto the person paying the reimbursement or al- your client for these expenses, you must includenondeductible expenses, earlier, under Ac-lowance. Excess reimbursement means any any reimbursements or allowances in income.countable Plans.amount for which you did not adequately ac- You must keep adequate records of these ex-
count within a reasonable period of time. For penses whether or not you account to your clientAn arrangement that repays you for business
example, if you received a travel advance and for these expenses.expenses by reducing the amount reported as
you did not spend all the money on business-re-your wages, salary, or other pay will be treatedIf you do not separately account for and seeklated expenses, or you do not have proof of allas a nonaccountable plan. This is because youreimbursement for meals and entertainment inyour expenses, you have an excess reimburse-are entitled to receive the full amount of your payconnection with providing services for a client,ment. whether or not you have any business ex- you are subject to the 50% limit on those ex-“Adequate accounting” and “reasonable pe-penses. penses. See 50% Limit in chapter 2.riod of time” were discussed earlier in this chap-If you are not sure if the reimbursement orter. expense allowance arrangement is an account-Adequate accounting. As a self-employed
able or nonaccountable plan, ask your em-person, you adequately account by reportingTravel advance. You receive a travel ad- ployer. your actual expenses. You should follow thevance if your employer provides you with an
recordkeeping rules in chapter 5.expense allowance before you actually have theReporting your expenses under a nonac-expense, and the allowance is reasonably ex- How to report. For information on how tocountable plan.Your employer will combinepected to be no more than your expense. Under report expenses on your tax return, see Self-em-the amount of any reimbursement or other ex-an accountable plan, you are required to ade- ployed at the beginning of this chapter.pense allowance paid to you under a nonac-quately account to your employer for this ad-countable plan with your wages, salary, or othervance and to return any excess within a pay. Your employer will report the total in box 1reasonable period of time. Required Records forof your Form W–2.If you do not adequately account for or do not Clients or CustomersYou must complete Form 2106 or 2106–EZreturn any excess advance within a reasonableand itemize your deductions to deduct your ex-period of time, the amount you do not account If you are a client or customer, you generally dopenses for travel, transportation, meals, or en-for or return will be treated as having been paid not have to keep records to prove the reimburse-tertainment. Your meal and entertainmentunder a nonaccountable plan (discussed later). ments or allowances you give, in the course ofexpenses will be subject to the 50% limit dis-your business, to an independent contractor forUnproved amounts. If you do not prove cussed in chapter 2. Also, your total expensestravel or gift expenses incurred on your behalf.that you actually traveled on each day for whichwill be subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-in-However, you must keep records if:you received a per diem or car allowance (prov-come limit that applies to most miscellaneous
ing the elements described in Table 4), you must itemized deductions. 1) You reimburse the contractor for entertain-return this unproved amount of the travel ad- ment expenses incurred on your behalf,vance within a reasonable period of time. If youExample 1. Kim’s employer gives her $500 anddo not do this, the unproved amount will bea month ($6,000 total for the year) for her busi-
considered paid under a nonaccountable planness expenses. Kim does not have to provide2) The contractor adequately accounts to you
(discussed later). any proof of her expenses to her employer, andfor these expenses.
Kim can keep any funds that she does notPer diem allowance MORE than federal spend.rate. If your employer’s accountable plan pays Contractor adequately accounts.If the con-Kim is being reimbursed under a nonac-you an allowance that is higher than the federal tractor adequately accounts to you for entertain-countable plan. Her employer will include therate, you do not have to return the difference ment expenses, you (the client or customer)$6,000 on Kim’s Form W–2 as if it were wages.between the two rates for the period you can must keep records documenting each elementIf Kim wants to deduct her business expenses,prove business-related travel expenses. How- of the expense, as explained in chapter 5. Useshe must complete Form 2106 or 2106–EZ andever, the difference will be reported as wages on your records as proof for a deduction on your taxitemize her deductions.your Form W–2. This excess amount is consid- return. If entertainment expenses are accountedered paid under a nonaccountable plan (dis- for separately, you are subject to the 50% limitExample 2. Kevin is paid $2,000 a month bycussed later). on entertainment. If the contractor adequatelyhis employer. On days that he travels away from
accounts to you for reimbursed amounts, you dohome on business, his employer designates $50Example. Your employer sends you on a not have to report the amounts on an informationa day of his salary as paid to reimburse his travel5-day business trip to Phoenix and gives you a return.expenses. Because his employer would pay Ke-$250 ($50 × 5 days) advance to cover your
vin his monthly salary whether or not he wasmeals and incidental expenses. The federal per
traveling away from home, the arrangement is aContractor does not adequately account.Ifdiem for meals and incidental expenses for
nonaccountable plan. No part of the $50 a daythe contractor does not adequately account toPhoenix is $46. Your trip lasts only 3 days.
designated by his employer is treated as paidyou for allowances or reimbursements of enter-Under your employer’s accountable plan, you
under an accountable plan. tainment expenses, you do not have to keepmust return the $100 ($50 × 2 days) advance for
records of these items. You are not subject tothe 2 days you did not travel. You do not have to
the 50% limit on entertainment in this case. Youreturn the $12 difference between the allowanceRules for Independent
can deduct the reimbursements or allowancesyou received and the federal rate for PhoenixContractors and Clients as payment for services if they are ordinary and(($50 − $46) × 3 days). However, the $12 will be
necessary business expenses. However, youreported on your Form W–2 as wages. This section provides rules for independent con-
must file Form 1099–MISC, Miscellaneous In-tractors who incur expenses on behalf of a client
come, to report amounts paid to the indepen-or customer. The rules cover the reporting andNonaccountable Plans
dent contractor if the total of the reimbursementssubstantiation of certain expenses discussed in
and any other fees is $600 or more during theA nonaccountable plan is a reimbursement or this publication, and they affect both indepen-
expense allowance arrangement that does not dent contractors and their clients or customers. calendar year.
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 31

Page 32 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form 2106–EZ. You must complete Section C, service” limits (as explained earlier under Indi-
Part II, Form 2106. In addition, unless you leaseviduals subject to “hours of service” limits inCompleting Forms
your car, you must complete Section D to show chapter 2), use 65% instead of 50%.
your depreciation deduction and any section2106 and 2106–EZ
Reimbursements. Enter on line 7 of Form179 deduction you can claim.
2106 (You cannot use Form 2106–EZ.) theIf you are still using a car that is fully depreci-This section briefly describes how employees
amounts your employer (or third party) reim-ated, continue to complete Section C. Since youcomplete Forms 2106 and 2106–EZ. Table 5
bursed you that were not reported to you in boxhave no depreciation deduction, enter zero onexplains what the employer reports on Form
1 of your Form W–2. This includes any amountline 28. In this case, do not complete Section D.W–2 and what the employee reports on Form
reported under code L in box 12 of Form W–2.2106. The instructions for the forms have moreCar rentals. If you claim car rental ex-information on completing them. Allocating your reimbursement. If youpenses on line 24a of Form 2106, you may have
were reimbursed under an accountable plan andto reduce that expense by an inclusion amountIf you are self-employed, do not file
want to deduct excess expenses that were notas described in chapter 4. If so, you can showForm 2106 or 2106–EZ. Report your
reimbursed, you may have to allocate your reim-your car expenses and any inclusion amount asexpenses on Schedule C, C–EZ, or FCAUTION
!
bursement. This is necessary when your em-follows.(Form 1040). See the instructions for the form
ployer pays your reimbursement in the followingthat you must file. 1) Compute the inclusion amount without manner:
taking into account your business use per-Form 2106–EZ. You may be able to use the
centage for the tax year. 1) Pays you a single amount that coversshorter Form 2106–EZ to claim your employee
meals and/or entertainment, as well asbusiness expenses. You can use this form if you2) Report the inclusion amount from (1) on other business expenses, andmeet all 3 of the following conditions. line 24b, Part II, Form 2106.
2) Does not clearly identify how much is for1) You are an employee deducting expenses3) Report on line 24c the net amount of car deductible meals and/or entertainment.attributable to your job. rental expenses (total car rental expenses
minus the inclusion amount computed inYou must allocate that single payment so that2) You were not reimbursed by your em- (1)). you know how much to enter in Column A andployer for your expenses (amounts in- Column B of line 7 of Form 2106.cluded in box 1 of your Form W–2 are notThe net amount of car rental expenses will be
considered reimbursements). adjusted on line 27, Part II, of Form 2106, toExample. Rob’s employer paid him an ex-reflect the percentage of business use for the tax3) If you are claiming car expenses, you are pense allowance of $5,000 this year under anyear.using the standard mileage rate. accountable plan. The $5,000 payment con-
sisted of $2,000 for airfare and $3,000 for enter-Transportation expenses.Show your trans-Car expenses. If you used a car to perform tainment and car expenses. The employer didportation expenses that did not involve overnightyour job as an employee, you may be able to not clearly show how much of the $3,000 was fortravel on line 2, Column A, of Form 2106 or ondeduct certain car expenses. These are gener- the cost of deductible entertainment. Rob actu-line 2, Part I, of Form 2106–EZ. Also include onally figured in Part II of Form 2106, and then ally spent $6,500 during the year ($2,000 forthis line business expenses you have for parkingclaimed on line 1, Column A, of Part I of Form airfare, $2,000 for entertainment, and $2,500 forfees and tolls. Do not include expenses of oper-2106. Car expenses using the standard mileage car expenses).ating your car or expenses of commuting be-rate can also be figured on Form 2106–EZ by Since the airfare allowance was clearly iden-tween your home and work.completing Part II and line 1 of Part I. tified, Rob knows that $2,000 of the payment
goes in Column A, line 7, of Form 2106. ToEmployee business expenses other thanInformation on use of cars.If you claim
allocate the remaining $3,000, Rob uses themeals and entertainment.Show your otherany deduction for the business use of a car, you
worksheet from the instructions for Form 2106.employee business expenses on lines 3 and 4,must answer certain questions and provide in-
His completed worksheet follows.Column A, of Form 2106 or on lines 3 and 4 offormation about the use of the car. The informa-
Form 2106–EZ. Do not include expenses fortion relates to the following items. 1. Enter the total amount ofmeals and entertainment on those lines. Line 4reimbursements your employer• Mileage (total, business, commuting, andis for expenses such as gifts, educational ex-gave you that were notother personal mileage). penses (tuition and books), office-in-the-homereported to you in box 1 of Formexpenses, and trade and professional publica-• Percentage of business use. W – 2 ................. 3,000
tions. 2. Enter the total amount of your• Date placed in service. expenses for the periodsIf line 4 expenses are the only ones youcovered by this reimbursement 4,500• Use of other vehicles. are claiming, you received no reim-3. Of the amount on line 2, enter
bursements (or the reimbursements• After-work use. your total expense for meals
TIP
were all included in box 1 of your Form W–2),and entertainment......... 2,000• Whether you have evidence to support theand the Special Rules discussed later do not 4. Divide line 3 by line 2. Enter thededuction. result as a decimal (rounded toapply to you, do not complete Form 2106 or
at least three places).......  .444 2106–EZ. Claim these amounts directly on line• Whether or not the evidence is written. 5. Multiply line 1 by line 4. Enter20 of Schedule A (Form 1040). List the type andthe result here and in ColumnEmployees must complete Section A, Part II,amount of each expense on the dotted lines andB, line 7............... 1,332Form 2106, or Part II, Form 2106–EZ, to pro-include the total on line 20. 6. Subtract line 5 from line 1. Entervide this information. the result here and in Column
Standard mileage rate.If you claim a de-Meal and entertainment expenses. Show A, line 7............... 1,668
duction based on the standard mileage rate in-the full amount of your expenses for On line 7 of Form 2106, Rob enters $3,668stead of your actual expenses, you must business-related meals and entertainment on($2,000 airfare and $1,668 of the $3,000) incomplete Section B, Part II, Form 2106. The line 5, Column B, of Form 2106. Include mealsColumn A and $1,332 (of the $3,000) in Columnamount on line 22 (Section B) is carried to line 1, while away from your tax home overnight andB.Part I, Form 2106. In addition, on line 2, Part I, other business meals and entertainment. Enter
Form 2106, you can deduct parking fees and 50% of the line 8, Column B, meal and entertain-After you complete the form.After you havetolls that apply to the business use of the car. If ment expenses on line 9, Column B, of Formcompleted your Form 2106 or 2106–EZ, followyou file Form 2106–EZ, complete line 1, Part I, 2106. the directions on that form to deduct your ex-for the standard mileage rate and line 2 for If you file Form 2106–EZ, enter the fullpenses on the appropriate line of your tax return.parking fees and tolls. See Standard Mileage amount of your meals and entertainment on theFor most taxpayers, this is line 20 of Schedule ARate in chapter 4 for information on using this line to the left of line 5 and multiply the total by(Form 1040). However, if you are a governmentrate. 50%. Enter the result on line 5. official paid on a fee basis, a performing artist, or
Actual expenses. If you claim a deductionHours of service limits.If you are subject a disabled employee with impairment-related
based on actual expenses, you cannot use to the Department of Transportation’s “hours of work expenses, see Special Rules, later.
Page 32 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 33 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Limits on employee business expenses. income from the performance of those You cannot deduct expenses of travel that
Your employee business expenses may be sub- services. does not take you more than 100 miles from
ject to any of the three limits described next. home as an adjustment to gross income. In-4) Your adjusted gross income is not moreThey are figured in the following order on the stead, you must complete Form 2106 orthan $16,000 before deducting these busi-specified form. 2106–EZ and deduct those expenses as anness expenses. itemized deduction on line 20 of Schedule A1. Limit on meals and entertainment.Cer- (Form 1040).tain meal and entertainment expenses are sub-Special rules for married persons.If you areject to a 50% limit. If you are an employee, youmarried, you must file a joint return unless youfigure this limit on line 9 of Form 2106 or line 5 oflived apart from your spouse at all times duringImpairment-Related WorkForm 2106–EZ. (See 50% Limit in chapter 2.)the tax year. If you file a joint return, you mustExpenses of Disabled Employees
2. Limit on miscellaneous itemized deduc-figure requirements (1), (2), and (3) separately
If you are an employee with a physical or mentaltions. If you are an employee, deduct yourfor both you and your spouse. However, require-
disability, your impairment-related work ex-employee business expenses (as figured onment (4) applies to your and your spouse’s com-
penses are not subject to theForm 2106 or 2106–EZ) on line 20 of Schedulebined adjusted gross income.
2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that appliesA (Form 1040). Most miscellaneous itemized
to most other employee business expenses. Af-deductions, including employee business ex-Where to report.If you meet all of the above
ter you complete Form 2106 or 2106–EZ, enterpenses, are subject to a 2%-of- requirements, you should first complete Form
your impairment-related work expenses fromadjusted-gross-income limit. This limit is figured2106 or 2106–EZ. Then you include your
line 10 of Form 2106 or line 6 of Form 2106–EZon line 25 of Schedule A (Form 1040). performing-arts-related expenses from line 10 of
on line 27 of Schedule A (Form 1040), andForm 2106 or line 6 of Form 2106–EZ in the3. Limit on total itemized deductions.If identify the type and amount of this expense ontotal on line 33 of Form 1040. Write “QPA” andyour adjusted gross income (line 35 of Form the dotted line next to line 27. Enter your em-the amount of your performing-arts-related ex-1040) is more than $139,500 ($69,750 if you are ployee business expenses that are unrelated topenses in the space to the left of line 33 of Formmarried filing separately), the total of certain your disability from line 10 of Form 2106 or line 61040.itemized deductions, including employee busi- of Form 2106–EZ on line 20 of Schedule AIf you do not meet all of the above require-ness expenses, may be limited. See your form (Form 1040).ments, you do not qualify to deduct your ex-instructions for information on how to figure thispenses as an adjustment to gross income. Impairment-related work expenses are yourlimit. Instead, you must complete Form 2106 or allowable expenses for attendant care at your
2106–EZ and deduct your employee businessworkplace and other expenses in connectionSpecial Rules expenses as an itemized deduction on line 20 ofwith your workplace that are necessary for you
Schedule A (Form 1040). to be able to work.This section discusses special rules that apply
You are disabled if you have:only to government officials who are paid on a
fee basis, performing artists, Armed Forces re-Armed Forces Reservists Traveling • A physical or mental disability (for exam-servists, and disabled employees with More Than 100 Miles From Home ple, blindness or deafness) that function-impairment-related work expenses. ally limits your being employed, or
If you are a member of a reserve component
• A physical or mental impairment (for ex-of the Armed Forces of the United States and
Officials Paid on a Fee Basis ample, a sight or hearing impairment) thatyou travel more than 100 miles away from home
substantially limits one or more of yourin connection with your performance of servicesCertain fee-basis officials can claim their em- major life activities, such as performingas a member of the reserves, you can deductployee business expenses whether or not they manual tasks, walking, speaking, breath-your travel expenses as an adjustment to grossitemize their other deductions on Schedule A ing, learning, or working.income rather than as a miscellaneous itemized(Form 1040). deduction. The amount of expenses you can
You can deduct impairment-related expensesFee-basis officials are persons who are em-deduct as an adjustment to gross income is
as business expenses if they are:ployed by a state or local government and wholimited to the regular federal per diem rate (for
are paid in whole or in part on a fee basis. Theylodging, meals, and incidental expenses) and• Necessary for you to do your work satis-can deduct their business expenses in perform-the standard mileage rate (for car expenses)factorily,ing services in that job as an adjustment to grossplus any parking fees, ferry fees, and tolls. See
income rather than as a miscellaneous itemized • For goods and services not required orPer Diem and Car Allowances earlier for more
deduction. used, other than incidentally, in your per-information. Any expenses in excess of these
sonal activities, andamounts can be claimed only as a miscellane-If you are a fee-basis official, include your
ous itemized deduction subject to the 2% limit.employee business expenses from line 10 of • Not specifically covered under other in-Form 2106 or line 6 of Form 2106–EZ in the come tax laws.Member of a reserve component.You are atotal on line 33 of Form 1040. Print “FBO” and
member of a reserve component of the Armedthe amount of your employee business ex-
Example. You are blind. You must use aForces of the United States if you are in thepenses in the space to the left of line 33 of Form
reader to do your work. You use the reader bothArmy, Naval, Marine Corps, Air Force, or Coast1040.
during your regular working hours at your placeGuard Reserve, the Army National Guard of the
of work and outside your regular working hoursUnited States, the Air National Guard of the
away from your place of work. The reader’sUnited States, or the Reserve Corps of the Pub-Expenses of Certain
services are only for your work. You can deductlic Health Service.Performing Artists
your expenses for the reader as business ex-
If you are a performing artist, you may qualify to penses.How to report. If you have reserve-related
deduct your employee business expenses as antravel that takes you more than 100 miles from
adjustment to gross income rather than as ahome, you should first complete Form 2106 orIllustrated Examples
miscellaneous itemized deduction. To qualify,Form 2106–EZ. Then include your expenses for
you must meet all of the following requirements.reserve travel over 100 miles from home, up toThe following examples illustrate the reporting of
the federal rate, from line 10 of Form 2106 or linetravel, entertainment, gift, and transportation ex-
6 of Form 2106–EZ in the total on line 33 of1) During the tax year, you perform services penses on Forms 2106 and 2106–EZ. Business
Form 1040. Write “RC” and the amount of thesein the performing arts as an employee for use of a car is shown using actual car expenses
expenses in the space to the left of line 33 ofat least two employers. in Example 1 and the standard mileage rate in
Form 1040. Subtract this amount from the totalExample 2. Sample records that prove some of2) You receive at least $200 each from anyon line 10 of Form 2106 or line 6 of Formthe claimed expenses are also shown.two of these employers. 2106–EZ and deduct the balance as an item-
3) Your related performing-arts business ex- ized deduction on line 20 of Schedule A (FormExample 1. David Pine purchased a new
penses are more than 10% of your gross 1040). car for $18,500 (including sales tax) on January
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 33

Page 34 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
6, 2003. In 2003, he used the car 70% for busi- this amount on line 2, Part I. David’s employer nent information in his Weekly Traveling Ex-
ness purposes. A sample page from David’s reimbursed him a total of $2,940 for his car andpense and Entertainment Record, shown in
logbook is illustrated in Table 6. He records his transportation expenses. This amount was paidTable 7. He obtains receipts for his expenses for
business mileage (but not his personal miles) from an accountable plan and was not shown on lodging and for any other expenses of $75 or
and expenses daily. David’s Form W–2. However, since he is claim- more.
David uses Form 2106 to claim actual car ing expenses that are more than his reimburse- During the year, Bill drove a total of 25,000
expenses. He completes Part II, Section A, as ments, he must show the entire reimbursement miles of which 20,000 miles were for business.
shown later on his illustrated form. He does not amount on line 7, Column A, Part I. Since David Following the instructions for Part II of Form
claim the section 179 deduction. He does claim had no meal or entertainment expenses, he en- 2106, he answers all the questions and figures
the 30% special depreciation allowance and ters his excess deductible expenses ($5,768) on his car expense to be $7,200 (20,000 business
uses the MACRS double declining balance line 10, Part I. He can deduct these expenses miles × 36 cents standard mileage rate.
method (200% DB) to determine his deprecia- (subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income His total employee business expenses are
tion deduction. limit) on line 20 of Schedule A (Form 1040) if he shown in the following table.
David figures his special depreciation allow- itemizes his deductions.
Type of Expense Amountance of $3,885 ($18,500 (basis) × 70% (busi-
Example 2. Bill Wilson is an employee ofness use) × 30%). Next, he figures his MACRS Parking fees and tolls.......... $  3 2 5
Fashion Clothing Co. in Manhattan, NY. In adeduction of $1,813 ($9,065 (remaining basis) × Car expenses............... 7,200
Meals .................... 2,632typical week, Bill leaves his home on Long Is-20%).
Lodging, laundry, dry cleaning.... 8,975land on Monday morning and drives to Albany toDavid’s total depreciation deduction would
Entertainment............... 1,870exhibit the Fashion line for 3 days to prospectivenormally be $5,698 ($3,885 + $1,813). How- Gifts, education, etc........... 4 3 0customers. Then he drives to Troy to showever, it is limited in the first year to $5,362 Total $21,432Fashion’s new line of merchandise to Town De-($7,660 (from the Maximum Depreciation De-
Bill received an allowance of $3,600 ($300partment Store, an old customer. While in Troy,duction for Cars table shown in chapter 4) ×
per month) to help offset his expenses. Bill didhe talks with Tom Brown, purchasing agent for70%). He enters these amounts in Part II, Sec-
not have to account to his employer for theTown Department Store, to discuss the new line.tion D.
reimbursement and the $3,600 was included asHe later takes John Smith of Attire Co. out toHis other car expenses included $3,080 for
income in box 1 of his Form W–2.dinner to discuss Attire Co.’s buying Fashion’sgas, oil, repairs, and insurance. He enters this
Because Bill’s reimbursement was includednew line of clothing.amount in Part II, Section C, and multiplies it by
in his income and he is using the standard mile-Bill purchased his car on January 3, 2000.the 70% business use. He adds this amount
age rate for his car expenses, he files FormHe uses the standard mileage rate for car ex-($2,156) to the depreciation deduction ($5,362)
2106–EZ with his tax return.pense purposes. He records his total mileage,and reports the total ($7,518) on line 1, Part I.
business mileage, parking fees, and tolls for theHis other transportation expenses for park-
year. Bill records his expenses and other perti-ing fees, tolls, and taxis were $1,190. He enters
Table 6. Daily Business Mileage and Expense Log
Date
6/9/03
Table 6. Daily Business Mileage and Expense Log Name:  David Pine
Destination
(City, Town, or Area)
Business
Purpose Start Stop
Miles
this trip
Type
(Gas, oil, tolls, etc.) Amount
Odometer Readings
6/10/03
6/11/03
6/12/03
6/13/03
6/14/03
6/15/03
Local
(St. Louis)
Indianapolis
Louisville
Return to
St. Louis
Local
(St. Louis)
Weekly
Total
Total
Year-to-Date
Sales calls
Sales calls
See Bob Smith
(Pot. Client)
Sales calls
8,097
8,211
8,486
8,599
8,914
8,097
8,188
8,486
8,599
8,875
9,005
9,005
91
275
113
276
91
846
6,236
Gas
Parking
Gas/Repair
flat tire
Gas
$ 18.25
2.00
16.50
17.25
$ 62.00
$993.00
8.00
Expenses
Page 34 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 35 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
David Pine 559 00 9559Sales
7,518
1,190
8,708
2,940
5,768
5,768
5,768
OMB No. 1545-0139Employee Business Expenses2106Form
/H17075See separate instructions.
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service /H17075Attach to Form 1040.
Attachment
Sequence No. 54
Social security numberYour name Occupation in which you incurred expenses
Employee Business Expenses and Reimbursements
Column BColumn A
Step 1 Enter Your Expenses Meals and
Entertainment
Other Than Meals
and Entertainment
1
Vehicle expense from line 22 or line 29. (Rural mail carriers: See
instructions.)
1
2
Parking fees, tolls, and transportation, including train, bus, etc., that
did not involve overnight travel or commuting to and from work
2
Travel expense while away from home overnight, including
lodging, airplane, car rental, etc. Do not include meals and
entertainment
3
3
Business expenses not included on lines 1 through 3. Do not
include meals and entertainment
4
4
5Meals and entertainment expenses (see instructions)5
Total expenses. In Column A, add lines 1 through 4 and enter the
result. In Column B, enter the amount from line 5
6
6
Note: If you were not reimbursed for any expenses in Step 1, skip line 7 and enter the amount from line 6 on line 8.
Step 2 Enter Reimbursements Received From Your Employer for Expenses Listed in Step 1
Enter reimbursements received from your employer that were not
reported to you in box 1 of Form W-2. Include any reimbursements
reported under code “L” in box 12 of your Form W-2 (see
instructions)
7
7
Step 3 Figure Expenses To Deduct on Schedule A (Form 1040)
8
Subtract line 7 from line 6. If zero or less, enter -0-. However, if
line 7 is greater than line 6 in Column A, report the excess as
income on Form 1040, line 7
8
Note: If both columns of line 8 are zero, you cannot deduct
employee business expenses. Stop here and attach Form
2106 to your return.
9
9
10
In Column A, enter the amount from line 8. In Column B, multiply
line 8 by 50% (.50). (Employees subject to Department of
Transportation (DOT) hours of service limits: Multiply meal
expenses by 65% (.65) instead of 50%. For details, see
instructions.)
Add the amounts on line 9 of both columns and enter the total here. Also, enter the total on
Schedule A (Form 1040), line 20. (Fee-basis state or local government officials, qualified
performing artists, and individuals with disabilities: See the instructions for special rules on
where to enter the total.)
/H1707510
Cat. No. 11700NFor Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see instructions. Form 2106 (2003)
Part I
(99)
2003
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 35

Page 36 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
/H12011
/H12011
16 0 3
20,000
14,000
70
10
2,400
3,600
/H12011
3,080
3,080
2,156
5,362
7,518
18,500
9,065
200DB 20%
1,813
5,698
7,660
5,362
5,362
3,885
/H12011
Page 2Form 2106 (2003)
Vehicle Expenses
Section A—General Information (You must complete this section if you
are claiming vehicle expenses.) (b) Vehicle 2(a) Vehicle 1
//1111 Enter the date the vehicle was placed in service
12 milesmiles12 Total miles the vehicle was driven during 2003
milesmiles1313 Business miles included on line 12
%%1414 Percent of business use. Divide line 13 by line 12
milesmiles1515 Average daily roundtrip commuting distance
milesmiles1616 Commuting miles included on line 12
17 Other miles. Add lines 13 and 16 and subtract the total from line 12 milesmiles17
Do you (or your spouse) have another vehicle available for personal use?18 NoYes
NoYesWas your vehicle available for personal use during off-duty hours?19
NoYes
If “Yes,” is the evidence written?21 NoYes
Do you have evidence to support your deduction?20
Section B—Standard Mileage Rate (See the instructions for Part II to find out whether to complete this section or
Section C.)
22 Multiply line 13 by 36¢ (.36) 22
Section C—Actual Expenses (b) Vehicle 2(a) Vehicle 1
Gasoline, oil, repairs, vehicle
insurance, etc.
23
23
24a24a Vehicle rentals
24bb Inclusion amount (see instructions)
24cc Subtract line 24b from line 24a
Value of employer-provided
vehicle (applies only if 100% of
annual lease value was included
on Form W-2—see instructions)
25
25
2626 Add lines 23, 24c, and 25
Multiply line 26 by the
percentage on line 14
27
27
28
Depreciation. Enter amount
from line 38 below
28
29 Add lines 27 and 28. Enter total
here and on line 1 29
Section D—Depreciation of Vehicles (Use this section only if you owned the vehicle and are completing Section C
for the vehicle.)
(a) Vehicle 1 (b) Vehicle 2
Enter cost or other basis (see
instructions)
30
30
Enter section 179 deduction
and special allowance (see
instructions)
31
31
Multiply line 30 by line 14 (see
instructions if you claimed the
section 179 deduction or special
allowance)
32
32
Enter depreciation method and
percentage (see instructions)
33
33
Multiply line 32 by the percentage
on line 33 (see instructions)
34
34
35Add lines 31 and 3435
Enter the applicable limit explained
in the line 36 instructions
36
36
Multiply line 36 by the
percentage on line 14
37
37
Enter the smaller of line 35 or
line 37. Also enter this amount
on line 28 above
38
38
Part II
//
Form 2106 (2003)
Page 36 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 37 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Travel and transportation expenses
Table 7. Weekly Traveling Expense and Entertainment Record
THIS IS NOT AN OFFICIAL INTERNAL REVENUE FORM
From: August 3, 2003 To: August 9, 2003 Name: Bill Wilson
Expenses Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday Total
Travel Expenses:
Airlines
1.
Excess baggage
Bus - Train
Cab and Limousine
Tips
Porter
Meals and Lodging:
Breakfast
Lunch
Dinner
Hotel and Motel
(Detail in Schedule B)
Entertainment
(Detail in Schedule C)
Other Expenses:
Postage
Telephone & Telegraph
Stationery & Printing
Stenographer
Sample Room
Advertising
Assistant(s) & Model(s)
Trade Shows
2.
3.
4.
Car Expenses: (List all car expenses - the division between business and personal expenses may be made at the end of the year.)
(Detail mileage in Schedule A.)
5.
Gas, oil, lube, wash
Repairs, parts
Tires, supplies
Parking fees, tolls
Other (Identify)
Total
Note: Attach receipted bills for (1) ALL lodging and (2) any other expenses of $75.00 or more.
Schedule A - Car
Mileage: End
Start
Total
Business Mileage
Schedule B - Lodging
Schedule C - Entertainment
Date
6.
Hotel
or
Motel
Name
City
August 7, 2003 Bar
Dinner
Item Place
John’s Steak House
Amount Business Purpose Business Relationship
Troy
Discuss purchases Smith-Attire Co.15 00
35 00
Bay Hotel Bay Hotel Bay Hotel Modern
Hotel
Albany Albany Albany Troy
57,600
57,445
155
155
57,620
57,600
20
57,650
57,620
57,660
57,650
57,840
57,660
30 10 395
170103020
180
385
40 0
87 25 120 00 117 75 111 50 19 50 456 00
10 0030 0 30 0
20 00 20 00
15 0015 00 30 00
40 00
15 0 10 0 25 0
50 00
22 00
97 5
50 00
18 25
10 00
67 5
50 00
17 50
92 5
60 0 52 5
82 5
45 00
50 00
70 0
85 0
25 00
45 75
195 00
57 75
50 00
WEEKLY REIMBURSEMENTS:
Other reimbursements
TOTAL
N/A
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 37

Page 38 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Bill Wilson 555 00 5555Sales
7,200
8,975
430
2,251
19,181
1 3 2000
20,000 2,600 2,400
/H12011
/H12011
/H12011
/H12011
4,502
325
OMB No. 1545-1441
Unreimbursed Employee Business Expenses2106-EZForm
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service /H17075Attach to Form 1040.
Attachment
Sequence No. 54A
Social security numberYour name Occupation in which you incurred expenses
1Vehicle expense using the standard mileage rate. Complete Part II and multiply line 8a by 36¢ (.36)1
2
Parking fees, tolls, and transportation, including train, bus, etc., that did not involve overnight
travel or commuting to and from work
2
Travel expense while away from home overnight, including lodging, airplane, car rental, etc.
Do not include meals and entertainment
3
3
Business expenses not included on lines 1 through 3. Do not include meals and entertainment4 4
5
Meals and entertainment expenses: $ x 50% (.50) (Employees subject to
Department of Transportation (DOT) hours of service limits: Multiply meal expenses by 65%
(.65) instead of 50%. For details, see instructions.)
5
Total expenses. Add lines 1 through 5. Enter here and on line 20 of Schedule A (Form 1040).
(Fee-basis state or local government officials, qualified performing artists, and individuals with
disabilities: See the instructions for special rules on where to enter this amount.)
6
6
Cat. No. 20604Q Form 2106-EZ (2003)
Part I
Part II
Figure Your Expenses
You May Use This Form Only if All of the Following Apply.
● You are an employee deducting ordinary and necessary expenses attributable to your job. An ordinary expense is one that is
common and accepted in your field of trade, business, or profession. A necessary expense is one that is helpful and
appropriate for your business. An expense does not have to be required to be considered necessary.
● If you are claiming vehicle expense, you are using the standard mileage rate for 2003.
● You do not get reimbursed by your employer for any expenses (amounts your employer included in box 1 of your Form W-2 are
not considered reimbursements).
Information on Your Vehicle. Complete this part only if you are claiming vehicle expense on line 1.
7
8
a
9
10
11a
b
When did you place your vehicle in service for business use? (month, day, year) /H17075 / /
Of the total number of miles you drove your vehicle during 2003, enter the number of miles you used your vehicle for:
Do you (or your spouse) have another vehicle available for personal use?
Was your vehicle available for personal use during off-duty hours?
Do you have evidence to support your deduction?
If “Yes,” is the evidence written?
Business
Yes No
b Commuting c Other
Yes No
Yes No
Yes No
(99)
General Instructions
Section references are to the Internal
Revenue Code.
Purpose of Form
You may use Form 2106-EZ instead of Form
2106 to claim your unreimbursed employee
business expenses if you meet all the
requirements listed above Part I.
A Change To Note
Standard mileage rate. The standard
mileage rate is 36 cents for each mile of
business use in 2003.
Recordkeeping
You cannot deduct expenses for travel
(including meals, unless you used the
standard meal allowance), entertainment,
gifts, or use of a car or other listed property,
unless you keep records to prove the time,
place, business purpose, business
relationship (for entertainment and gifts), and
amounts of these expenses. Generally, you
must also have receipts for all lodging
expenses (regardless of the amount) and any
other expense of $75 or more.
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see back of form.
Caution: You can use the standard mileage rate for 2003 only if: (a) you owned the vehicle and used the standard mileage rate for the first year
you placed the vehicle in service or (b) you leased the vehicle and used the standard mileage rate for the portion of the lease period after 1997.
Additional Information
For more details about employee business
expenses, see:
Pub. 463, Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Expenses
Pub. 529, Miscellaneous Deductions
Pub. 587, Business Use of Your Home
(Including Use by Daycare Providers)
Pub. 946, How To Depreciate Property
Specific Instructions
Part I—Figure Your Expenses
Line 2. See the line 8b instructions for the
definition of commuting.
Line 3. Enter lodging and transportation
expenses connected with overnight travel
away from your tax home (defined on this
page). You cannot deduct expenses for travel
away from your tax home for any period of
temporary employment of more than 1 year.
Do not include expenses for meals and
entertainment. For more details, including
limits, see Pub. 463.
Generally, your tax home is your main
place of business or post of duty regardless
of where you maintain your family home. If
you do not have a regular or main place of
business because of the nature of your work,
then your tax home is the place where you
regularly live. If you do not fit in either of
these categories, you are considered an
itinerant and your tax home is wherever you
work. As an itinerant, you are never away
from home and cannot claim a travel expense
deduction. For more details on your tax
home, see Pub. 463.
2003
Instead of keeping records of your actual
incidental expenses, you can use an optional
method for deducting incidental expenses
only if you did not pay or incur meal
expenses on a day you were traveling away
from your tax home. The amount of the
deduction is $2 a day for the period from
January 1 through October 31, 2003, and $3
a day for the period from November 1
through December 31, 2003. Incidental
expenses include fees and tips given to
porters, baggage carriers, bellhops, hotel
maids, stewards or stewardesses and others
on ships, and hotel servants in foreign
countries. They do not include expenses for
laundry, cleaning and pressing of clothing,
lodging taxes, or the costs of telegrams or
telephone calls. You cannot use this method
on any day that you use the standard meal
allowance (as explained in the instructions for
line 5).
Line 4. Enter other job-related expenses not
listed on any other line of this form. Include
Page 38 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 39 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• See answers to frequently asked tax ques-ices. To ensure that IRS representatives give
tions. accurate, courteous, and professional answers,
we use several methods to evaluate the quality• Search publications on-line by topic or7. of our telephone services. One method is for akeyword. second IRS representative to sometimes listen
• Figure your withholding allowances usingin on or record telephone calls. Another is to ask
our Form W-4 calculator. some callers to complete a short survey at theHow To Get Tax
end of the call.• Send us comments or request help by
e-mail.Help Walk-in. Many products and services• Sign up to receive local and national tax are available on a walk-in basis.news by e-mail.You can get help with unresolved tax issues,
order free publications and forms, ask tax ques-• Get information on starting and operating
tions, and get more information from the IRS ina small business. • Products. You can walk in to many postseveral ways. By selecting the method that is offices, libraries, and IRS offices to pick upbest for you, you will have quick and easy ac-You can also reach us using File Transfer certain forms, instructions, and publica-cess to tax help. Protocol at ftp.irs.gov. tions. Some IRS offices, libraries, grocery
Contacting your Taxpayer Advocate.If you stores, copy centers, city and county gov-Fax. You can get over 100 of the most
have attempted to deal with an IRS problem ernment offices, credit unions, and officerequested forms and instructions 24
unsuccessfully, you should contact your Tax- supply stores have a collection of productshours a day, 7 days a week, by fax.
payer Advocate. available to print from a CD-ROM or pho-Just call 703–368–9694  from your fax ma-
The Taxpayer Advocate independently rep- tocopy from reproducible proofs. Also,chine. Follow the directions from the prompts.
resents your interests and concerns within the some IRS offices and libraries have theWhen you order forms, enter the catalog num-
IRS by protecting your rights and resolving Internal Revenue Code, regulations, Inter-ber for the form you need. The items you request
problems that have not been fixed through nor- nal Revenue Bulletins, and Cumulativewill be faxed to you.
mal channels. While Taxpayer Advocates can- Bulletins available for research purposes.For help with transmission problems, callnot change the tax law or make a technical tax703–487–4608. • Services. You can walk in to your localdecision, they can clear up problems that re-Long-distance charges may apply. Taxpayer Assistance Center every busi-sulted from previous contacts and ensure that
ness day to ask tax questions or get helpyour case is given a complete and impartial Phone. Many services are available by with a tax problem. An employee can ex-review. phone. plain IRS letters, request adjustments toTo contact your Taxpayer Advocate:
your account, or help you set up a pay-• Call the Taxpayer Advocate toll free at ment plan. You can set up an appointment1–877–777–4778. • Ordering forms, instructions, and publica-by calling your local Center and, at the
tions. Call 1–800–829–3676 to order prompt, leaving a message requesting• Call, write, or fax the Taxpayer Advocatecurrent-year forms, instructions, and publi-Everyday Tax Solutions help. A represen-office in your area. cations and prior-year forms and instruc-tative will call you back within 2 business• Call 1–800–829–4059 if you are a tions. You should receive your order withindays to schedule an in-person appoint-TTY/TDD user. 10 days. ment at your convenience. To find the
• Visit the web site at www.irs.gov/advo- number, go to www.irs.gov or look in the• Asking tax questions. Call the IRS with
cate. phone book under “United States Govern-your tax questions at 1–800–829–1040.
ment, Internal Revenue Service.”• Solving problems. You can getFor more information, see Publication 1546,face-to-face help solving tax problemsThe Taxpayer Advocate Service of the IRS. Mail. You can send your order forevery business day in IRS Taxpayer As- forms, instructions, and publications tosistance Centers. An employee can ex-Free tax services.To find out what services the Distribution Center nearest to youplain IRS letters, request adjustments toare available, get Publication 910, Guide to Free and receive a response within 10 workdays afteryour account, or help you set up a pay-Tax Services. It contains a list of free tax publi- your request is received. Use the address thatment plan. Call your local Taxpayer Assis-cations and an index of tax topics. It also de- applies to your part of the country.tance Center for an appointment. To findscribes other free tax information services,
the number, go to www.irs.gov or look inincluding tax education and assistance pro- • Western part of U.S.:
the phone book under “United States Gov-grams and a list of TeleTax topics. Western Area Distribution Center
ernment, Internal Revenue Service.” Rancho Cordova, CA 95743–0001Internet. You can access the IRS web
• TTY/TDD equipment. If you have accesssite 24 hours a day, 7 days a week at • Central part of U.S.:
to TTY/TDD equipment, callwww.irs.gov to: Central Area Distribution Center
1–800–829–4059  to ask tax or account P.O. Box 8903
questions or to order forms and publica- Bloomington, IL 61702–8903• E-file. Access commercial tax preparation tions.and e-file services available for free to eli- • Eastern part of U.S. and foreign
• TeleTax topics. Call 1–800–829–4477  togible taxpayers. addresses:
listen to pre-recorded messages covering Eastern Area Distribution Center• Check the amount of advance child tax various tax topics. P.O. Box 85074credit payments you received in 2003.
Richmond, VA 23261–5074• Refund information. If you would like to• Check the status of your 2003 refund. check the status of your 2003 refund, callClick on “Where’s My Refund” and then on CD-ROM for tax products. You can1–800–829–4477  for automated refund“Go Get My Refund Status.” Be sure to order IRS Publication 1796, Federalinformation and follow the recorded in-wait at least 6 weeks from the date you Tax Products on CD-ROM, and obtain:structions or call 1–800–829–1954 . Befiled your return (3 weeks if you filed elec-sure to wait at least 6 weeks from the datetronically) and have your 2003 tax returnyou filed your return (3 weeks if you filed• Current-year forms, instructions, and pub-available because you will need to know electronically) and have your 2003 tax re-lications.your filing status and the exact whole dol-turn available because you will need tolar amount of your refund. • Prior-year forms and instructions.know your filing status and the exact
• Download forms, instructions, and publica- whole dollar amount of your refund. • Frequently requested tax forms that maytions. be filled in electronically, printed out for
• Order IRS products on-line. Evaluating the quality of our telephone serv-submission, and saved for recordkeeping.
Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help Page 39

Page 40 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Internal Revenue Bulletins. business. This handy, interactive CD contains and quick and incorporates file formats and
all the business tax forms, instructions and pub-browsers that can be run on virtually any
Buy the CD-ROM from National Technical In-lications needed to successfully manage a busi- desktop or laptop computer.
formation Service (NTIS) on the Internet atness. In addition, the CD provides an It is available in early April. You can get a
www.irs.gov/cdorders for $22 (no handling abundance of other helpful information, such as free copy by calling 1–800–829–3676  or by
fee) or call 1–877–233–6767  toll free to buyhow to prepare a business plan, finding financ- visiting the web site at www.irs.gov/smallbiz.
the CD-ROM for $22 (plus a $5 handling fee).ing for your business, and much more. The de-
The first release is available in early Januarysign of the CD makes finding information easy
and the final release is available in late Febru-
ary.
CD-ROM for small businesses. IRS
Publication 3207, Small Business Re-
source Guide, is a must for every small
business owner or any taxpayer about to start a
Page 40 Chapter 7 How To Get Tax Help

Page 41 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendices
There are fifteen appendices. Appendix B–1 shows the lease that you may need to report if you
Appendices A–1 through A–7 inclusion amounts that you may leased an electric car.
show the lease inclusion amounts need to report if you leased a truckIf any of these apply to you, usethat you may need to report if you or van in 2003. the appendix for the year you firstleased a car (other than a truck or Appendices C-1 through C-7leased the car. (See chapter 4.)van, or an electric car) for 30 days show the lease inclusion amounts
or more. The tables are numbered.
■
Page 41

Page 42 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-1. Inclusion Amounts for Cars First Leased in 1993 through 1997
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
40
48
55
63
73
87
99
112
125
137
150
163
175
189
207
233
259
285
310
335
362
387
412
438
464
490
515
540
566
591
617
643
669
695
720
746
771
796
822
847
874
899
925
950
975
39
49
58
68
81
97
113
129
145
161
176
193
208
225
248
280
312
344
376
408
440
471
503
535
567
599
631
662
694
726
757
790
822
854
886
918
950
981
1,013
1,045
1,077
1,109
1,141
1,172
1,204
28
43
56
71
89
113
136
159
184
207
230
254
277
301
336
383
429
477
524
570
617
665
711
758
804
851
899
946
992
1,039
1,086
1,133
1,180
1,227
1,274
1,320
1,367
1,415
1,462
1,508
1,556
1,603
1,649
1,696
1,743
For Lease Term
Beginning in
1993
For Lease Term
Beginning in
1994
For Lease Term
Beginning in
1995
For Lease Term
Beginning in
1996
$$ $$$ $
5th and Later
21
32
42
53
67
84
102
119
136
154
171
189
207
225
250
286
320
355
390
425
460
495
531
565
600
635
670
705
740
775
810
844
880
915
950
985
1,020
1,054
1,089
1,125
1,159
1,195
1,230
1,264
1,299
$
For Lease Term
Beginning in
1997
10
21
32
44
58
77
95
114
132
151
169
187
205
224
252
288
326
362
399
435
473
509
546
583
620
657
693
731
767
804
841
878
915
951
989
1,026
1,062
1,098
1,136
1,172
1,209
1,246
1,282
1,320
1,356
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
2
1,002
1,027
1,052
1,078
1,104
1,130
1,155
1,194
1,245
1,295
1,347
1,398
1,450
1,500
1,551
1,236
1,268
1,299
1,331
1,363
1,395
1,427
1,475
1,538
1,602
1,666
1,730
1,793
1,857
1,921
1,790
1,837
1,884
1,931
1,977
2,024
2,072
2,142
2,235
2,330
2,423
2,517
2,611
2,704
2,799
1,334
1,370
1,404
1,440
1,474
1,509
1,544
1,597
1,667
1,737
1,807
1,876
1,947
2,016
2,086
1,394
1,430
1,467
1,504
1,540
1,578
1,615
1,670
1,743
1,817
1,890
1,964
2,038
2,112
2,186
1
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for preceding year.
2
If the fair market value of the car is more than $76,000 or less than $15,801, see the document listed for the first year of th e lease.
For 1994, Revenue Procedure 94-53 (1994-2 CB 712)
For 1993, Revenue Procedure 93-35 (1993-2 CB 472)
For 1995, Revenue Procedure 95-9 (1995-1 CB 498)
For 1996, Revenue Procedure 96-25 (1996-1 CB 681)
For 1997, Revenue Procedure 97-20 (1997-1 CB 647)
If you leased an electric car after August 5, 1987, use Appendix B.
Page 42

Page 43 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-2. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Electric Cars) First Leased in 1998
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
17,500
1
4
6
9
12
5
10
15
20
28
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000 
2
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
16
20
24
28
32
36
40
45
49
55
63
71
79
88
96
104
112
120
128
137
145
153
161
169
178
186
194
202
210
218
227
235
243
251
259
268
276
284
292
300
308
317
325
333
341
349
358
370
386
403
419
435
452
468
484
501
517
546
587
627
668
37
46
55
64
73
82
91
99
108
122
140
158
176
193
211
229
247
265
283
301
319
337
355
373
391
409
427
445
463
481
498
516
534
552
570
588
606
624
642
660
678
695
713
732
750
768
785
812
848
884
920
956
991
1,027
1,063
1,099
1,135
1,198
1,287
1,377
1,467 2,178 3,018 2,613
1
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 98-30 (1998-17 IRB 6).
$$ $$$$ $ 8
16
25
33
43
56
70
83
96
110
123
136
150
163
183
210
236
263
290
317
343
370
396
423
449
476
502
529
556
582
608
635
662
688
715
742
769
795
822
849
875
901
928
955
981
1,008
1,035
1,062
1,087
1,114
1,140
1,168
1,207
1,261
1,313
1,367
1,420
1,474
1,527
1,580
1,633
1,686
1,779
1,913
2,046
12
22
31
41
53
70
85
101
117
133
149
165
181
197
221
252
285
316
348
380
412
444
476
508
540
571
604
635
667
699
731
763
794
827
859
891
922
955
986
1,018
1,050
1,082
1,114
1,145
1,178
1,209
1,241
1,273
1,305
1,337
1,369
1,400
1,449
1,512
1,577
1,640
1,704
1,767
1,832
1,896
1,959
2,023
2,134
2,294
2,453
14
25
36
47
62
80
99
117
136
154
173
191
209
228
255
292
329
366
403
439
477
513
550
587
624
661
697
735
771
808
845
882
919
955
992
1,028
1,066
1,102
1,140
1,176
1,213
1,250
1,286
1,324
1,360
1,398
1,434
1,471
1,508
1,544
1,582
1,619
1,674
1,747
1,821
1,894
1,968
2,042
2,115
2,189
2,263
2,337
2,466
2,649
2,834
Page 43

Page 44 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-3. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Electric Cars) First Leased in 1999
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
16
19
22
26
29
32
39
47
53
61
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000 
2
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
32
35
39
42
47
53
60
66
73
79
85
92
98
105
111
118
124
131
137
144
150
157
163
170
176
183
189
196
202
208
215
221
228
234
241
247
254
260
267
273
280
286
296
309
322
335
348
361
374
387
399
412
435
467
500
532
68
75
82
89
100
114
128
142
156
171
185
199
214
227
242
256
270
284
299
313
327
341
355
369
384
398
412
426
441
455
469
483
497
512
526
540
554
569
582
597
611
625
646
675
703
732
760
788
817
845
874
902
952
1,023
1,094
1,165 1,729 2,394 2,073
1
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 99-14 (1999-5 IRB 56).
$$ $$$$ $
48
59
69
80
90
101
111
122
132
148
169
190
212
233
253
275
296
316
338
359
380
402
423
443
464
486
507
528
549
570
591
612
633
654
675
696
718
739
759
780
802
823
843
865
886
907
928
960
1,002
1,044
1,086
1,128
1,171
1,212
1,255
1,297
1,339
1,413
1,518
1,623
58
71
83
96
108
121
134
146
160
178
204
229
254
279
305
330
355
381
406
431
456
481
506
532
557
582
607
633
658
683
708
734
759
784
810
835
860
885
911
936
961
986
1,012
1,037
1,062
1,087
1,113
1,151
1,201
1,252
1,302
1,353
1,403
1,454
1,504
1,555
1,606
1,694
1,821
1,947
68
82
96
111
126
140
155
169
183
206
235
264
293
322
351
380
410
439
468
497
527
556
585
614
643
672
702
731
760
789
819
848
877
906
935
964
993
1,023
1,052
1,081
1,110
1,140
1,169
1,198
1,227
1,256
1,285
1,329
1,387
1,446
1,504
1,563
1,621
1,679
1,738
1,796
1,854
1,956
2,102
2,248
2
4
6
8
10
13
3
7
11
15
20
25
15,500
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
17,500
4
10
17
23
29
38
4
13
20
28
35
45
6
14
23
32
41
53
Page 44

Page 45 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-4. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Electric Cars) First Leased in 2000
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
15,500
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
3
5
8
10
13
6
12
17
23
28
9
17
25
33
42
10
20
30
40
49
12
23
34
45
57
17,000
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
49,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
2
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
16
20
25
29
33
37
41
45
50
54
60
68
77
85
93
102
110
119
127
135
144
152
160
169
177
185
194
202
210
219
227
235
244
252
260
269
277
285
294
302
311
319
327
336
344
352
361
369
381
398
415
432
448
465
482
498
515
532
561
603
644
686
36
45
54
63
72
81
91
100
109
118
132
150
168
187
205
223
241
259
278
296
314
333
351
369
388
406
424
443
461
479
497
516
534
552
571
589
607
626
644
662
680
699
717
735
754
772
790
808
836
873
909
945
982
1,019
1,055
1,092
1,129
1,165
1,229
1,320
1,412
1,504
52
66
79
93
107
121
133
147
160
174
194
222
249
276
303
330
358
385
412
439
467
493
521
548
574
602
629
656
683
710
738
765
792
819
846
873
901
927
954
982
1,009
1,036
1,063
1,090
1,117
1,145
1,172
1,199
1,240
1,294
1,348
1,403
1,457
1,511
1,566
1,620
1,673
1,728
1,823
1,959
2,095
2,230
62
78
95
111
127
143
160
176
193
209
234
266
298
331
364
396
429
461
493
527
558
591
623
656
689
721
754
786
819
852
884
916
949
982
1,014
1,047
1,079
1,112
1,145
1,177
1,210
1,242
1,275
1,308
1,340
1,372
1,405
1,438
1,486
1,551
1,617
1,681
1,747
1,811
1,876
1,942
2,007
2,072
2,186
2,349
72
91
109
128
147
166
185
204
222
241
269
306
345
381
419
457
494
532
570
607
645
683
720
757
795
833
870
908
946
983
1,021
1,058
1,095
1,133
1,171
1,208
1,246
1,284
1,321
1,359
1,396
1,433
1,471
1,508
1,546
1,584
1,621
1,659
1,715
1,790
1,865
1,941
2,016
2,092
2,166
2,241
2,317
2,392
2,523
2,711
2,899
3,087
2,511
2,674
1
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2000-18 (2000-9 I.R.B. 274).
$$ $$$$ $
Page 45

Page 46 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-5. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Electric Cars) First Leased in 2001
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
15,500
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
3
5
8
10
13
6
12
17
22
27
9
16
24
33
41
10
20
30
39
48
11
22
33
44
56
17,000
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
2
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
16
20
24
28
32
36
40
45
49
53
59
67
75
83
91
100
108
116
124
132
140
149
157
165
173
181
189
198
206
214
222
230
238
247
255
263
271
279
287
296
304
312
320
328
336
345
353
361
373
390
406
422
439
455
471
488
504
520
549
590
631
671
35
44
53
62
71
80
89
97
106
115
129
147
165
183
201
218
236
254
272
290
308
326
343
361
379
397
415
433
451
469
487
505
523
540
558
576
594
612
630
648
666
684
702
720
738
755
773
791
818
854
890
926
961
997
1,033
1,068
1,104
1,140
1,203
1,292
1,382
1,472
51
64
78
91
104
117
131
144
158
171
190
217
243
270
296
324
350
377
403
430
456
482
510
536
563
590
616
642
669
695
722
748
775
802
828
855
881
908
935
961
987
1,014
1,040
1,067
1,093
1,120
1,147
1,173
1,213
1,266
1,319
1,372
1,426
1,479
1,532
1,585
1,638
1,692
1,784
1,917
2,049
2,182
61
77
92
109
125
141
156
173
188
204
229
260
292
324
356
387
419
451
483
515
547
579
610
643
674
705
738
770
801
833
865
897
929
961
993
1,024
1,057
1,088
1,119
1,151
1,184
1,215
1,248
1,279
1,311
1,343
1,375
1,407
1,455
1,518
1,582
1,645
1,709
1,772
1,836
1,901
1,964
2,027
2,139
2,298
70
89
107
125
143
162
181
199
217
236
263
300
337
373
410
447
484
520
557
594
631
667
705
741
778
815
851
888
925
962
998
1,036
1,072
1,108
1,145
1,183
1,219
1,256
1,293
1,330
1,366
1,403
1,439
1,476
1,514
1,550
1,586
1,624
1,678
1,752
1,825
1,900
1,972
2,047
2,120
2,193
2,267
2,341
2,469
2,653
2,837
3,020
2,458
2,617
$$ $$$$ $
1
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2001-19 (2001-9 IRB 732).
Page 46

Page 47 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-6. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Electric Cars) First Leased in 2002
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
15,500
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
15,800
16,100
16,400
16,700
17,000
2
3
4
6
7
5
9
14
18
23
17,000
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
20,000
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
17,500
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
9
11
14
16
18
21
23
25
28
30
33
38
43
47
52
57
61
66
71
75
80
85
89
94
99
103
108
112
117
122
126
131
136
140
145
150
154
159
164
168
173
177
182
187
191
196
201
205
212
222
231
240
250
259
268
277
287
296
312
335
359
382
29
37
44
52
60
67
75
82
90
97
108
123
139
154
169
185
199
214
230
245
260
276
290
305
321
336
351
366
381
396
411
426
441
457
472
487
502
517
532
548
904
934
964
1,017
1,092
1,169
1,245
$$
1
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2002-14 (2002-5 IRB 450).
3
7
10
13
16
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
56
60
66
74
84
94
104
114
124
135
145
155
165
175
185
196
206
216
226
236
247
257
267
278
288
298
308
318
328
339
349
359
369
379
390
400
410
420
430
440
451
466
486
507
527
547
568
589
609
629
650
686
737
787
838
6
11
17
22
29
35
44
53
62
71
80
89
98
108
117
130
149
166
185
203
220
239
258
275
294
312
329
348
367
384
403
421
439
457
475
493
512
530
548
566
584
602
620
639
657
675
693
711
729
747
766
784
802
829
866
902
938
974
1.011
1,047
1,083
1,120
1,156
1,219
1,311
1,401
1,491
6
13
19
26
31
40
50
61
72
82
93
103
114
123
134
150
171
192
213
234
255
276
296
318
338
360
381
402
422
443
464
485
506
527
549
570
590
611
632
653
674
695
717
737
758
779
800
821
842
863
883
905
925
957
999
1,041
1,083
1,125
1,166
1,208
1,250
1,292
1,334
1,408
1,512
1,617
1,722100,000
2
$$$$ $
563
578
593
608
624
639
654
669
692
722
752
783
813
843
873
Page 47

Page 48 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-7. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Trucks, Vans, or Electric Cars) First Leased in 2003
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
18,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
10
12
14
15
17
33
39
44
50
56
20,500
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
19
21
22
25
28
32
35
39
42
46
49
52
56
59
63
66
70
73
77
80
83
87
90
94
97
101
104
108
111
115
118
121
125
128
132
135
139
142
146
149
152
158
165
171
178
185
192
199
206
213
220
232
249
266
284
61
66
72
81
92
103
115
125
137
148
159
171
182
194
204
215
227
238
249
260
272
283
294
306
317
328
339
351
362
374
385
396
407
418
430
441
452
463
474
486
$$
1
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2
If the fair market value of the lease is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2003-75 (2003-45 IRB 1018).
22
26
30
34
37
41
45
49
54
62
70
77
85
92
100
108
115
123
130
138
146
153
161
168
176
184
191
199
206
214
221
229
236
244
251
259
267
274
282
289
297
304
312
320
327
335
346
361
377
392
407
422
437
452
467
483
509
547
585
623
40
46
53
59
66
73
80
87
97
110
123
137
151
165
178
191
205
218
231
245
259
272
285
299
313
326
340
353
366
380
394
407
420
434
447
460
474
488
502
515
528
542
556
569
582
596
616
642
670
697
724
751
778
804
832
859
906
973
1.041
1,108
45
53
61
69
77
85
92
100
111
127
143
158
174
189
204
221
236
251
267
283
298
314
330
346
361
376
391
407
423
438
454
470
486
501
516
532
548
563
578
594
610
626
641
656
672
688
711
743
773
805
835
867
898
930
960
991
1,046
1,124
1,202
1,280
$$$$ $
497
514
537
559
581
604
626
649
672
694
716
756
812
868
924
100,000 
2
Page 48

Page 49 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix B-1. Inclusion Amounts for Trucks and Vans First Leased in 2003
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
18,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
19,000
19,500
20,000
20,500
21,000
7
8
10
12
14
22
27
33
38
44
21,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
26,000
27,000
28,000
29,000
30,000
31,000
32,000
33,000
34,000
35,000
36,000
37,000
38,000
39,000
40,000
41,000
42,000
43,000
44,000
45,000
46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
21,500
22,000
23,000
24,000
25,000
15
17
20
23
27
30
33
37
40
44
47
51
54
58
61
65
68
71
75
78
82
85
89
92
96
99
102
106
109
113
116
120
123
127
130
134
137
140
144
147
152
159
166
173
180
187
194
201
208
215
227
244
261
278
49
55
63
74
86
97
109
119
130
142
153
165
176
187
198
210
221
232
243
254
266
277
289
300
311
322
333
345
356
368
$$
1
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2
If the fair market value of the lease is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2003-75 (2003-45 IRB 1018).
14
18
22
26
29
34
37
43
51
58
66
73
81
89
96
104
111
119
126
134
141
149
157
164
172
179
187
194
202
209
217
225
232
240
247
255
263
270
278
285
293
301
308
316
323
335
350
365
380
395
410
426
441
456
471
497
535
573
611
24
32
38
45
52
59
66
76
89
102
116
129
143
157
170
183
196
210
224
238
251
264
278
292
305
318
332
345
358
373
386
400
413
426
439
29
36
44
52
60
67
75
86
102
118
133
149
165
180
196
212
227
242
258
273
289
305
320
336
352
367
383
398
414
429
445
460
476
492
507
$$$$ $
100,000 
2
379
389
401
412
434
445
457
468
480
496
519
542
564
587
609
631
654
676
699
739
795
851
907
453
467
480
493
507
521
534
548
561
575
595
622
648
676
702
730
757
783
811
837
885
952
1,020
1,088
424
523
538
554
570
585
601
617
632
647
663
687
717
749
780
811
842
873
905
935
967
1,021
1,099
1,177
1,254
Page 49

Page 50 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix C-1. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 1997
1
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
2
1
This table only applies to lease terms beginning after August 5, 1997.
2
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
$$ $$$$ $
3
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 98-24 (1998-10 IRB 31).
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
3
1
9
17
25
34
42
50
58
66
74
83
91
99
111
128
144
160
177
193
209
226
242
259
287
328
369
410
4
22
40
58
75
93
111
129
147
165
183
201
219
246
282
318
354
389
425
461
497
533
568
632
721
811
900
7
33
60
87
114
140
167
194
220
247
273
300
326
366
419
472
525
579
632
686
738
792
845
938
1,071
1,204
1,337
9
41
73
104
136
169
200
232
264
296
328
359
392
440
503
567
631
695
759
822
887
950
1,014
1,125
1,285
1,444
1,604
11
48
84
122
159
195
232
269
306
342
379
417
453
508
582
656
730
803
876
950
1,023
1,097
1,171
1,300
1,484
1,669
1,853
Appendix C-2. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 1998
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
2
$$ $$$$ $47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
4
5
13
21
29
38
46
54
62
70
79
87
95
103
115
132
148
164
181
197
214
230
246
263
291
332
373
414
11
29
47
65
83
101
119
137
155
172
190
208
226
253
289
325
361
396
432
468
504
540
576
639
728
818
908
18
45
71
98
124
151
177
204
231
258
284
311
338
378
430
484
537
591
644
697
750
803
856
949
1,083
1,215
1,348
21
52
85
116
148
180
212
244
275
307
340
372
403
451
515
578
643
706
770
834
898
962
1,025
1,137
1,296
1,456
1,615
23
60
96
134
171
207
244
281
318
355
391
428
465
520
594
668
741
815
888
962
1,035
1,109
1,183
1,312
1,496
1,681
1,865
4
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 98-30 (1998-17 IRB 6).
Page 50

Page 51 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix C-3. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 1999
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
1
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
$$ $$$$ $
2
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 99-14 (1999-5 IRB 56).
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
2
7
14
20
27
33
39
46
52
59
65
72
78
85
95
107
120
133
146
159
172
185
198
211
234
266
298
331
14
28
43
57
71
86
100
114
128
142
156
171
185
206
235
263
291
320
348
377
405
433
462
511
582
654
724
21
42
62
83
105
126
147
168
189
211
232
252
273
305
347
389
432
473
516
558
600
643
684
758
864
968
1,075
26
51
77
102
127
151
177
202
228
253
278
304
329
367
417
468
518
569
619
669
720
771
822
910
1,036
1,163
1,289
30
59
88
118
147
177
205
235
264
292
322
351
380
424
483
541
600
658
716
775
833
891
949
1,052
1,198
1,343
1,489
Appendix C-4. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 2000
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
$$ $$$$ $47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
3
7
14
20
27
33
39
46
52
59
65
72
78
85
95
107
120
133
146
159
172
185
198
211
234
266
298
331
17
31
45
59
74
88
102
116
130
145
159
173
187
208
237
266
294
322
351
379
407
436
464
514
585
656
727
26
47
69
90
110
132
153
174
195
216
237
258
279
311
353
394
437
480
521
564
606
648
690
763
869
975
1,080
32
57
82
107
133
157
183
209
234
259
284
310
335
373
423
474
524
574
625
675
727
777
828
916
1,042
1,168
1,295
36
66
95
124
153
183
211
240
270
299
328
357
387
430
489
547
606
664
723
781
838
897
955
1,058
1,204
1,350
1,495
3
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2000-18 (2000-9 IRB 726).
Page 51

Page 52 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix C-5. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 2001
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
$$ $$$$ $47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
2
9
17
25
33
42
50
58
66
74
82
91
99
107
119
136
152
168
185
201
217
234
250
266
295
336
377
417
21
39
57
75
93
111
129
147
165
183
200
218
236
263
298
334
370
406
442
478
513
549
585
648
737
826
916
33
60
86
113
139
165
192
218
245
272
299
325
352
391
445
498
551
604
657
710
764
817
870
962
1,095
1,229
1,361
40
71
104
135
167
199
231
263
295
326
358
390
422
470
533
597
661
724
788
852
915
979
1,043
1,155
1,314
1,472
1,632
46
83
119
157
193
230
266
304
340
377
414
451
487
543
616
690
763
837
910
984
1,057
1,131
1,204
1,332
1,517
1,701
1,885
1
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2001-19 (2001-9 IRB 732).
Appendix C-6. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 2002
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
$$ $$$$ $46,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
47,000
48,000
49,000
50,000
51,000
52,000
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
3
3
7
12
17
21
26
31
35
40
45
49
54
59
63
70
79
89
98
107
117
126
135
145
154
170
193
217
240
6
16
26
36
47
57
67
77
87
98
108
118
128
139
154
276
297
317
337
373
424
475
526
10
26
41
56
71
86
101
117
132
146
161
177
192
206
229
260
290
320
350
381
411
441
472
502
555
631
706
782
102
120
138
156
174
193
211
229
248
275
311
347
384
420
456
493
529
564
602
665
756
847
937
117
138
159
180
201
222
242
264
284
316
358
400
442
484
525
567
609
652
693
767
871
976
1,081
174
195
215
236
256
11
29
47
66
83
12
33
54
74
96
3
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2002-14 (2002-5 IRB 450).
Page 52

Page 53 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix C-7. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 2003
Fair Market Value
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
Tax Year of Lease
1
$$ $$$$ $
1
For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2
If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2003-19 (2003-45 IRB 1018).
53,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
54,000
55,000
56,000
57,000
58,000
59,000
60,000
62,000
64,000
66,000
68,000
70,000
72,000
74,000
76,000
78,000
80,000
85,000
90,000
95,000
100,000
2
28
31
35
38
42
45
49
54
61
68
75
81
88
95
102
109
116
128
145
162
180
60
68
76
83
91
98
106
117
132
147
163
178
193
208
223
239
254
280
318
356
394
90
101
112
124
134
146
157
174
197
219
241
264
287
309
332
353
376
416
472
528
584
108
121
134
148
162
175
188
209
235
263
290
317
343
371
397
425
452
499
566
634
701
124
140
156
171
187
203
218
241
273
304
334
366
397
428
460
491
521
576
655
732
810
Page 53

Page 54 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Disabled employees, Performing artists ....... 3 3AL
expenses of .......... 3 3 Personal trip.......... 7 ,  8Accountable plan........ 2 8 Lavish expenses .......5 ,  1 0
Disposition of car..... 17, 24 Personal useAccounting to employer . . . 28 Leasing a car ......... 23, 32
Documentary evidence .... 2 5 o f  c a r..... 16, 18, 21, 23, 24Actual car expenses.... 16, 32 Limits:
Placed in service, car..... 1 750% limit............. 1 2Actual cost............. 5
Depreciation deduction . . . 19Probationary work period . . . 4Adequate accounting..... 2 8 E Depreciation of car...... 2 0 Prorating standard mealAdequate records ....... 2 5 Electric cars......... 15, 21 Depreciation of electric allowance............ 2 9Advances, travel...... 28, 31 Employer-provided cars .............. 2 0 Proving expenses ....... 2 5Advertising.......... 13, 15 vehicles.............. 2 Depreciation of trucks and Publications (See Tax help)Allocating between Entertainment: vans .............. 2 0business and Employee business50% limit............. 1 2nonbusiness expenses . . . 7, Rexpenses ........... 3 3Deductible10 Reasonable period....... 2 8Exceptions to 50% limit . . . 13expenses ....... 9 ,  10, 32Allocation of Recordkeeping ......... 2 5Gifts................ 1 3Facilities............. 1 0reimbursement ........ 3 2 Luxury water travel....... 8Tickets............ 10, 26 Recovery period of
Allowances and Meals and c a r............... 20, 22Exceptions to the 50%reimbursements ....... 2 8 entertainment........ 1 2limit................ 1 3 Regular federal per diem
Armed Forces .........3 ,  1 4 Section 179 rate ................ 2 9Excess depreciation ofReserves ...........2 ,  3 3 deduction......... 17, 21c a r................. 2 3 Reimbursements:
Artists, performing....... 3 3 Skyboxes ............ 1 0 Excess .............. 2 8Excess
Assistance (See Tax help) Local transportation...... 1 4 For personalreimbursements ..... 28, 31
Associated Luxury skyboxes ........ 1 0 expenses ......... 27, 28Expenses for others.....5 ,  1 2
entertainment......... 1 1 General rules.......... 2 8Luxury water travel....... 8Extravagant expenses . . . 5, 10
Away from home ......... 3 Reporting............ 3 2
Unclaimed............ 2 7M Related to employer....... 6FB M&IE .................. 5 Reporting businessFair market value of car . . . 23Basis of car.......... 17, 19 MACRS depreciation ..... 2 0 expenses ............ 2 7FAVR allowance ........ 2 9Business and nonbusiness MACRS depreciation Returning excessFederal crime investigationsentertainment......... 1 0 chart ............... 2 0 reimbursement ........ 3 1or prosecutions........ 4Business associate....... 5 Main place of business or Rural mail carriers....... 1 5Federal rate............ 2 9 work ................ 3Business trip.......... 6 ,  7 Fee-basis officials....... 3 3 Meal allowance .......... 5Business use of Forms: Sc a r..........16, 17, 23, 24 Meal allowance,2106 ............. 32, 34 Section 179More-than-50%-use test . . 18 standard ............ 2 92 1 0 6 – E Z ..........32, 34 deduction.......... 17, 21Qualified business use . . . 18 Meal expenses .......... 3 24562 ............... 2 7 Self-employedActual cost............ 54797 ............... 2 3 person ............ 13, 27Standard meal allowance . . . 5C Free tax services........ 3 9 Skyboxes ............. 1 0Meals and entertainment:Car allowance .......... 2 9 Special depreciation allowance:50% limit............. 1 2Car defined............ 1 6 Amount .............. 1 7Meals and incidentalGCar expenses .......... 1 5 Election not to claim..... 1 7expenses ............ 2 9Gifts, business......... 1 3Car pools ............. 1 5 Qualified property....... 1 7Meetings, expenses ofCar rentals.......... 23, 32 Spouse, expenses for....5 ,  1 2attending.......... 10, 12Clean-fuel cars....... 15, 21 Standard mealMembership fees ......... 9HClient, expenses paid for . . 31 allowance...........5 ,  2 9Military personnel......3 ,  1 4Hauling tools........... 1 5Club dues .............. 9 Amount ............... 6More information (See Tax help)Help (See Tax help)Comments on publication . . . 2 Standard mileage rate:High-low rate........... 2 9 Amount .............. 1 5Commuting ............ 1 5 Home used as office...... 1 5 N Depreciation adjustment . . 24Conventions ..........9 ,  1 2 Hours of service limits.... 1 3 Necessary expense ....... 2 How to report........ 29, 32Cost of car............ 1 7 How to report business Nonaccountable plan..... 3 1 Substantiation ofCruise ships............ 9 expenses ............ 2 7 North American area...... 9 expenses ............ 2 5Customer, expenses paid
Suggestions forf o r................. 3 1
publication............ 2OI
Office in the home....... 1 5Impairment-related workD Officials paid on a fee Texpenses ............ 3 3Depreciation deduction: basis ............... 3 3 Tax help .............. 3 9Incidental expenses....... 5Limits............... 1 9 Ordinary expense ........ 2 Tax home .............. 3Inclusion amount........ 2 3Depreciation of car:
Taxpayer Advocate ...... 3 9Incomplete records...... 2 6Chart, MACRS ......... 2 0
TemporaryIndefinite assignment...... 4Excess .............. 2 3 P
assignment .........4 ,  1 4General rules..... 16, 18, 20 Independent contractor . . . 31Per diem allowances:
Limits............... 2 0 Temporary work location . . 14High-low rate.......... 2 9Itinerant............... 3
Standard mileage rate.... 2 4 Meals and incidental Tickets:
Year of disposition...... 2 4 expenses rate........ 2 9 Charity event.......... 1 0
KDirectly–related Regular rate.......... 2 9 Entertainment....... 10, 26
entertainment......... 1 1 Keeping records ...... 25, 27 Reporting expenses..... 2 9 Traffic violations........ 1 6
Page 54

Page 55 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Trade-in of car........ 19, 24 Deductible expenses.... 3 ,  4Unclaimed W
Expenses for others...... 5 reimbursement ........ 2 7Traffic tickets.......... 1 6 Water travel............. 8
In the United States...... 6 Union hall, trips from..... 1 5Transient............. 3 ,  4 ■Luxury water........... 8 Unrecovered basis of car . . 21Transportation.......... 3 2
Meals expense.......... 5Transportation expenses . . 14 Outside the United States . . 7Transportation workers.... 6 VTTY/TDD information..... 3 9Travel: Vehicle provided by
Advance ............. 3 1 employer ............ 2 8
UAllocation rules......... 7 Volunteers ............. 2
Away from home ........ 3 Unadjusted basis........ 1 9
Page 55

Page 56 of 56 of Publication 463 15:25 - 28-JAN-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tax Publications for Individual Taxpayers
General Guides
Your Rights as a Taxpayer
Your Federal Income Tax (For
Individuals)
Farmer’s Tax Guide
Tax Guide for Small Business (For
Individuals Who Use Schedule C or
C-EZ)
Tax Calendars for 2004
Highlights of 2003 Tax Changes
Guide to Free Tax Services
Specialized Publications
Armed Forces’ Tax Guide
Fuel Tax Credits and Refunds
Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Expenses
Exemptions, Standard Deduction, and
Filing Information
Medical and Dental Expenses (Including
the Health Coverage Tax Credit)
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Divorced or Separated Individuals
Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax
Foreign Tax Credit for Individuals
U.S. Government Civilian Employees
Stationed Abroad
Social Security and Other Information
for Members of the Clergy and
Religious Workers
U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens
Moving Expenses
Selling Your Home
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Taxable and Nontaxable Income
Charitable Contributions
Residential Rental Property
Commonly Used Tax Forms
Miscellaneous Deductions
Tax Information for First-Time
Homeowners
Reporting Tip Income
Self-Employment Tax
Installment Sales
Partnerships
Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets
Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
Investment Income and Expenses
Basis of Assets
Recordkeeping for Individuals
Older Americans’ Tax Guide
Community Property
Examination of Returns, Appeal Rights,
and Claims for Refund
Survivors, Executors, and
Administrators
Determining the Value of Donated
Property
Mutual Fund Distributions
Tax Guide for Individuals With Income
From U.S. Possessions
Pension and Annuity Income
Casualty, Disaster, and Theft Loss
Workbook (Personal-Use Property)
Business Use of Your Home (Including
Use by Daycare Providers)
Individual Retirement Arrangements
(IRAs)
Tax Highlights for U.S. Citizens and
Residents Going Abroad
What You Should Know About the IRS
Collection Process
Earned Income Credit (EIC)
Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service
Retirement Benefits
Tax Highlights for Persons with
Disabilities
Bankruptcy Tax Guide
Direct Sellers
Social Security and Equivalent
Railroad Retirement Benefits
How Do I Adjust My Tax Withholding?
Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
Household Employer’s Tax Guide
Tax Rules for Children and
Dependents
Home Mortgage Interest Deduction
How To Depreciate Property
Practice Before the IRS and
Power of Attorney
Introduction to Estate and Gift Taxes
The IRS Will Figure Your Tax
Per Diem Rates
Reporting Cash Payments of Over
$10,000 (Received in a Trade or
Business)
The Taxpayer Advocate Service
of the IRS
Derechos del Contribuyente
Cómo Preparar la Declaración de
Impuesto Federal
Crédito por Ingreso del Trabajo
English-Spanish Glossary of Words
and Phrases Used in Publications
Issued by the Internal Revenue
Service
U.S. Tax Treaties
Spanish Language Publications
Tax Highlights for Commercial
Fishermen
910
595
553
509
334
225
17
1
3
378
463
501
502
503
504
505
514
516
517
519
521
523
524
525
526
527
529
530
531
533
537
544
547
550
551
552
554
541
555
556
559
561
564
570
575
584
587
590
593
594
596
721
901
907
908
915
919
925
926
929
946
911
936
950
1542
967
1544
1546
596SP
1SP
850
579SP
Comprendiendo el Proceso de Cobro594SP
947
Tax Benefits for Adoption968
Informe de Pagos en Efectivo en
Exceso de $10,000 (Recibidos en
una Ocupación o Negocio)
1544SP
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get forms, including by computer, fax, phone,
and mail. For fax orders only, use the catalog number when ordering.
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Itemized Deductions & Interest and
Ordinary Dividends
Profit or Loss From Business
Net Profit From Business
Capital Gains and Losses
Supplemental Income and Loss
Earned Income Credit
Profit or Loss From Farming
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Income Tax Return for Single and 
Joint Filers With No Dependents
Self-Employment Tax
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Interest and Ordinary Dividends for
Form 1040A Filers
Child and Dependent Care
Expenses for Form 1040A Filers
Credit for the Elderly or the 
Disabled for Form 1040A Filers
Estimated Tax for Individuals
Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Unreimbursed Employee Business
Expenses
Underpayment of Estimated Tax by
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
Power of Attorney and Declaration of
Representative
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Moving Expenses
Depreciation and Amortization
Application for Automatic Extension of Time
To File U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Investment Interest Expense Deduction
Additional Taxes on Qualified Plans (Including
IRAs) and Other Tax-Favored Accounts
Alternative Minimum Tax—Individuals
Noncash Charitable Contributions
Change of Address
Expenses for Business Use of Your Home
Nondeductible IRAs
Passive Activity Loss Limitations
1040
Sch A&B
Sch C
Sch C-EZ
Sch D
Sch E
Sch EIC
Sch F
Sch H Household Employment Taxes 
Sch R
Sch SE
1040EZ
1040A
Sch 1
Sch 2
Sch 3
1040-ES
1040X
2106 Employee Business Expenses
2106-EZ
2210
2441
2848
3903
4562
4868
4952
5329
6251
8283
8582
8606
8822
8829
Form Number and Title
Catalog
Number
Sch J Farm Income Averaging
Additional Child Tax Credit8812
Education Credits8863
Catalog
Number
11700
20604
11744
11862
11980
12490
12906
13141
13177
13329
13600
62299
63704
63966
10644
12081
13232
25379
11320
Form Number and Title
11330
11334
14374
11338
11344
13339
11346
12187
25513
11359
11358
11327
12075
10749
12064
11329
11340
11360
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get publications, including
by computer, phone, and mail.
970 Tax Benefits for Education
971 Innocent Spouse Relief
Sch D-1 Continuation Sheet for Schedule D 10424
972 Child Tax Credit
Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and
Residents Aliens Abroad
54
Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
536
Tax-Sheltered Annuity Plans (403(b)
Plans)
571
Medical Savings Accounts (MSAs)969
Installment Agreement Request9465 14842
Page 56