Userid: ________ Leading adjust: 0% ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: P535.cvt (18-Mar-2003) (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 535 ContentsCat. No. 15065Z
Introduction..................... 1Department
of the
Important Changes for 2002......... 2BusinessTreasury
Internal Important Change for 2003.......... 2
Revenue Expenses
Service Important Reminder............... 2
1. Deducting Business
Expenses ................... 2For use in preparing
2. Employees’ Pay............... 6
2002 Returns 3. Retirement Plans.............. 8
4. Rent Expense................. 15
5. Interest..................... 18
6. Taxes ...................... 23
7. Insurance ................... 25
8. Costs You Can Deduct or
Capitalize................... 28
9. Amortization................. 33
10. Depletion.................... 40
11. Business Bad Debts............ 45
12. Electric and Clean-Fuel
Vehicles .................... 48
13. Other Expenses............... 51
14. How To Get Tax Help........... 58
Index.......................... 60
Introduction
This publication discusses common business
expenses and explains what is and is not de-
ductible. The general rules for deducting busi-
ness expenses are discussed in the opening
chapter. The chapters that follow cover specific
expenses and list other publications and forms
you may need.
Comments and suggestions. We welcome
your comments about this publication and your
suggestions for future editions.
You can e-mail us while visiting our web site
at www.irs.gov.
You can write to us at the following address:
Internal Revenue Service
Tax Forms and Publications
W:CAR:MP:FP
1111 Constitution Ave. NW
Washington, DC 20224
We respond to many letters by telephone.
Therefore, it would be helpful if you would in-
clude your daytime phone number, including the
area code, in your correspondence.

Page 2 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
❏ 542 Corporations
Important ChangeImportant Changes ❏ 547 Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
❏ 587 Business Use of Your Homefor 2003for 2002 (Including Use by Day-Care
Providers)The following items highlight some changes inHealth insurance deduction for the
the tax law for 2002. self-employed. For 2003, this deduction is ❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
100% of the amount you pay for health insur-❏ 936 Home Mortgage InterestRetirement plans.Many changes to the tax ance for yourself and your family. See chapter 7. Deductionlaws for retirement plans were made by the
Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation ❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property
Act of 2001 that was enacted on June 7, 2001.
Most of those changes take effect in 2002. For Form (and Instructions)Important Reminder
information about those changes that are not
❏ Sch A (Form 1040)Itemized Deductionscovered in chapter 3, see Publication 560, Re- Photographs of missing children.The Inter-tirement Plans for Small Business, or Publica- ❏ 5213 Election To Postponenal Revenue Service is a proud partner with thetion 553, Highlights of 2002 Tax Changes. Determination as To Whether theNational Center for Missing and Exploited Chil-
Presumption Applies That andren. Photographs of missing children selectedHealth insurance deduction for the self-em- Activity Is Engaged in for Profitby the Center may appear in this publication onployed. For 2002, this deduction is 70% of thepages that would otherwise be blank. You canamount you pay for health insurance for yourself See chapter 14 for information about gettinghelp bring these children home by looking at theand your family. See chapter 7. publications and forms.photographs and calling 1–800–THE–LOST
(1–800–843–5678) if you recognize a child.New health insurance credit for eligible re-
cipients.You may be able to take this new
credit only if you were an eligible trade adjust-
What Can I Deduct?ment assistance (TAA), alternative TAA, or Pen-
sion Benefit Guaranty Corporation pension
To be deductible, a business expense must berecipient. By February 18, 2003, Form 8887,
both ordinary and necessary. An ordinary ex-Health Insurance Credit Eligibility Certificate,1. pense is one that is common and accepted inshowing that you were an eligible recipient
your trade or business. A necessary expense isshould be sent to you. Use Form 8885,Health one that is helpful and appropriate for your tradeInsurance Credit for Eligible Recipients, to figure or business. An expense does not have to beDeductingthe amount, if any, of your health insurance indispensable to be considered necessary.credit.
It is important to separate business ex-
Business penses from the following expenses.Qualified environmental cleanup (remedia-
tion) costs.The deduction for qualified envi- • The expenses used to figure the cost ofronmental cleanup (remediation) costs wasExpenses goods sold.scheduled to expire for costs paid or incurred
• Capital expenses.after 2001. It has been extended to include costs
you pay or incur before 2004. See chapter 8. • Personal expenses.Introduction
Marginal production of oil and gas.The This chapter covers the general rules for deduct-suspension of the taxable income limit on per- If you have an expense that is partly foring business expenses. Business expenses arecentage depletion from the marginal production business and partly personal, separatethe costs of carrying on a trade or business.of oil and natural gas that scheduled to expire for the personal part from the business
TIP
These expenses are usually deductible if thetax years beginning after 2001 has been ex- part.business is operated to make a profit.tended to tax years beginning before 2004. For
more information on marginal production, seeTopics Cost of Goods Soldsection 613A(c) of the Internal Revenue Code.This chapter discusses:
If your business manufactures products orMaximum clean-fuel vehicle deduction.
• What you can deduct purchases them for resale, some of your ex-The maximum clean-fuel vehicle deduction and
penses may be included in figuring cost of goodsqualified electric vehicle credit were scheduled• How much you can deduct sold. You deduct cost of goods sold from yourto be 25% lower for 2002 and both were sched-• When to deduct gross receipts to figure your gross profit for theuled to be phased out completely by 2005. The
year. If you use an expense to figure the cost offull deduction and credit are now allowed for• Not-for-profit activities goods sold, you cannot deduct it again as aqualified property placed in service in 2002 and business expense.2003. The phaseout of the deduction and theUseful Items The following are types of expenses that gocredit will begin in 2004, and no deduction orYou may want to see: into figuring cost of goods sold.credit will be allowed for property placed in serv-
ice after 2006. See chapter 12. • The cost of products or raw materials, in-Publication
cluding the cost of having them shipped toStandard mileage rate.The standard mile- ❏ 334 Tax Guide for Small Business you.age rate for the cost of operating your car, van,
❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car• The cost of storing the products you sell.pickup, or panel truck in 2002 is 361/2 cents a
Expensesmile for all business miles. See chapter 13. • Direct labor costs (including contributions
❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income to pension or annuity plans) for workersMeal expense deduction subject to “hours of
who produce the products.service” limits.In 2002, this deduction in-❏ 529 Miscellaneous Deductions
creases to 65% of the reimbursed meals your • Factory overhead expenses.❏ 536 Net Operating Losses (NOLs) foremployees consume while they are subject to Individuals, Estates, and Truststhe Department of Transportation’s “hours of Under the uniform capitalization rules, you
service” limits. See chapter 13. ❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methods must capitalize the direct costs and part of the
Page 2 Chapter 1 Deducting Business Expenses

Page 3 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
indirect costs for production or resale activities. liminary investigation of, a business or There are dollar limits on the depreciation
Indirect costs include rent, interest, taxes, stor- investment possibility. you can claim each year on passenger automo-
age, purchasing, processing, repackaging, han- biles used in your business. See Publication2) The costs you had in your attempt to ac-dling, and administrative costs. This rule does 463.quire or begin a specific business. Thesenot apply to personal property you acquire for Repairs you make to your business vehiclecosts are capital expenses and you canresale if your average annual gross receipts (or are deductible expenses. However, amountsdeduct them as a capital loss.those of your predecessor) for the preceding 3 you pay to recondition and overhaul a business
If you are a corporation and your attempt totax years are not more than $10 million. vehicle are capital expenses.
go into a new trade or business is not success-For more information, see the following
ful, you may be able to deduct all investigatorysources. Roads and driveways. The costs of building
costs as a loss. a private road on your business property and the
• Cost of goods sold—chapter 6 of Publica- cost of replacing a gravel driveway with a con-The costs of any assets acquired during yourtion 334. crete one are capital expenses you may be ableunsuccessful attempt to go into business are a
• Inventories—Publication 538. to depreciate. The cost of maintaining a privatepart of your basis in the assets. You cannot take
road on your business property is a deductiblea deduction for these costs. You will recover the• Uniform capitalization rules—section expense.costs of these assets when you dispose of them.263A of the Internal Revenue Code and
the related regulations. Tools. Unless the uniform capitalization rules
apply, amounts spent for tools used in yourBusiness Assets
business are deductible expenses if the toolsCapital Expenses The cost of any asset you use in your businesshave a life expectancy of less than 1 year.
is a capital expense. There are many differentYou must capitalize, rather than deduct, some
kinds of business assets, such as land, build-Machinery parts.Unless the uniform capitali-costs. These costs are a part of your investment
ings, machinery, furniture, trucks, patents, andzation rules apply, the cost of replacingin your business and are called “capital ex-
franchise rights. You must capitalize the full costshort-lived parts of a machine to keep it in goodpenses.” There are, in general, three types of
of the asset, including freight and installationworking condition and not add to its life is acosts you capitalize.
charges. deductible expense.
1) Going into business. If you produce certain property for use in
Heating equipment. The cost of changingyour trade or business, capitalize the production2) Business assets. from one heating system to another is a capitalcosts under the uniform capitalization rules. See
expense.3) Improvements. section 1.263A–2 of the regulations for informa-
tion on those rules.
Personal ExpensesRecovery. Although you generally cannot
take a current deduction for a capital expense,
Improvements Generally, you cannot deduct personal, living, oryou may be able to take deductions for the
family expenses. However, if you have an ex-amount you spend through depreciation, amorti-The costs of making improvements to a busi-pense for something that is used partly for busi-zation, or depletion. These allow you to deductness asset are capital expenses if the improve-ness and partly for personal purposes, dividepart of your cost each year over a number ofments add to the value of the asset, appreciablythe total cost between the business and per-years. In this way you are able to “recover” yourlengthen the time you can use it, or adapt it to asonal parts. You can deduct as a business ex-capital expense. See Amortization (chapter 9) different use. You can deduct repairs that keeppense only the business part.and Depletion (chapter 10) in this publication.your property in a normal efficient operating con-For example, if you borrow money and useFor information on depreciation, see Publicationdition as a business expense. 70% of it for business and the other 30% for a946. Improvements include new electric wiring, afamily vacation, generally you can deduct as anew roof, a new floor, new plumbing, bricking upbusiness expense only 70% of the interest youwindows to strengthen a wall, and lighting im-pay on the loan. The remaining 30% is personalGoing Into Business provements. interest that is not deductible. See chapter 5 for
The costs of getting started in business, before information on deducting interest and the alloca-Restoration plan.Capitalize the cost of re-you actually begin business operations, are cap- tion rules.conditioning, improving, or altering your prop-ital expenses. These costs may include ex-
erty as part of a general restoration plan to makepenses for advertising, travel, or wages for Business use of your home.If you use partit suitable for your business. This applies even iftraining employees. of your home for business, you may be able tosome of the work would by itself be classified asdeduct expenses for the business use of your
repairs.If you go into business.When you go into home. These expenses may include mortgage
business, treat all costs you had to get your interest, insurance, utilities, repairs, and depre-Replacements. You cannot deduct the cost ofbusiness started as capital expenses. ciation.a replacement that stops deterioration and addsUsually you recover costs for a particular To qualify to claim expenses for the businessto the life of your property. Capitalize that costasset through depreciation. Generally, you can- use of your home, you must meet the followingand depreciate it.not recover other costs until you sell the busi- tests.Treat as repairs amounts paid to replaceness or otherwise go out of business. However,
parts of a machine that only keep it in a normalyou can choose to amortize certain costs for 1) The business part of your home must beoperating condition. However, if your equipmentsetting up your business. See Going Into Busi- used exclusively and regularly for yourhas a major overhaul, capitalize and depreciateness in chapter 9 for more information on busi- trade or business.the expense.ness start-up costs.
2) The business part of your home must be
If you do not go into business.If you are an one of the following.
individual and your attempt to go into business isCapital or Deductible Expenses a) Your principal place of business.not successful, the expenses you had in trying to
To help you distinguish between capital andestablish yourself in business fall into two cate- b) A place where you meet or deal withdeductible expenses, several different items aregories. patients, clients, or customers in thediscussed below. normal course of your trade or busi-1) The costs you had before making a deci- ness.sion to acquire or begin a specific busi-Business motor vehicles.You usually capi-
ness. These costs are personal and talize the cost of a motor vehicle you buy to use c) A separate structure (not attached to
nondeductible. They include any costs in- in your business. You can recover its cost your home) you use in connection with
curred during a general search for, or pre- through annual deductions for depreciation. your trade or business.
Chapter 1 Deducting Business Expenses Page 3

Page 4 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You generally do not have to meet the exclu- For more information on recoveries and the basic methods are the cash method and an
sive use test for the part of your home that you accrual method.tax benefit rule, see Publication 525.
regularly use in either of the following ways. For more information on accounting meth-
Payments in kind. If you provide services toods, see Publication 538.• For the storage of inventory or productpay a business expense, the amount you cansamples. Cash method. Under the cash method of ac-deduct is the amount you spend to provide the
counting, you generally deduct business ex-services. It is not what you would have paid in• As a day-care facility.
penses in the tax year you actually paid them,cash.
even if you incurred them in an earlier year.Your home office qualifies as your principalSimilarly, if you pay a business expense in
place of business if you meet the following re-goods or other property, you can deduct only theAccrual method. Under an accrual method ofquirements. amount the property costs you. If these costs areaccounting, you generally deduct business ex-included in the cost of goods sold, do not deduct• You use the office exclusively and regu- penses when both of the following apply.them as a business expense.larly for administrative or management ac-
1) The all-events test has been met. The testtivities of your trade or business. Limits on losses.If your deductions for an is met when:investment or business activity are more than• You have no other fixed location where
the income it brings in, you have a net loss.you conduct substantial administrative or a) All events have occurred that fix the
There may be limits on how much, if any, of themanagement activities of your trade or fact of liability, and
loss you can use to offset income from otherbusiness. b) The liability can be determined withsources. reasonable accuracy.For more information, see Publication 587.Not-for-profit limits.If you do not carry on
your business activity with the intention of mak-2) Economic performance has occurred.Business use of your car.If you use your caring a profit, you cannot use a loss from it to offsetin your business, you can deduct car expenses. Economic performance. You generallyother income. See Not-for-Profit Activities, later.If you use your car for both business and per- cannot deduct or capitalize a business expensesonal purposes, you must divide your expensesAt-risk limits.Generally, a deductible lossuntil economic performance occurs. If your ex-based on mileage. Only your expenses for thefrom a trade or business or other income-pro-pense is for property or services provided to you,miles you drove the car for business are deducti-ducing activity is limited to the investment youor for your use of property, economic perform-ble as business expenses. have “at risk” in the activity. You are “at risk” inance occurs as the property or services areYou can deduct actual car expenses, whichany activity for the following items. provided, or the property is used. If your ex-include depreciation (or lease payments), gas pense is for property or services you provide to1) The money and adjusted basis of propertyand oil, tires, repairs, tune-ups, insurance, and others, economic performance occurs as youyou contribute to the activity.registration fees. Instead of figuring the busi- provide the property or services.ness part of these actual expenses, you may be2) Amounts you borrow for use in the activityable to use the standard mileage rate to figureif: Example. Your tax year is the calendaryour deduction. For 2002, the standard mileage year. In December 2002, the Field Plumbingrate is 361/2 cents a mile for all business milesa) You are personally liable for repay-Company did some repair work at your place ofdriven. ment, or business and sent you a bill for $150. You paid itIf you are self-employed, you can also de- by check in January 2003. If you use an accrualb) You pledge property (other than prop-duct the business part of interest on your car method of accounting, deduct the $150 on yourerty used in the activity) as security forloan, state and local personal property tax on the tax return for 2002 because all events occurredthe loan.car, parking fees, and tolls, whether or not you to fix the fact of liability, the liability can beclaim the standard mileage rate. You can use determined, and economic performance oc-For more information, see Publication 925.the nonbusiness part of the personal property curred in that year. If you use the cash method oftax to determine your deduction for taxes onPassive activities.Generally, you are in aaccounting, you can deduct the expense on yourSchedule A (Form 1040) if you itemize yourpassive activity if you have a trade or business2003 return.deductions. activity in which you do not materially participate
For more information on car expenses andduring the year, or a rental activity. In general,Prepayment. You generally cannot deduct
the rules for using the standard mileage rate,deductions for losses from passive activitiesexpenses in advance, even if you pay them in
see Publication 463. only offset your income from passive activities.advance. This rule applies to both the cash and
You cannot use any excess deductions to offsetaccrual methods. It applies to prepaid interest,
your other income. In addition, passive activityprepaid insurance premiums, and any other ex-
credits can only offset the tax on net passivepense paid far enough in advance to, in effect,
How Much income. Any excess loss or credits are carried create an asset with a useful life extending sub-
stantially beyond the end of the current tax year.over to later years. For more information, see
Can I Deduct? Publication 925.
Example. In 2002, you sign a 10-year leaseNet operating loss.If your deductions areYou cannot deduct more for a business expense and immediately pay your rent for the first 3more than your income for the year, you maythan the amount you actually spend. There is years. Even though you paid the rent for 2002,have a “net operating loss.” You can use a netusually no other limit on how much you can 2003, and 2004, you can deduct only the rent foroperating loss to lower your taxes in other years.deduct if the amount is reasonable. However, if 2002 on your current tax return. You can deductSee Publication 536 for more information. Seeyour deductions are large enough to produce a on your 2003 and 2004 tax returns the rent forPublication 542 for information about net operat-net business loss for the year, the tax loss may those years.ing losses of corporations.be limited.
Contested liability.Under the cash method,
Recovery of amount deducted. If you re- you can deduct a contested liability only in the
cover part of an expense in the same tax year for year you pay the liability. Under an accrual
which you would have claimed a deduction, re- method, you can deduct contested liabilities,When Can I
duce your expense deduction by the amount of such as taxes (except foreign or U.S. posses-
the recovery. If you have a recovery in a later
Deduct an Expense? sion income, war profits, and excess profits
year, include the recovered amount in income. taxes), in the tax year you pay the liability (or
When you deduct an expense depends on yourHowever, if part of the deduction for the expense transfer money or other property to satisfy the
accounting method. An accounting method is adid not reduce your tax, you do not have to obligation) or in the tax year you settle the con-
set of rules used to determine when and howinclude all the recovery in income. Exclude the test. However, to take the deduction in the year
part that did not reduce your tax. income and expenses are reported. The two of payment or transfer, you must meet certain
Page 4 Chapter 1 Deducting Business Expenses

Page 5 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
conditions. See Contested Liability in Publica- If a taxpayer dies before the end of the lowed next, but only to the extent your gross
tion 538 for more information. 5-year (or 7-year) period, the period ends on the income from the activity is more than the deduc-
date of the taxpayer’s death. tions you take (or could take) under the first
If your business or investment activitycategory. Most business deductions, such asRelated person. Under an accrual method of
passes this 3- (or 2-) years-of-profit test, pre- those for advertising, insurance premiums, in-accounting, you generally deduct expenses
sume it is carried on for profit. This means the terest, utilities, wages, etc., belong in this cate-when you incur them, even if you have not paid
limits discussed here will not apply. You can gory.them. However, if you and the person you owe
take all your business deductions from the activ-are related and the person uses the cash Category 3. Business deductions that de-ity, even for the years that you have a loss. Youmethod of accounting, you must pay the ex- crease the basis of property are allowed last, butcan rely on this presumption in every case, un-pense before you can deduct it. The deduction only to the extent the gross income from theless the IRS shows it is not valid.by an accrual method payer is allowed when the activity is more than deductions you take (orcorresponding amount is includible in income byUsing the presumption later.If you are start-could take) under the first two categories. Thethe related cash method payee. See Related ing an activity and do not have 3 (or 2) yearsdeductions for depreciation, amortization, andPersons in Publication 538. showing a profit, you may want to elect to havethe part of a casualty loss an individual could not
the presumption made after you have the 5 (ordeduct in category (1) belong in this category.
7) years of experience allowed by the test.Where more than one asset is involved, divide
You can choose to do this by filing Form depreciation and these other deductions propor-
Not-for-Profit Activities5213. Filing this form postpones any determina-tionally among those assets.
tion that your activity is not carried on for profitIndividuals must claim the amounts inIf you do not carry on your business or invest-until 5 (or 7) years have passed since you categories (2) and (3) as miscellane-ment activity to make a profit, there is a limit onstarted the activity. ous deductions on Schedule A (Formthe deductions you can take. You cannot use a
TIP
The benefit gained by making this choice is1040). They are subject to theloss from the activity to offset other income.that the IRS will not immediately question2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit. See Publi-Activities you do as a hobby, or mainly for sportwhether your activity is engaged in for profit.cation 529 for information on this limit.or recreation, come under this limit. So does anAccordingly, it will not restrict your deductions.
investment activity intended only to produce taxRather, you will gain time to earn a profit in 3 (or
losses for the investors. 2) out of the first 5 (or 7) years you carry on theExample. Ida is engaged in a not-for-profit
The limit on not-for-profit losses applies toactivity. If you show 3 (or 2) years of profit at theactivity. The income and expenses of the activity
individuals, partnerships, estates, trusts, and Send of this period, your deductions are not lim-are as follows.
corporations. It does not apply to corporationsited under these rules. If you do not have 3 (or 2)
other than S corporations. Gross income................. $3,200years of profit, the limit can be applied retroac-
tively to any year in the 5-year (or 7-year) periodIn determining whether you are carrying on Minus expenses:with a loss.an activity for profit, all the facts are taken into Real estate taxes........ $700
Filing Form 5213 automatically extends theaccount. No one factor alone is decisive. Among Home mortgage interest.... 9 0 0
period of limitations on any year in the 5-year (orthe factors to consider are whether: Insurance............. 4 0 0
7-year) period to 2 years after the due date ofUtilities............... 7 0 0
1) You carry on the activity in a businesslikethe return for the last year of the period. TheMaintenance ........... 2 0 0
manner, period is extended only for deductions of theDepreciation on an automobile 600
activity and any related deductions that might beDepreciation on a machine . . 200 3,7002) The time and effort you put into the activityaffected.indicate you intend to make it profitable, Loss ....................... $ 500You must file Form 5213 within 3 years3) You depend on income from the activity for after the due date of your return for theyour livelihood, Ida must limit her deductions to $3,200, theyear in which you first carried on the
TIP
gross income she earned from the activity. The4) Your losses are due to circumstances be-activity, or, if earlier, within 60 days after receiv-limit is reached in category (3), as follows.yond your control (or are normal in theing written notice from the Internal Revenue
start-up phase of your type of business),Service proposing to disallow deductions attrib-Limit on deduction.............. $3,200utable to the activity.5) You change your methods of operation in Category 1: Taxes and interest $1,600an attempt to improve profitability, Category 2: Insurance, utilities,
and maintenance.......... 1,300 2,900Limit on6) You, or your advisors, have the knowledge
needed to carry on the activity as a suc-Deductions and Losses Available for Category 3......... $ 300
cessful business,
If your activity is not carried on for profit, takeThe $300 for depreciation is divided between7) You were successful in making a profit indeductions only in the following order, only to thethe automobile and machine as follows.similar activities in the past, extent stated in the three categories, and, if you
are an individual, only if you itemize them on8) The activity makes a profit in some years, $600 depreciation for theSchedule A (Form 1040).and how much profit it makes, and $800 x $300= $225 automobile
9) You can expect to make a future profitCategory 1. Deductions you can take for per-
from the appreciation of the assets used insonal as well as for business activities are al-$200 depreciation for thex $300= $75the activity. lowed in full. For individuals, all nonbusiness$800 machinedeductions, such as those for home mortgage
The basis of each asset is reduced accord-interest, taxes, and casualty losses, belong inPresumption of profit.An activity is pre- ingly.this category. Deduct them on the appropriatesumed carried on for profit if it produced a profit The $1,600 for category (1) is deductible inlines of Schedule A (Form 1040). You can de-in at least 3 of the last 5 tax years, including the full on the appropriate lines for taxes and interestduct a casualty loss on property you own forcurrent year. Activities that consist primarily of on Schedule A (Form 1040). Ida deducts thepersonal use only to the extent it is more thanbreeding, training, showing, or racing horses are remaining $1,600 (the total of categories (2) and$100 and all these losses are more than 10% ofpresumed carried on for profit if they produced a (3)) as other miscellaneous deductions onyour adjusted gross income. See Publicationprofit in at least 2 of the last 7 tax years, includ- Schedule A (Form 1040) subject to the547 for more information on casualty losses. Foring the current year. The activity must be sub- 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit.the limits that apply to mortgage interest, seestantially the same for each year within thisPublication 936.period. You have a profit when the gross income Partnerships and S corporations.If a part-
from an activity is more than the deductions forCategory 2. Deductions that do not result innership or S corporation carries on a
it. an adjustment to the basis of property are al- not-for-profit activity, these limits apply at the
Chapter 1 Deducting Business Expenses Page 5

Page 6 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
partnership or S corporation level. They are re-• Work opportunity credit. exist when you contract for the services, not
flected in the individual shareholder’s or those existing when the reasonableness isHowever, you must reduce your deduction forpartner’s distributive shares. questioned. If the pay is excessive, you canemployee wages by the amount of any employ-deduct only the part that is reasonable.ment credits you claim. For more informationMore than one activity.If you have severalabout these credits, see Publication 954, Taxundertakings, each may be a separate activity or Factors to consider.To determine if pay isIncentives for Empowerment Zones and Otherseveral undertakings may be one activity. The reasonable, consider the following items andDistressed Communities.following are the most significant facts and cir- any other pertinent facts.
cumstances in making this determination.
• The duties performed by the employee.Topics• The degree of organizational and eco-
• The volume of business handled.This chapter discusses:nomic interrelationship of various under-
takings. • The character and amount of responsibil-• Tests for deducting pay ity.• The business purpose that is (or might be)
• Kinds of payserved by carrying on the various under- • The complexities of your business.
takings separately or together in a busi-
• The amount of time required.ness or investment setting. Useful Items • The general cost of living in the locality.• The similarity of various undertakings.You may want to see:
• The ability and achievements of the indi-
The IRS will generally accept your characteri-Publication vidual employee performing the service.
zation of several undertakings as one activity, or
• The pay compared with the gross and net❏ 15 Circular E, Employer’s Tax Guidemore than one activity, if supported by facts and
income of the business, as well as withcircumstances. ❏ 15–A Employer’s Supplemental Tax distributions to shareholders if the busi-GuideIf you are carrying on two or more dif- ness is a corporation.
ferent activities, keep the deductions❏ 15–B Employer’s Tax Guide to Fringe • Your policy regarding pay for all your em-and income from each one separate.
TIP
Benefits ployees.Figure separately whether each is a
not-for-profit activity. Then figure the limit on • The history of pay for each employee.See chapter 14 for information about gettingdeductions and losses separately for each activ-publications and forms.ity that is not for profit. Individual pay.You must base the test of
whether an individual’s pay is reasonable on
each individual’s pay and the service performed,
not on the total amount paid to all officers or all
Tests for
employees. For example, even if the total
Deducting Pay amount you pay to your officers is reasonable,
you cannot deduct the part of an individual
2. To be deductible, your employees’ pay must beofficer’s pay that is not reasonable based on the
an ordinary and necessary expense and youitems listed above.
must pay or incur it in the tax year. These and
other requirements that apply to all businessTest 2—For ServicesEmployees’ Pay expenses are explained in chapter 1. PerformedIn addition, the pay must meet both the fol-
lowing tests. You must be able to prove the payment was
Introduction made for services actually performed.• Test 1. The pay must be reasonable.
You can generally deduct the pay you give your• Test 2. The pay must be for servicesemployees for the services they perform for yourperformed.business. The pay may be in cash, property, or
Kinds of Payservices. It may include wages, salaries, vaca-If these tests are met, the form or method of
tion allowances, bonuses, commissions, andfiguring the pay does not affect its deductibility.
Some of the ways you may provide pay to yourfringe benefits. This chapter provides informa-For example, bonuses and commissions based
employees are discussed next.tion about deductions allowed for various kindson sales or earnings and paid under an agree-
of pay. ment made before the services were performed
AwardsFor information about determining who is anare generally deductible.
employee and about employment taxes on your
You can generally deduct amounts you pay toemployees’ pay, see Publication 15, Circular E,Employee-shareholder salaries.If a corpo-
your employees as awards, whether paid inEmployer’s Tax Guide, Publication 15–A, ration pays an employee who is also a share-
cash or property. (For awards paid in property,Employer’s Supplemental Tax Guide, and Publi- holder a salary that is unreasonably high
see Property, later.) If you give property to ancation 15–B, Employer’s Tax Guide to Fringeconsidering the services actually performed, the
employee as an employee achievement award,Benefits. For information about deducting em-excessive part of the salary may be treated as ayour deduction may be limited.ployment taxes paid on your employees’ pay,constructive distribution of earnings to the
see chapter 6. employee-shareholder. For more information on
Achievement awards. An achievementcorporate distributions to shareholders, seeYou can claim the following employ- award is an item of tangible personal propertyPublication 542, Corporations.ment credits if you hire individuals who that meets all the following requirements.meet certain requirements.
TIP
Test 1—Reasonable • It is given to an employee for length of• Empowerment zone and renewal commu- service or safety achievement.nity employment credit. Determine the reasonableness of pay by the
• It is awarded as part of a meaningful pres-facts. Generally, reasonable pay is the amount• Indian employment credit. entation.that like enterprises ordinarily would pay for the
• New York Liberty Zone business em- services under similar circumstances. • It is awarded under conditions and circum-ployee credit. You must be able to prove the pay is reason-stances that do not create a significant
• Welfare-to-work credit. able. Base this test on the circumstances that likelihood of disguised pay.
Page 6 Chapter 2 Employees’ Pay

Page 7 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Length-of-service award.An award will Gifts of nominal value.If, to promote em- or business schedule. However, you may de-
not qualify as a length-of-service award if either ployee goodwill, you distribute turkeys, hams, or duct certain costs on other lines. For example, if
of the following applies. other merchandise of nominal value to your em- you provide dependent care by operating a de-
ployees at holidays, you can deduct the cost of pendent care facility for your employees, deduct
• The employee receives the award duringthese items as a nonwage business expense. your costs in whatever categories they fall (de-
his or her first 5 years of employment.Your deduction for de minimis gifts of food or preciation, utilities, salaries, etc.).
drink are not subject to the 50% deduction limit• The employee received another Group-term life insurance coverage.Youthat generally applies to meals. For more infor-length-of-service award (other than one of cannot deduct the cost of group-term life insur-mation on this deduction limit, see Meals andvery small value) during the same year or ance coverage if you are directly or indirectly thelodging, later.in any of the prior 4 years. beneficiary of the policy. See Nondeductible
Premiums in chapter 7.Safety achievement award.An award will Education Expenses
Welfare benefit funds.A welfare benefitnot qualify as a safety achievement award if
fund is a funded plan (or a funded arrangementIf you pay or reimburse education expenses foreither of the following applies.
having the effect of a plan) that provides welfarean employee, you can deduct the payments.
benefits to your employees, independent con-Deduct the payments on the “employee benefit1) It is given to a manager, administrator,
tractors, or their beneficiaries. Welfare benefitsprograms” line of your tax return or businessclerical employee, or other professional
are any benefits other than deferred compensa-schedule if they are part of a qualified educa-employee.
tion or transfers of restricted property.tional assistance program. For information on2) During the tax year, more than 10% of Your deduction for contributions to a welfareeducational assistance programs, see Educa-your employees, excluding those listed in benefit fund is limited to the fund’s qualified costtional Assistance in section 2 of Publication(1), have already received a safety for the tax year. If your contributions to the fund15–B.achievement award (other than one of very are more than its qualified cost, you can carrysmall value). the excess over to the next tax year.Fringe Benefits
Generally, the fund’s qualified cost is theDeduction limit.Your deduction for the total of the following amounts, reduced by theA fringe benefit is a form of pay provided to anycost of employee achievement awards given to after-tax income of the fund.person for the performance of services by thatany one employee during the tax year is limitedperson. The following are examples of fringeto the following amounts. • The cost you would have been able tobenefits. deduct using the cash method of account-• $400 for awards that are not qualified plan ing if you had paid for the benefits directly.• Benefits under employee benefit pro-awards. grams. • The contributions added to a reserve ac-• $1,600 for all awards, whether or not qual- count that are needed to fund claims in-• Meals and lodging.ified plan awards. curred but not paid as of the end of the• Use of a car. year for supplemental unemployment ben-Deduct achievement awards as a nonwage
efits, severance pay, or disability, medical,• Flights on airplanes.business expense on your return or business
or life insurance benefits.schedule. • Discounts on property or services.
A qualified plan award is an achievement For more information, see sections 419(c) and• Memberships in country clubs or other so-award given as part of an established written 419A of the Internal Revenue Code and thecial clubs.plan or program that does not favor highly com- related regulations.• Tickets to entertainment or sportingpensated employees as to eligibility or benefits.
events.A highly compensated employee for 2002 is Meals and lodging. You can usually deduct
an employee who meets either of the following the cost of furnishing meals and lodging to yourYou can generally deduct the cost of fringetests. employees. However, you can generally deductbenefits you provide on your tax return or busi-only 50% of the cost of furnishing meals.ness schedule in whatever category the cost1) The employee was a 5% owner at any Deduct the cost on your tax return or busi-falls. For example, if you allow an employee totime during the year or the preceding year. ness schedule in whatever category the ex-use a car or other property you lease, deduct thepense falls. For example, if you operate a2) The employee received more than cost of the lease as a rent or lease expense. Ifrestaurant, deduct the cost of the meals you$90,000 in pay for the preceding year.you own the property, include your deduction forfurnish to your employees as part of the cost ofits cost or other basis as a section 179 deductionYou can choose to ignore test (2) if the em- goods sold. If you operate a nursing home,or a depreciation deduction.ployee was not also in the top 20% of employees motel, or rental property, deduct the cost of
ranked by pay for the preceding year. furnishing lodging to an employee as expensesYou may not owe employment taxes
An award is not a qualified plan award if the for utilities, linen service, salaries, depreciation,on the value of the fringe benefits you
average cost of all the employee achievement etc.provide to an employee. See Publica-
TIP
awards given during the tax year (that would betion 15–B. Deduction limit on meals.You can gener-qualified plan awards except for this limit) is ally deduct only 50% of the cost of furnishingmore than $400. To figure this average cost, do meals to your employees. However, you canEmployee benefit programs.Employee ben-not take into account awards of very small value. deduct the full cost of the following meals.efit programs include the following.
You may not owe employment taxes • Meals whose value you include in an• Accident and health plans.on the value of achievement awards employee’s wages. For more information,you provide to an employee. See Publi-• Adoption assistance.
TIP
see section 2 in Publication 15–B.cation 15–B. • Cafeteria plans. • Meals that qualify as a de minimis fringe
benefit as discussed in section 2 of Publi-• Dependent care assistance.Bonuses cation 15–B. This generally includes• Educational assistance. meals you furnish to employees at yourYou can generally deduct a bonus paid to an place of business if more than half of• Group-term life insurance coverage.employee if you intended the bonus as addi- these employees are provided the mealstional pay for services, not as a gift, and the• Welfare benefit funds. for your convenience.services were actually performed. However, the
total bonuses, salaries, and other pay must be You can generally deduct amounts you spend• Meals you furnish to your employees at
reasonable for the services performed. If the on employee benefit programs on the “em- the work site when you operate a restau-
bonus is paid in property, see Property, later. ployee benefit programs” line of your tax return rant or catering service.
Chapter 2 Employees’ Pay Page 7

Page 8 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Meals you furnish to your employees as “Substantially vested” means the property is
part of the expense of providing recrea- not subject to a substantial risk of forfeiture. The
tional or social activities, such as a com- recipient is not likely to have to give up his or her
pany picnic. rights in the property in the future.
3.
• Meals you are required by federal law to
Reimbursementsfurnish to crew members of certain com-
mercial vessels (or would be required to
for Business Expenses Retirementfurnish if the vessels were operated at
You can generally deduct the amount you pay orsea). This does not include meals you fur-
reimburse employees for business expensesnish on vessels primarily providing luxury Plansthey incur for you for items such as travel andwater transportation.
entertainment. However, your deduction for• Meals you furnish on an oil or gas platformmeal and entertainment expenses is usually lim-or drilling rig located offshore or in Alaska.ited to 50% of the payment. Important ChangeThis includes meals you furnish at a sup-If you make the payment under an account-port camp that is near and integral to anable plan, deduct it in the category of the ex-for 2002oil or gas drilling rig located in Alaska.pense paid. For example, if you pay an
employee for travel expenses incurred on yourMany changes to the tax laws for retirementbehalf, deduct this payment as a travel expenseLoans or Advances plans were made by the Economic Growth andon your tax return or business schedule. See theTax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2001 that wasinstructions for the form you file for informationYou generally can deduct as wages a loan or enacted on June 7, 2001. Most of those changeson which lines to use.advance you make to an employee that you do take effect in 2002. For information about thoseIf you make the payment under a nonac-not expect the employee to repay if it is for changes not covered in this chapter, see Publi-countable plan, deduct it as wages on your taxpersonal services actually performed. The total cation 560, Retirement Plans for Small Busi-return or business schedule.must be reasonable when you add the loan or ness, or Publication 553, Highlights of 2002 TaxSee Travel, Meals, and Entertainment inadvance to the employee’s other pay. However, Changes.chapter 13 for more information about deductingif the employee performs no services, treat the
reimbursements and an explanation of account-amount you advanced to the employee as a
able and nonaccountable plans.loan, which you cannot deduct unless it be-
comes a bad debt. For information on the deduc-
Introductiontion for bad debts, see chapter 11. Sick Pay
This chapter discusses retirement plans you canBelow-market interest rate loans.On cer- You can deduct amounts you pay to your em-set up and maintain for yourself and your em-tain loans you make to an employee or share-ployees for sickness and injury, includingployees. Retirement plans are savings plansholder, you are treated as having receivedlump-sum amounts, as wages. However, yourthat offer you tax advantages to set aside moneyinterest income and as having paid compensa-deduction is limited to amounts not compen-
for your own and your employees’ retirement.tion or dividends equal to that interest. Seesated by insurance or other means.
Below-Market Loans in chapter 5 for more infor- In general, a sole proprietor or a partner is
mation. treated as an employee for retirement plan pur-Vacation Pay
poses.
Property Vacation pay is an amount you pay to an em-SEP, SIMPLE, and qualified plans offer youployee while the employee is on vacation. Itand your employees a tax favored way to saveIf you transfer property (including your includes an amount you pay an employee forfor retirement. You can deduct contributions youcompany’s stock) to an employee as paymentunused vacation leave. Vacation pay does notmake to the plan for your employees. If you are afor services, you can generally deduct it asinclude any sick pay or holiday pay. sole proprietor, you can deduct contributionswages. The amount you can deduct is its fairYou can ordinarily deduct vacation pay onlyyou make to the plan for yourself. You can alsomarket value on the date of the transfer minusin your tax year in which the employee actuallydeduct trustees’ fees if contributions to the planany amount the employee paid for the property.receives it. This rule applies regardless ofdo not cover them. Earnings on the contributionsYou can claim the deduction only for the taxwhether you use the cash method or an accrualare generally tax free until you or your employ-year in which your employee includes the method of accounting. ees receive distributions from the plan in laterproperty’s value in income. Your employee isHowever, you can deduct vacation pay inyears.deemed to have included the value in income ifyour tax year in which the employee earns it if it
you report it on Form W–2 in a timely manner. Under certain plans, employees can haveis vested by the end of that year and the em-
 You treat the deductible amount as receivedployee actually receives it within 21/2 months you contribute limited amounts of their
in exchange for the property, and you must rec-after the end of that year. Generally, vacationbefore-tax pay to a plan. These amounts (and
ognize any gain or loss realized on the transfer.pay is vested if it is payable under an oral orthe earnings on them) are generally tax free until
Your gain or loss is the difference between thewritten vacation pay plan that you told your em-your employees receive distributions from thefair market value of the property and its adjustedployees about before the tax year and itsplan in later years.basis on the date of transfer. amount and your liability for it are certain.In general, individuals who are employed or
A corporation recognizes no gain or self-employed can also set up and contribute to
loss when it pays for services with its individual retirement arrangements (IRAs).
own stock.CAUTION
!
TopicsThese rules also apply to property trans-
This chapter discusses:ferred to an independent contractor, generally
reported on Form 1099–MISC.
• Simplified employee pension (SEP) plansRestricted property. If the property you
• SIMPLE (Savings incentive match plan fortransfer for services is subject to restrictions that
employees) retirement plansaffect its value, you generally cannot deduct it
and do not report gain or loss until it is substan- • Qualified plans (also called H.R. 10 planstially vested in the recipient. However, if the or Keogh plans when covering self-em-recipient pays for the property, you must report ployed individuals)any gain at the time of the transfer up to the
• Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs)amount paid.
Page 8 Chapter 3 Retirement Plans

Page 9 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
More than one plan.If you also contribute to aUseful Items Salary Reduction
defined contribution retirement plan (definedYou may want to see: Simplified Employeelater), annual additions to all a participant’s ac-
Pension (SARSEP)counts are limited to the lesser of $40,000 orPublication
100% of the participant’s compensation. When
you figure this limit, you must add your contribu-❏ 560 Retirement Plans for Small An employer is no longer allowed to set
tions to all defined contribution plans. A SEP isBusiness (SEP, SIMPLE, and up a SARSEP. However, participants
considered a defined contribution plan for thisQualified Plans) in a SARSEP set up before 1997 (in-CAUTION
!
limit. cluding employees hired after 1996) can con-❏ 590 Individual Retirement Arrangements
tinue to have their employer contribute part of(IRAs) Contributions for yourself.The annual limitstheir pay to the plan.on your contributions to a common-lawForm (and Instructions) A SARSEP is a SEP set up before 1997 thatemployee’s SEP-IRA also apply to contributions
included a salary reduction arrangement. Underyou make to your own SEP-IRA.❏ W–2 Wage and Tax Statement the arrangement, employees can choose to
❏ 5304–SIMPLE Savings Incentive Match have you contribute part of their pay to theirDeduction LimitPlan for Employees of Small SEP-IRAs rather than receive it in cash. This
Employers (SIMPLE)—Not for Use The most you can deduct for employer contribu-contribution is called an elective deferral be-
With a Designated Financial tions (other than elective deferrals) for acause employees choose (elect) to set aside theInstitution common-law employee is 25% of the compen-money and the tax on the money is deferred until
sation (limited to $200,000 per participant) paidit is distributed.❏ 5305–SIMPLE Savings Incentive Match
to him or her during the year from the businessPlan for Employees of Small This choice is available only if all the follow-that has the plan, not to exceed $40,000 perEmployers (SIMPLE)—for Use ing requirements are met.participant.With a Designated Financial
• The SARSEP was set up before 1997.Institution Deduction of contributions for yourself.
• At least 50% of the eligible employeesWhen figuring the deduction for employer contri-See chapter 14 for information about getting choose the salary reduction arrangement.butions made to your own SEP-IRA, compensa-publications and forms. tion is your net earnings from self-employment• You had 25 or fewer eligible employeesminus the following amounts. (or employees who would have been eligi-
ble if you had maintained a SEP) at any1) The deduction for one-half your self-em-
time during the preceding year.ployment tax.Simplified Employee
• Each eligible highly compensated2) The deduction for contributions to yourPension (SEP) employee’s deferral percentage each yearown SEP-IRA.
is no more than 125% of the averageThe deduction for contributions to your ownA simplified employee pension (SEP) is a written deferral percentage (ADP) of all nonhighlySEP-IRA and your net earnings depend on eachplan that allows you to make deductible contri- compensated employees eligible to partici-other. For this reason, you determine the deduc-butions toward your own and your employees’ pate (the ADP test). See Publication 560tion for contributions to your own SEP-IRA indi-retirement without getting involved in more com- for the definition of a highly compensatedrectly by reducing the contribution rate called forplex retirement plans. A corporation also can employee and information on how to figurein your plan. Use Worksheet 3–A, shown underhave a SEP and make deductible contributions
the deferral percentage.Qualified Plan, later, to figure the rate.toward its employees’ retirement. However, cer-
tain advantages available to qualified plans,
SEP and defined contribution plan.If yousuch as the special tax treatment that may apply Limit on elective deferrals.In general, the
also contributed to a qualified defined contribu-to lump-sum distributions, do not apply to SEPs. total income an employee can defer under ation plan, you must reduce the 25% deductionUnder a SEP, you make the contributions to SARSEP and certain other elective deferral ar-limit for that plan by the allowable deduction fora traditional individual retirement arrangement rangements for 2002 is limited to the lesser ofcontributions to the SEP-IRAs of those partici-(called a SEP-IRA) set up for each eligible em- $11,000 or 25% of the employee’s compensa-pating in both the SEP plan and the definedployee. tion (as defined in Publication 560). This limitcontribution plan.SEP-IRAs are set up for, at a minimum, each applies only to amounts that reduce the
eligible employee. A SEP-IRA may have to be employee’s pay, not to any contributions fromSEP and another qualified plan.If you also
set up for a leased employee, but need not be employer funds.contributed to any other type of qualified plan,
set up for an excludable employee. For moretreat the SEP as a separate profit-sharing (de-
information, see Publication 560. Catch-up contributions.Beginning in 2002,fined contribution) plan when applying the over-
all 25% deduction limit described in sectiona SEP can permit participants who are age 50 or
Form 5305–SEP. You may be able to use 404(h)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code. older at the end of the calendar year to make
Form 5305–SEP, Simplified Employee Pen- catch-up contributions. (If the participant’s 50thIf your SEP contribution is more thansion—Individual Retirement Accounts Contri- birthday is on January 1, 2003, the participant isthe deduction limit (nondeductible con-bution Agreement, in setting up your SEP. considered age 50 at the end of 2002.) Thetribution), you can carry over and de-
TIP
catch-up contribution limit for 2002 is $1,000duct the difference in later years. However, theContribution Limits ($2,000 for 2003). Elective deferrals are notcontribution carryover, when combined with the
treated as catch-up contributions for 2002 untilcontribution for the later year, is subject to theContributions you make for 2002 to a they exceed the limit discussed earlier underdeduction limit for that year.common-law employee’s SEP-IRA are limited to Limit on elective deferrals, the SARSEP ADPthe lesser of $40,000 or 25% of the employee’s test (see Publication 560), or the plan limit (ifcompensation. Compensation generally doesEmployee contributions. Employees can any). However, the catch-up contribution a par-not include your contributions to the SEP, butalso make contributions of up to $3,000 (or
ticipant can make for a year cannot exceed thedoes include certain elective deferrals unless$3,500 if they are 50 or older) for 2002 to their
lesser of the following amounts.you choose not to include them. SEP-IRAs independent of the employer’s SEP
contributions. However, the employee’s deduc-• The catch-up contribution limit.Annual compensation limit. You generally tion for IRA contributions may be reduced or
• The excess of the participant’s compensa-cannot consider the part of an employee’s com- eliminated because the employee is covered by
tion over the elective deferrals that are notpensation over $200,000 when you figure your an employer retirement plan (the SEP plan).
catch-up contributions.contribution limit for that employee. See Publication 590 for details.
Chapter 3 Retirement Plans Page 9

Page 10 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Catch-up contributions are not subject to the disposition, or similar transaction. Under this
rule, the SIMPLE IRA plan will be treated aslimit discussed under Limit on elective deferrals, SIMPLE
meeting the 100-employee limit for the year ofearlier.
the transaction and the 2 following years if bothRetirement Plans
the following conditions are satisfied.Deduction limit and elective deferrals. A Savings Incentive Match Plan for Employees• Coverage under the plan has not signifi-Compensation, as discussed earlier, under De- (SIMPLE plan) is a written arrangement that cantly changed during the grace period.duction Limit, includes elective deferrals. Begin-provides you and your employees with a simpli-ning in 2002, elective deferrals are no longer • The SIMPLE IRA plan would have contin-fied way to make contributions to provide retire-subject to this deduction limit. However, the ued to qualify after the transaction if youment income. Under a SIMPLE plan, employeescombined deduction for a participant’s elective had remained a separate employer.can choose to make salary reduction contribu-
deferrals, and other SEP contributions, cannottions to the plan rather than receiving these
exceed $40,000. amounts as part of their regular pay. In addition,The grace period for acquisitions, dis-you will contribute matching or nonelective con-positions, and similar transactions alsotributions.Employment taxes. Elective deferrals that applies if, because of these types ofCAUTION
!
SIMPLE plans can only be maintained on ameet the ADP test are not subject to income tax transactions, you do not meet the rules ex-calendar-year basis.in the year of deferral, but they are included in plained under Other qualified plan, next, or WhoA SIMPLE plan can be set up in either of thewages for social security, Medicare, and federal Can Participate in a SIMPLE IRA Plan?, later.following ways.unemployment (FUTA) tax.
• Using SIMPLE IRAs (SIMPLE IRA plan). Other qualified plan.The SIMPLE IRA plan
Reporting SEP Contributions generally must be the only retirement plan to• As part of a 401(k) plan (SIMPLE 401(k)
which you make contributions, or benefits ac-on Form W–2 plan).
crue, for service in any year beginning with the
See Publication 560 for information on SIMPLEYour contributions to an employee’s SEP-IRA year the SIMPLE IRA plan becomes effective.
401(k) plans.are excluded from the employee’s income. Do Exception. If you maintain a qualified plannot include these contributions in your for collective bargaining employees, you areMany financial institutions will help youemployee’s wages on Form W–2 for income, permitted to maintain a SIMPLE IRA plan forset up a SIMPLE plan.social security, or Medicare tax purposes. Your other employees.
TIP
SEP contributions under a salary reduction ar-
rangement are included in your employee’s
wages for social security and Medicare tax pur-
Who Can ParticipateSIMPLE IRA Planposes only. in a SIMPLE IRA Plan?
A SIMPLE IRA plan is a retirement plan that
Example. Jim’s salary reduction arrange-uses SIMPLE IRAs for each eligible employee.Eligible employee.Any employee who re-ment calls for 10% of his salary to be contributedUnder a SIMPLE IRA plan, a SIMPLE IRA mustceived at least $5,000 in compensation duringby his employer as an elective deferral to Jim’sbe set up for each eligible employee. For theany 2 years preceding the current calendar yearSEP-IRA. Jim’s salary for the year is $30,000definition of an eligible employee, see Who Can and is reasonably expected to receive at least
(before reduction for the deferral). The employerParticipate in a SIMPLE IRA Plan?, next. $5,000 during the current calendar year is eligi-
did not choose to treat deferrals as compensa- ble to participate. The term employee  includes
tion under the arrangement. To figure the defer- a self-employed individual who received earned
Who Can Set Upral, the employer multiplies Jim’s salary of income.
a SIMPLE IRA Plan?$30,000 by 9.0909%, the reduced rate You can use less restrictive eligibility require-
equivalent of 10%, to get the deferral of ments (but not more restrictive ones) by elimi-You can set up a SIMPLE IRA plan if you meet$2,727.27. (This method is the same one you, nating or reducing the prior year compensationboth the following requirements.as a self-employed person, use to figure the requirements, the current year compensation
contributions you make on your own behalf. See• You meet the employee limit. requirements, or both. For example, you can
Worksheet 3–A, under Qualified Plan, later.) allow participation for employees who received• You do not maintain another qualified planat least $3,000 in compensation during any pre-On Jim’s Form W–2, his employer shows unless the other plan is for collective bar-ceding calendar year. However, you cannot im-total wages of $27,272.73 ($30,000 − gaining employees. pose any other conditions on participating in a$2,727.27), social security wages of $30,000, SIMPLE IRA plan.and Medicare wages of $30,000. Jim reportsEmployee limit. You can set up a SIMPLE$27,272.73 as wages on his individual income Excludable employees. The following em-IRA plan only if you had 100 or fewer employeestax return. ployees do not need to be covered under awho received $5,000 or more in compensation
If his employer does not make the choice SIMPLE IRA plan.from you for the preceding year. Under this rule,
explained above, Jim’s deferral would be $3,000you must take into account all employees em- • Employees who are covered by a union($30,000 x 10%). In this case, the employerployed at any time during the calendar year agreement and whose retirement benefitsuses the rate called for under the arrangementregardless of whether they are eligible to partici-were bargained for in good faith by the(not the reduced rate) to figure the deferral andpate. Employees include self-employed individ-employees’ union and you.the ADP test. On Jim’s Form W–2, the employeruals who received earned income and leased
employees. • Nonresident alien employees who haveshows total wages of $27,000 ($30,000 −
Once you set up a SIMPLE IRA plan, you received no U.S. source wages, salaries,$3,000), social security wages of $30,000, and
must continue to meet the 100-employee limit or other personal services compensationMedicare wages of $30,000. Jim reports
each year you maintain the plan. from you.$27,000 as wages on his return.
In either case, the maximum deductible con-Grace period for employers who cease to
meet the 100-employee limit.If you maintainCompensation. Compensation for employ-tribution would be $6,000 ($30,000 x 20%).
the SIMPLE IRA plan for at least 1 year and you ees is the total wages required to be reported on
cease to meet the 100-employee limit in a later Form W–2. Compensation also includes theMore information. For more information onyear, you will be treated as meeting it for the 2 salary reduction contributions made under thisemployer withholding requirements, see Publi-calendar years immediately following the calen- plan, compensation deferred under a sectioncation 15. dar year for which you last met it. 457 plan, and the employees’ elective deferrals
For more information on SEPs, see Publica-A different rule applies if you do not meet the under a section 401(k) plan, a SARSEP, or a
tion 560. 100-employee limit because of an acquisition,section 403(b) annuity contract. If you are
Page 10 Chapter 3 Retirement Plans

Page 11 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
self-employed, compensation is your net earn- not affect the amount an individual can contrib- If an employee is a participant in any other
ings from self-employment (line 4 of Short employer plan during the year and has electiveute to a Roth IRA.
Schedule SE (Form 1040)) before subtracting salary reductions or deferred compensationDeadline for setting up a SIMPLE IRA.Aany contributions made to the SIMPLE IRA plan under those plans, the salary reduction contribu-SIMPLE IRA must be set up for an employeefor yourself. tions under a SIMPLE IRA plan also are electivebefore the first date by which a contribution isdeferrals that count toward the overall $11,000required to be deposited into the employee’sannual limit on exclusion of salary reductionsIRA. See Time limits for contributing funds, later,How To Set Up a SIMPLE IRA Plan and other elective deferrals.under Contribution Limits.
Catch-up contributions.For tax years be-You can use Form 5304–SIMPLE  or Form
ginning after 2001, a SIMPLE plan can permit5305–SIMPLE  to set up a SIMPLE IRA plan.
participants who are age 50 or older at the endNotification RequirementEach form is a model savings incentive match
of the calendar year to make catch-up contribu-plan for employees (SIMPLE) plan document.If you adopt a SIMPLE IRA plan, you must notifytions. (If the participant’s 50th birthday is onWhich form you use depends on whether youeach employee of the following informationJanuary 1, 2003, the participant is consideredselect a financial institution or your employeesbefore the beginning of the election period.age 50 at the end of 2002.) The catch-up contri-select the institution that will receive the contri-
bution limit for 2002 is $500. This limit increasesbutions. • The employee’s opportunity to make orby $500 each year thereafter until it reachesUse Form 5304–SIMPLE if you allow each change a salary reduction choice under a$2,500 in 2006. The limit is subject to cost-of-liv-plan participant to select the financial institutionSIMPLE IRA plan. ing increases after 2006. The catch-up contribu-for receiving his or her SIMPLE IRA plan contri-
• Your choice to make either reduced tions a participant can make for a year cannotbutions. Use Form 5305–SIMPLE if you require
matching contributions or nonelective con-exceed the lesser of the following amounts.that all contributions under the SIMPLE IRA plan
tributions (discussed later).be deposited initially at a designated financial • The catch-up contribution limit.
institution. • A summary description and the location of• The excess of the participant’s compensa-The SIMPLE IRA plan is adopted when you the plan. The financial institution shouldtion over the elective deferrals that are not(and the designated financial institution, if any)provide you with this information. catch-up contributions.have completed all appropriate boxes and
• Written notice that his or her balance canblanks on the form and you have signed it. Keep
be transferred without cost or penalty ifthe original form. Do not file it with the IRS. Employer matching contributions. Youyou use a designated financial institution.generally are required to match each
Other uses of the forms. If you set up a employee’s salary reduction contributions (other
SIMPLE IRA plan using Form 5304–SIMPLE or than catch-up contributions) on a dollar-for-dol-Election period.The election period is gener-
Form 5305–SIMPLE, you can use the form to lar basis up to 3% of the employee’s compensa-ally the 60-day period immediately preceding
satisfy other requirements, including the follow- tion. This requirement does not apply if youJanuary 1 of a calendar year (November 2 to
ing. make nonelective contributions as discussedDecember 31 of the preceding calendar year).
later.However, the dates of this period are modified if• Meeting employer notification require-
you set up a SIMPLE IRA plan in mid-year (forments for the SIMPLE IRA plan. Page 3 of Example. In 2002, your employee, Johnexample, on July 1) or if the 60-day period fallsForm 5304–SIMPLE and Page 3 of Form Rose, earned $25,000 and chose to defer 5% ofbefore the first day an employee becomes eligi-5305–SIMPLE contain a Model Notifica- his salary. You make a 3% matching contribu-ble to participate in the SIMPLE IRA plan.tion to Eligible Employees that provides tion. The total contribution you can make forA SIMPLE IRA plan can provide longer peri-the necessary information to the em- John is $2,000, figured as follows.ods for permitting employees to enter into salaryployee.
reduction agreements or to modify prior agree-• Maintaining the SIMPLE IRA plan records Salary reduction contributionsments. For example, a SIMPLE IRA plan canand proving you set up a SIMPLE IRA ($25,000 × .05)................ $1,250provide a 90-day election period instead of theEmployer matching contributionplan for employees. 60-day period. Similarly, in addition to the($25,000 × .03)................ 7 5 060-day period, a SIMPLE IRA plan can provideTotal contributions............. $2,000Deadline for setting up a SIMPLE IRA plan.quarterly election periods during the 30 days
You can set up a SIMPLE IRA plan effective onbefore each calendar quarter, other than the firstLower percentage. If you choose a match-any date between January 1 and October 1 of aquarter of each year. ing contribution less than 3%, the percentageyear, provided you did not previously maintain a must be at least 1%. You must notify the em-SIMPLE IRA plan. This requirement does not ployees of the lower match within a reasonableapply if you are a new employer that comes intoContribution Limits period of time before the 60-day election periodexistence after October 1 of the year the (discussed earlier) for the calendar year. YouContributions are made up of salary reductionSIMPLE IRA plan is set up and you set up a cannot choose a percentage less than 3% forcontributions and employer contributions. You,SIMPLE IRA plan as soon as administratively more than 2 years during the 5-year period thatas the employer, must make either matchingfeasible after you come into existence. If you ends with (and includes) the year for which thecontributions or nonelective contributions, dis-previously maintained a SIMPLE IRA plan, you choice is effective.cussed later. No other contributions can becan set up a SIMPLE IRA plan effective only on
made to the SIMPLE IRA plan. These contribu-Nonelective contributions. Instead ofJanuary 1 of a year. A SIMPLE IRA plan cannot
tions, which you can deduct, must be madematching contributions, you can choose to makehave an effective date that is before the date you
timely. See Time limits for contributing funds,nonelective contributions of 2% of compensa-actually adopt the plan.
later. tion on behalf of each eligible employee who has
Setting up a SIMPLE IRA.SIMPLE IRAs are at least $5,000 of compensation (or some lower
the individual retirement accounts or annuitiesSalary reduction contributions.The amount amount of compensation that you select) from
into which the contributions are deposited. Athe employee chooses to have you contribute toyou for the year. If you make this choice, you
SIMPLE IRA must be set up for each eligiblea SIMPLE IRA on his or her behalf cannot bemust make nonelective contributions whether or
employee. Forms 5305–S, SIMPLE Individual more than $7,000 for 2002 ($8,000 for 2003).not the employee chooses to make salary re-
Retirement Trust Account, and 5305–SA, These contributions must be expressed as aduction contributions. Only $200,000 of the
SIMPLE Individual Retirement Custodial Ac-percentage of the employee’s compensation un-employee’s compensation can be taken into ac-
count, are model trust and custodial accountless you permit the employee to express themcount to figure the contribution limit.
documents the participant and the trustee (oras a specific dollar amount. You cannot placeIf you choose this 2% contribution formula,
custodian) can use for this purpose. restrictions on the contribution amount (such asyou must notify the employees within a reasona-
limiting the contribution percentage), except toA SIMPLE IRA cannot be designated as a ble period of time before the 60-day election
comply with the $7,000 limit.Roth IRA. Contributions to a SIMPLE IRA will period (discussed earlier) for the calendar year.
Chapter 3 Retirement Plans Page 11

Page 12 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example 1. In 2002, your employee, Jane sets until they are distributed. However, certainTax Treatment of Contributions
Wood, earned $36,000 and chose to have you loans made from qualified plans are treated as
You can deduct your contributions and your em-contribute 10% of her salary. You make a 2% taxable distributions. For more information, see
ployees can exclude these contributions fromPublication 575.nonelective contribution. Both of you are under
their gross income. SIMPLE IRA contributionsage 50. The total contributions you can make for
are not subject to federal income tax withhold-her are $4,320, figured as follows. Qualification requirements.To be a quali-ing. However, salary reduction contributions are
fied plan, the plan must meet many require-subject to social security, Medicare, and federalSalary reduction contributions ments. They include requirements thatunemployment (FUTA) taxes. Matching and($36,000 × .10).............. $3,600 determine the following.nonelective contributions are not subject to2% nonelective contributions
these taxes.($36,000 × .02).............. 7 2 0 • Who must be covered by the plan.Total contributions........... $4,320 Reporting on Form W–2. Do not include
• How contributions to the plan are to beSIMPLE IRA contributions in the “Wages, tips,
invested.Example 2. Using the same facts as in Ex- other compensation” box of Form W–2. How-
ever, salary reduction contributions must be in-ample 1, above, the maximum contribution you • How contributions to the plan and benefits
cluded in the boxes for social security wagescan make for Jane if she earned $75,000 is under the plan are to be determined.
and Medicare wages. Also include the proper$8,500, figured as follows. • How much of an employee’s interest in thecode in Box 12. For more information, see the
plan must be guaranteed (vested).Salary reduction contributions instructions for Forms W–2 and W–3.
(maximum amount) .......... $7,000 For more information, see Publication 560.2% nonelective contributions
($75,000 × .02)............. 1,500 Distributions (Withdrawals) More than one job.If you are self-employedTotal contributions.......... $8,500 and also work for someone else, you can partici-Distributions from a SIMPLE IRA are subject topate in retirement plans for both jobs. Generally,IRA rules and generally are includible in incomeyour participation in a retirement plan for one jobTime limits for contributing funds.You for the year received. Tax-free rollovers can bedoes not affect your participation in a plan for themust make the salary reduction contributions tomade from one SIMPLE IRA into another other job. However, if you have an IRA, you maythe SIMPLE IRA within 30 days after the end ofSIMPLE IRA. A rollover from a SIMPLE IRA to anot be allowed to deduct part or all of your IRAthe month in which the amounts would other-non-SIMPLE IRA can be made tax free only contributions. See Publication 590.wise have been payable to the employee inafter a 2-year participation in the SIMPLE IRA
cash. You must make matching contributions orplan.
nonelective contributions by the due date (in- Kinds of Qualified PlansEarly withdrawals generally are subject to a
cluding extensions) for filing your federal income10% additional tax. However, the additional tax
There are two basic kinds of qualified retirementtax return for the year. is increased to 25% if funds are withdrawn within
plans: defined contribution plans and defined2 years of beginning participation.
benefit plans.
More information.See Publication 590 for in-When To Deduct Contributions
formation about IRA rules, including those on
You can deduct SIMPLE IRA contributions in the Defined Contribution Planthe tax treatment of distributions, rollovers, re-
tax year with or within which the calendar yearquired distributions, and income tax withholding.
This plan provides for a separate account forfor which contributions were made ends. You
each person covered by the plan. Benefits arecan deduct contributions for a particular tax year
based only on amounts contributed to or allo-More Information onif they are made for that tax year and are made
cated to each account.SIMPLE IRA Plansby the due date (including extensions) of your
There are two types of defined contributionfederal income tax return for that year. If you need more help to set up and maintain aplans: profit-sharing and money purchase pen-SIMPLE IRA plan, see the following IRS noticeExample 1. Your tax year is the fiscal year sion.and revenue procedure.ending June 30. Contributions under a SIMPLE
IRA plan for the calendar year 2002 (includingNotice 98–4. This notice contains questionsProfit-sharing plan.This plan lets your em-contributions made in 2002 before July 1, 2002)and answers about the implementation and op-ployees or their beneficiaries share in the profitsare deductible in the tax year ending June 30,eration of SIMPLE IRA plans, including the elec-of your business. The plan must have a definite2003. tion and notice requirements for these plans.formula for allocating the contribution among the
Notice 98–4 is in Cumulative Bulletin 1998–1.participating employees and for distributing theExample 2. You are a sole proprietor whose accumulated funds in the plan.tax year is the calendar year. ContributionsRevenue Procedure 97–29. This revenue
under a SIMPLE IRA plan for the calendar yearprocedure provides guidance to drafters of pro-
2002 (including contributions made in 2003 bytotype SIMPLE IRAs on obtaining opinion let-Money purchase pension plan. Under this
ters. Revenue Procedure 97–29 is inApril 15, 2003) are deductible in the 2002 tax plan, contributions are fixed and are not based
Cumulative Bulletin 1997–1.year. on your business profits. For example, if the plan
requires contributions of 10% of each participat-
ing employee’s compensation, regardless of
Where To Deduct Contributions whether you have a profit, the plan is a money
Qualified Plan purchase pension plan.Deduct contributions you make for your
common-law employees on your tax return. ForA qualified retirement plan is a written plan youexample, sole proprietors deduct them on can set up for the exclusive benefit of your em-Defined Benefit PlanSchedule C (Form 1040) or Schedule F (Formployees and their beneficiaries. It is sometimes
1040), partnerships deduct them on Form 1065, This is any plan that is not a defined contributioncalled a Keogh or H.R. 10 plan.
and corporations deduct them on Form 1120, plan. In general, contributions to a qualified de-You, or you and your employees, can make
Form 1120–A, or Form 1120S. fined benefit plan are based on what is neededcontributions to the plan. If your plan meets the
to provide definitely determinable benefits toSole proprietors and partners deduct contri-qualification requirements, you generally can
plan participants. Your contributions to the planbutions for themselves on line 31 of Form 1040.deduct your contributions to the plan. For more
are based on actuarial assumptions. Generally,(If you are a partner, contributions for yourselfinformation, see Publication 560.
you will need continuing professional help toare shown on the Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) youYour employees generally are not taxed on
administer a defined benefit plan.receive from the partnership). your contributions or increases in the plan’s as-
Page 12 Chapter 3 Retirement Plans

Page 13 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Defined contribution plans.The deduction Your net earnings are your business grossSetting Up a Plan
for contributions to a defined contribution plan income minus the allowable business deduc-
(profit sharing plan or money purchase pension tions from that business. Allowable businessYou must adopt a written plan. The plan can be
plan) cannot be more than 25% of the compen- deductions include contributions to SEP andan IRS-approved master or prototype plan of-
sation paid (or accrued) during the year to the qualified plans for common-law employees andfered by a sponsoring organization. Or it can be
eligible employees participating in the plan. You the deduction for one-half your self-employmentan individually designed plan.
must reduce this limit in figuring the deduction tax.Master or prototype plans. The following for contributions you make for your own ac- Net earnings include a partner’s distributivesponsoring organizations generally can providecount. See Deduction of contributions for your-share of partnership income or loss (other thanIRS-approved master or prototype plans. self, later. separately stated items such as capital gains
When figuring the deduction limit, the follow- and losses) and any guaranteed payments. If• Trade or professional organizations.
ing rules apply. you are a limited partner, net earnings include• Banks (including savings and loan as- only guaranteed payments for services ren-• Elective deferrals (discussed in Publica-sociations and federally insured credit un- dered to or for the partnership. For more infor-tion 560) are not subject to the limit.ions). mation, see Partnership Income or Loss under
• Compensation includes elective deferrals.Figuring Earnings Subject to Self-Employment• Insurance companies.
Tax in Publication 533.• The maximum compensation that can be• Mutual funds. Net earnings do not include income passedtaken into account for each employee isthrough to shareholders of S corporations.Adoption of a master or prototype plan does not$200,000.mean your plan is automatically qualified. It still Adjustments. You must reduce your netmust meet all the qualification requirements earnings by the deduction for one-half yourDefined benefit plans.An actuary must fig-stated in the law. self-employment tax. Also, net earnings must beure the deduction for contributions to a definedreduced by the deduction for contributions youbenefit plan because it is based on actuarialIndividually designed plan.If you prefer, you make for yourself. This reduction is made indi-assumptions and computations.can set up an individually designed plan to meet rectly, as explained next.specific needs. Although advance IRS approvalDeduction of contributions for yourself.To Net earnings reduced by adjusting contri-is not required, you can apply for approval bytake a deduction for contributions you make to abution rate.You must reduce net earnings bypaying a fee and requesting a determinationplan for yourself, you must have net earningsyour deduction for contributions for yourself. Theletter. You may need professional help with this.from the trade or business for which the plandeduction and the net earnings depend on eachRevenue Procedure 2002–6 in Internal Reve-was set up. other. You make the adjustment indirectly bynue Bulletin 2002–1 may help you decide
Limit on deduction.If the qualified plan is areducing the contribution rate called for in thewhether to apply for approval.
profit-sharing plan, your deduction for yourself isplan and using the reduced rate to figure your
limited to the lesser of $40,000 or 20% (25%maximum deduction for contributions for your-Deduction Limits reduced as discussed later) of your net earn-self.
ings.The deduction limit for contributions to a quali- Annual compensation limit.You generallyfied plan depends on the kind of plan you have.Net earnings. Your net earnings must becannot take into account more than $200,000 of
from self-employment in a trade or business inyour compensation in figuring your contributionIn figuring the deduction for contribu-
which your personal services are a materialto a defined contribution plan.tions to these plans, you cannot take
income-producing factor. Your net earnings dointo account any contributions or bene-CAUTION
!
not include items excluded from income (or de-fits that are more than the limits discussed under
ductions related to that income), other than for-Limits on Contributions and Benefits in Publica-
eign earned income and foreign housing costtion 560. However, for plan years beginning in
amounts.2002 and later years, your deduction can be as
much as the plan’s unfunded current liability.
Chapter 3 Retirement Plans Page 13

Page 14 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet 3–B. Deduction Worksheet for Self-Employed Figuring Your Deduction
Step 1 Use the following worksheet to find the reduced
contribution rate for yourself. Make no reductionEnter your net profit from line 31, Schedule C (Form 1040); line 3, Schedule
C-EZ (Form 1040); line 36, Schedule F (Form 1040); or line 15a*, Schedule K-1 to the contribution rate for any common-law em-
(Form 1065)............................................. ployees.
*General partners should reduce this amount by the same additional expenses
Worksheet 3–A. Rate Worksheet forsubtracted from line 15a to determine the amount on line 1 or 2 of Schedule SE
Self-EmployedStep 2
Enter your deduction for self-employment tax from line 29, Form 1040....... 1) Plan contribution rate as a
Step 3 decimal (for example, 101/2% =
.105) ...................Net earnings from self-employment. Subtract step 2 from step 1...........
2) Rate in line 1 plus 1 (for example,Step 4
.105 + 1 = 1.105)...........Enter your rate from the Worksheet 3 – A..........................
3) Self-employed rate as a decimalStep 5 rounded to at least 3 decimal
Multiply step 3 by step 4..................................... places (line 1 ÷ line 2)........
Step 6
Multiply $200,000 by your plan contribution rate (not the reduced rate).......
After you have figured your self-employedStep 7
rate, you can figure your maximum deduction forEnter the smaller of step 5 or step 6............................. contributions for yourself by completing Work-
Step 8 sheet 3–B.
An Example of how to complete the work-Contribution dollar limit...................................... $40,000
sheets follows.• If you made any elective deferrals, go to step 9.
• Otherwise, skip steps 9 through 18 and enter the smaller
of step 7 or step 8 on step 19.
Step 9
Enter your allowable elective deferrals made during 2002. Do not enter more
than $11,000............................................
Step 10
Subtract step 9 from step 8...................................
Step 11
Subtract step 9 from step 3.........................
Step 12
Enter one-half of step 11....................................
Step 13
Enter the smallest of step 7, 10, or 12............................
Step 14
Subtract step 13 from step 3..................................
Step 15
Enter the smaller of step 9 or step 14............................
• If you made catch-up contributions, go to step 16.
• Otherwise, skip steps 16 through 18 and go to step 19.
Step 16
Subtract step 15 from step 14.................................
Step 17
Enter your catch-up contributions, if any. Do not enter more than $1,000......
Step 18
Enter the smaller of step 16 or step 17...........................
Step 19
Add steps 13, 15, and 18. This is your maximum deductible contribution....
Next: Enter your deduction on line 31, Form 1040.
Page 14 Chapter 3 Retirement Plans

Page 15 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet 3–B. Deduction Worksheet for Self-Employed — IllustratedExample
Step 1 You are a sole proprietor with no employees.
The terms of your plan provide that you contrib-Enter your net profit from line 31, Schedule C (Form 1040); line 3, Schedule
C-EZ (Form 1040); line 36, Schedule F (Form 1040); or line 15a*, Schedule K-1 ute 81/2% (.085) of your compensation (defined
(Form 1065)............................................. $200,000 earlier) to your plan. Your net profit from line 31,
Schedule C (Form 1040) is $200,000. You have*General partners should reduce this amount by the same additional expenses
no elective deferrals or catch-up contributions.subtracted from line 15a to determine the amount on line 1 or 2 of Schedule SE
Your self-employment tax deduction on line 29Step 2
of Form 1040 is $7,942. You figure your self-em-Enter your deduction for self-employment tax from line 29, Form 1040....... 7,942 ployed rate and maximum deduction for em-
Step 3 ployer contributions you made for yourself as
shown in illustrated Worksheet 3–A and Work-Net earnings from self-employment. Subtract step 2 from step 1........... 192,058
sheet 3–B.Step 4
Enter your rate from Worksheet 3 – A............................. 0.078 Worksheet 3–A. Rate Worksheet for
Step 5 Self-Employed —
IllustratedMultiply step 3 by step 4..................................... 14,981
Step 6 1) Plan contribution rate as a
Multiply $200,000 by your plan contribution rate (not the reduced rate)....... 17,000 decimal (for example, 101/2% =
.105) ................... 0.085Step 7
2) Rate in line 1 plus 1 (for example,Enter the smaller of step 5 or step 6............................. 14,981
.105 + 1 = 1.105)........... 1.085Step 8
3) Self-employed rate as a decimalContribution dollar limit...................................... $40,000 rounded to at least 3 decimal
• If you made any elective deferrals, go to step 9. places (line 1 ÷ line 2)........ 0.078
• Otherwise, skip steps 9 through 18 and enter the smaller
of step 7 or step 8 on step 19. When to make contributions.To take a de-
duction for contributions for a particular year,Step 9
you must make the contributions not later thanEnter your allowable elective deferrals made during 2002. Do not enter more the due date (generally April 15 for calendarthan $11,000............................................
year taxpayers), plus extensions, of your taxStep 10 return for that year.
Subtract step 9 from step 8................................... More information. See Publication 560 for
Step 11 more information on retirement plans for small
business owners, including the self-employed.Subtract step 9 from step 3.........................
Publication 560 also discusses the reportingStep 12
forms that must be filed for these plans.Enter one-half of step 11....................................
Step 13
Enter the smallest of step 7, 10, or 12............................
Individual RetirementStep 14
Subtract step 13 from step 3.................................. Arrangement (IRA)
Step 15
An individual retirement arrangement (IRA) is aEnter the smaller of step 9 or step 14............................
personal savings plan that allows you to set• If you made catch-up contributions, go to step 16. aside money for your retirement. You may be
• Otherwise, skip steps 16 through 18 and go to step 19. able to deduct your contributions, depending on
the type of IRA and your circumstances. Gener-Step 16
ally, amounts in an IRA, including earnings andSubtract step 15 from step 14................................. gains, are not taxed until they are distributed. In
Step 17 certain cases, your earnings and gains may not
Enter your catch-up contributions, if any. Do not enter more than $1,000...... be taxed at all if they are distributed according to
the rules. For more information on IRAs, seeStep 18
Publication 590.Enter the smaller of step 16 or step 17...........................
Step 19
Add steps 13, 15, and 18. This is your maximum deductible contribution.... $14,981
Next: Enter your deduction on line 31, Form 1040.
4.
Rent Expense
Introduction
This chapter discusses the tax treatment of rent
or lease payments you make for property you
Chapter 4 Rent Expense Page 15

Page 16 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
use in your business but do not own. It alsoCanceling a lease.You generally can deduct • The lessor must maintain a minimum un-discusses how to treat other kinds of payments as rent an amount you pay to cancel a businessconditional “at risk” equity investment inyou make that are related to your use of this lease. the property (at least 20% of the cost ofproperty. These include payments you make forLease or purchase. There may be instances the property) during the entire lease term.taxes on the property, improvements to thein which you must determine whether your pay-• The lessee may not have a contractualproperty, and getting a lease. There is a discus-ments are for rent or for the purchase of theright to buy the property from the lessor atsion about capitalizing (including in the cost ofproperty. You must first determine whether yourless than fair market value when the rightproperty) certain rent expenses at the end of theagreement is a lease or a conditional sales con-is exercised.chapter. tract. Payments made under a conditional sales
contract are not deductible as rent expense.• The lessee may not invest in the property,Topics except as provided by Revenue ProcedureConditional sales contract.Whether anThis chapter discusses: 2001–28.agreement is a conditional sales contract de-
pends on the intent of the parties. Determine• The lessee may not lend any money to the• The definition of rent
intent based on the provisions of the agreementlessor to buy the property or guarantee the• Taxes on leased property and the facts and circumstances that exist whenloan used by the lessor to buy the prop-
you make the agreement. No single test, or erty.• The cost of getting a lease
special combination of tests, always applies.• The lessor must show that it expects to• Improvements by the lessee However, in general, an agreement may be con-receive a profit apart from the tax deduc-sidered a conditional sales contract rather than• Capitalizing rent expenses tions, allowances, credits, and other taxa lease if any of the following is true. attributes.
• The agreement applies part of each pay-See chapter 14 for information about getting
ment toward an equity interest you will re- The IRS may charge you a user fee for issuingpublications and forms.
ceive. a tax ruling. For more information, see Revenue
Procedure 2003–1, in Internal Revenue Bulletin• You get title to the property after you makeNo. 2003–1, or Publication 1375, which is aa stated amount of required payments.reprint of Revenue Procedure 2003–1.Rent • The amount you must pay to use the prop-Leveraged leases of limited-use property.erty for a short time is a large part of theRent is any amount you pay for the use of The IRS will not issue advance rulings on lever-amount you would pay to get title to theproperty you do not own. In general, you can aged leases of so-called limited-use property.property.deduct rent as an expense only if the rent is for Limited-use property is property not expected to
property you use in your trade or business. If you be either useful to or usable by a lessor at the• You pay much more than the current fair
have or will receive equity in or title to the prop- end of the lease term except for continued leas-rental value of the property.
erty, the rent is not deductible. ing or transfer to a lessee. See Revenue Proce-• You have an option to buy the property atdure 2001–28 for examples of limited-useUnreasonable rent.You cannot take a rental a nominal price compared to the value ofproperty and property that is not limited-usededuction for unreasonable rent. Ordinarily, thethe property when you may exercise theproperty.issue of reasonableness arises only if you andoption. Determine this value when you
the lessor are related. Rent paid to a related Leases over $250,000.Special rules are pro-make the agreement.
person is reasonable if it is the same amount vided for certain leases of tangible property. The• You have an option to buy the property atyou would pay to a stranger for use of the same rules apply if the lease calls for total payments ofa nominal price compared to the totalproperty. Rent is not unreasonable just because more than $250,000 and any of the followingamount you have to pay under the agree-it is figured as a percentage of gross sales. For apply.ment.examples of related persons, see Related Per-
• Rents increase during the lease.sons in chapter 12. • The agreement designates part of the pay-
• Rents decrease during the lease.ments as interest, or that part is easy toRent on your home. If you rent your home
recognize as interest.and use part of it as your place of business, you • Rents are deferred (rent is payable after
may be able to deduct the rent you pay for that the end of the calendar year following theLeveraged leases. Leveraged lease trans-part. You must meet the requirements for busi- calendar year in which the use occurs andactions may not be considered leases. Lever-ness use of your home. For more information, the rent is allocated).aged leases generally involve three parties: asee Business use of your home in chapter 1.
• Rents are prepaid (rent is payable beforelessor, a lessee, and a lender to the lessor.
Rent paid in advance.Generally, rent paid in the end of the calendar year preceding theUsually the lease term covers a large part of the
your trade or business is deductible in the year calendar year in which the use occurs anduseful life of the leased property, and the
paid or accrued. If you pay rent in advance, you the rent is allocated).lessee’s payments to the lessor are enough to
can deduct only the amount that applies to yourcover the lessor’s payments to the lender.These rules do not apply if your lease specifiesuse of the rented property during the tax year.If you plan to take part in what appears to beequal amounts of rent for each month in theYou can deduct the rest of your payment onlya leveraged lease, you may want to get anlease term and all rent payments are due in theover the period to which it applies. advance ruling. Revenue Procedure 2001–28calendar year to which the rent relates (or in thein Internal Revenue Bulletin 2001–19 containspreceding or following calendar year).Example 1. You leased a building for 5the guidelines the IRS will use to determine if ayears beginning July 1. Your rent is $12,000 per Generally, if the special rules apply, you mustleveraged lease is a lease for federal income taxyear. You paid the first year’s rent ($12,000) on use an accrual method of accounting (and timepurposes. Revenue Procedure 2001–29 in theJune 30. You can deduct only $6,000 (6/12 × value of money principles) for your rental ex-same Internal Revenue Bulletin provides the$12,000) for the rent that applies to the first year. penses, regardless of your overall method ofinformation required to be furnished in a request
accounting. In addition, in certain cases in whichfor an advance ruling on a leveraged leaseExample 2. Last January you leased prop- the IRS has determined that a lease was de-transaction.erty for 3 years for $6,000 a year. You paid the signed to achieve tax avoidance, you must takeIn general, Revenue Procedure 2001–28full $18,000 (3 × $6,000) during the first year of rent and stated or imputed interest into accountprovides that, for advance ruling purposes only,the lease. Each year you can deduct only under a constant rental accrual method in whichthe IRS will consider the lessor in a leveraged$6,000, the part of the rent that applies to that the rent is treated as accruing ratably over thelease transaction to be the owner of the propertyyear. entire lease term. For details, see the regula-and the transaction to be a valid lease if all the
tions under section 467 of the Internal Revenuefactors in the revenue procedure are met, in-
Code.cluding the following.
Page 16 Chapter 4 Rent Expense

Page 17 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
there are 10 years remaining on the lease with bought solely to get a lease, the loss is a cost of
no option to renew, you can deduct $1,000 each getting the lease. You must capitalize the lossTaxes on
year. and amortize it over the remaining term of the
The cost of getting an existing lease of tangi- lease.Leased Property
ble property is not subject to the amortization
rules for section 197 intangibles discussed inIf you lease business property, you can deduct
chapter 9.as additional rent any taxes you have to pay to
or for the lessor. When you can deduct these ImprovementsOption to renew. The term of the lease fortaxes as additional rent depends on your ac-amortization includes all renewal options plusby Lesseecounting method. any other period for which you and the lessor
reasonably expect the lease to be renewed.Cash method. If you use the cash method of If you add buildings or make other permanentHowever, this applies only if less than 75% ofaccounting, you can deduct the taxes as addi- improvements to leased property, depreciatethe cost of getting the lease is for the termtional rent only for the tax year in which you pay the cost of the improvements using the modifiedremaining on the purchase date (not includingthem. accelerated cost recovery system (MACRS).any period for which you may choose to renew,Depreciate the property over its appropriate re-Accrual method. If you use an accrual extend, or continue the lease). Allocate thecovery period. You cannot amortize the costmethod of accounting, you can deduct taxes aslease cost to the original term and any optionover the remaining term of the lease.additional rent for the tax year in which you canterm based on the facts and circumstances. InIf you do not keep the improvements whendetermine all the following. some cases, it may be appropriate to make theyou end the lease, figure your gain or loss basedallocation using a present value computation.• That you have a liability for taxes on the on your adjusted basis in the improvements atFor more information, see sectionleased property. that time.1.178–1(b)(5) of the regulations. For more information, see the discussion of• How much the liability is.
MACRS in Publication 946, How To DepreciateExample 1. You paid $10,000 to get a lease• That economic performance occurred. Property.with 20 years remaining on it and two options to
renew for 5 years each. Of this cost, you paidAssignment of a lease.If a long-term lesseeThe liability and amount of taxes are deter-
$7,000 for the original lease and $3,000 for thewho makes permanent improvements to landmined by state or local law and the lease agree-
renewal options. Because $7,000 is less thanlater assigns all lease rights to you for moneyment. Economic performance occurs as you use
75% of the total $10,000 cost of the lease (orand you pay the rent required by the lease, thethe property.
$7,500), you must amortize the $10,000 over 30amount you pay for the assignment is a capital
years. That is the remaining life of your presentExample 1. Oak Corporation is a calendar investment. If the rental value of the leased land
lease plus the periods for renewal.year taxpayer that uses an accrual method of increased since the lease began, part of your
accounting. Oak leases land for use in its busi- capital investment is for that increase in the
Example 2. The facts are the same as inness. Under state law, owners of real property rental value. The rest is for your investment in
Example 1, except that you paid $8,000 for thebecome liable (incur a lien on the property) for the permanent improvements.
original lease and $2,000 for the renewal op-real estate taxes for the year on January 1 of The part that is for the increased rental value
tions. You can amortize the entire $10,000 overthat year. However, they do not have to pay of the land is a cost of getting a lease, and you
the 20-year remaining life of the original lease.these taxes until July 1 of the next year (18 amortize it over the remaining term of the lease.
The $8,000 cost of getting the original lease wasmonths later) when tax bills are issued. Under You can depreciate the part that is for your
not less than 75% of the total cost of the leasethe terms of the lease, Oak becomes liable for investment in the improvements over the recov-
(or $7,500).the real estate taxes in the later year when the ery period of the property as discussed earlier,
tax bills are issued. If the lease ends before the without regard to the lease term.Cost of a modification agreement.You maytax bill for a year is issued, Oak is not liable forhave to pay an additional “rent” amount over partthe taxes for that year. of the lease period to change certain provisionsOak cannot deduct the real estate taxes asin your lease. You must capitalize these pay-rent until the tax bill is issued. This is when Oak’s Capitalizingments and amortize them over the remainingliability under the lease becomes fixed. period of the lease. You cannot deduct the pay-
Rent Expensesments as additional rent, even if they are de-Example 2. The facts are the same as inscribed as rent in the agreement.Example 1 except that, according to the terms of Under the uniform capitalization rules, you have
the lease, Oak becomes liable for the real estate to capitalize the direct costs and part of theExample. You are a calendar year taxpayertaxes when the owner of the property becomes indirect costs for production or resale activities.and sign a 20-year lease to rent part of a buildingliable for them. As a result, Oak will deduct the Indirect costs include amounts incurred forstarting on January 1. However, before you oc-real estate taxes as rent on its tax return for the renting or leasing equipment, facilities, or land.cupy it, you decide that you really need lessearlier year. This is the year in which Oak’s Generally, you are subject to the uniformspace. The lessor agrees to reduce your rentliability under the lease becomes fixed. capitalization rules if you do any of the followingfrom $7,000 to $6,000 per year and to release
in the course of a trade or business or an activitythe excess space from the original lease. In
carried on for profit.exchange, you agree to pay an additional rent
amount of $3,000, payable in 60 monthly install-• Produce real or tangible personal propertyCost of ments of $50 each. for use in the business or activity.
You must capitalize the $3,000 and amortize
Getting a Lease • Produce real or tangible personal propertyit over the 20-year term of the lease. Your amor-
for sale to customers.tization deduction each year will be $150
You may either enter into a new lease with the($3,000 ÷ 20). You cannot deduct the $600 (12 × • Acquire property for resale. However, thislessor of the property or get an existing lease$50) that you will pay during each of the first 5rule does not apply to personal propertyfrom another lessee. Very often when you get anyears as rent. acquired for resale if your average annualexisting lease from another lessee, you must gross receipts for the 3 previous tax yearsCommissions, bonuses, and fees.Commis-pay the previous lessee money to get the lease, were not more than $10 million.sions, bonuses, fees, and other amounts youbesides having to pay the rent on the lease.
pay to get a lease on property you use in yourIf you get an existing lease on property or
business are capital costs. You must amortizeExample 1. You rent construction equip-equipment for your business, you generally
these costs over the term of the lease. ment to build a storage facility. You must capital-must amortize any amount you pay to get that
ize as part of the cost of the building the rent youlease over the remaining term of the lease. ForLoss on merchandise and fixtures.If you
paid for the equipment. You recover your cost byexample, if you pay $10,000 to get a lease andsell at a loss merchandise and fixtures that you
Chapter 4 Rent Expense Page 17

Page 18 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Proceeds deposited in borrower’s account.claiming a deduction for depreciation on the❏ 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitations
Treat loan proceeds deposited in an account asbuilding.
property held for investment. It does not matterSee chapter 14 for information about getting
Example 2. You rent space in a facility to whether the account pays interest. Any interestpublications and forms.
conduct your business of manufacturing tools. you pay on the loan is investment interest ex-
You must include the rent you paid to occupy the pense. If you withdraw the proceeds of the loan,
facility in the cost of the tools you produce. you must reallocate the loan based on the use of
the funds.Allocation of InterestMore information.For more information, see
the regulations under section 263A of the Inter- Example. Connie, a calendar-year tax-The rules for deducting interest vary, dependingnal Revenue Code. payer, borrows $100,000 on January 4 and im-on whether the loan proceeds are used for busi-
mediately uses the proceeds to open a checkingness, personal, investment, or passive activi-
account. No other amounts are deposited in theties. If you use the proceeds of a loan for more
account during the year and no part of the loanthan one type of expense, you must make an
principal is repaid during the year. On April 1,allocation to determine the interest for each use
Connie uses $20,000 from the checking accountof the loan’s proceeds.
for a passive activity expenditure. On Septem-Allocate your interest expense to the follow-5. ber 1, Connie uses an additional $40,000 froming categories.
the account for personal purposes.
• Trade or business interest Under the interest allocation rules, the entire
$100,000 loan is treated as property held forInterest • Passive activity interest
investment for the period from January 4
• Investment interest through March 31. From April 1 through August
31, Connie must treat $20,000 of the loan as• Portfolio interestIntroduction used in the passive activity and $80,000 of the
• Personal interest loan as property held for investment. From Sep-This chapter discusses the tax treatment of busi-
tember 1 through December 31, she must treatness interest expense. Business interest ex-In general, you allocate interest on a loan the
$40,000 of the loan as used for personal pur-pense is an amount charged for the use ofsame way you allocate the loan proceeds. You
poses, $20,000 as used in the passive activity,money you borrowed for business activities.allocate loan proceeds by tracing disburse-
and $40,000 as property held for investment.ments to specific uses.
Topics Order of funds spent.Generally, you treat
This chapter discusses: The easiest way to trace disburse-loan proceeds deposited in an account as used
ments to specific uses is to keep the(spent) before either of the following amounts.
• Allocation of interest proceeds of a particular loan separate
TIP
• Any unborrowed amounts held in thefrom any other funds.• Interest you can deduct same account.
• Interest you cannot deduct Secured loan. The allocation of loan pro- • Any amounts deposited after these loanceeds and the related interest is not generallyproceeds.• Capitalization of interest affected by the use of property that secures the
• When to deduct interest loan.
Example. On January 9, Edith opened a
• Below-market loans checking account, depositing $500 of the pro-Example. You secure a loan with property
ceeds of Loan A and $1,000 of unborrowedused in your business. You use the loan pro-
funds. The following table shows the transac-ceeds to buy an automobile for personal use.Useful Items
tions in her account during the tax year.You must allocate interest expense on the loanYou may want to see:
to personal use (purchase of the automobile)
Date Transactioneven though the loan is secured by businessPublication
property. January 9 $500 proceeds of Loan A
❏ 537 Installment Sales andIf the property that secures the loan is $1,000 unborrowed funds❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methods your home, you generally do not allo- depositedcate the loan proceeds or the related
TIP
❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses January 13 $500 proceeds of Loan Binterest. The interest is usually deductible as
❏ 936 Home Mortgage Interest depositedqualified home mortgage interest, regardless of
Deduction how the loan proceeds are used. For more infor-February 18 $800 used for personal
mation, see Publication 936. purposesForm (and Instructions)
February 27 $700 used for passiveAllocation period.The period for which a❏ Sch A (Form 1040)Itemized activityloan is allocated to a particular use begins on theDeductions date the proceeds are used and ends on theJune 19 $1,000 proceeds of Loan C
earlier of the following dates. deposited❏ Sch E (Form 1040)Supplemental
Income and Loss November 20 $800 used for an• The date the loan is repaid.
investment❏ Sch K–1 (Form 1065) Partner’s Share • The date the loan is reallocated to anotherof Income, Credits, Deductions, etc. December 18 $600 used for personaluse.
purposes❏ Sch K–1 (Form 1120S) Shareholder’s
Share of Income, Credits, Proceeds not disbursed to borrower.Even Edith treats the $800 used for personal pur-Deductions, etc. if the lender disburses the loan proceeds to aposes as made from the $500 proceeds of Loan
third party, the allocation of the loan is still basedA and $300 of the proceeds of Loan B. She❏ 1098 Mortgage Interest Statement
on your use of the funds. This applies whethertreats the $700 used for a passive activity as❏ 3115 Application for Change in you pay for property, services, or anything elsemade from the remaining $200 proceeds ofAccounting Method by incurring a loan, or you take property subjectLoan B and $500 of unborrowed funds. She
to a debt. treats the $800 used for an investment as made❏ 4952 Investment Interest Expense
entirely from the proceeds of Loan C. She treatsDeduction
the $600 used for personal purposes as made
Page 18 Chapter 5 Interest

Page 19 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
from the remaining $200 proceeds of Loan C Example. You borrowed $20,000 and used You must allocate the loan proceeds and the
the proceeds of this loan to open a new savings related interest expense among all the assets ofand $400 of unborrowed funds.
account. When the account had earned interest the entity. You can use any reasonable method.For the periods during which loan proceeds
of $867, you withdrew $20,000 for personal pur- If you buy an interest in a partnership or Sare held in the account, Edith treats them as
poses. You can treat the withdrawal as coming corporation (other than by way of a contributionproperty held for investment.
first from the interest earned on the account, to capital), reasonable methods include a pro
Payments from checking accounts.Gen- $867, and then from the loan proceeds, $19,133 rata allocation based on the fair market value,
erally, you treat a payment from a checking or($20,000 − $867). All the interest charged on the book value, or adjusted basis of the assets,
similar account as made at the time the check isloan from the time it was deposited in the ac- reduced by any debts allocated to the assets.
written if you mail or deliver it to the payee withincount until the time of the withdrawal is invest-If you contribute to the capital of a partner-
a reasonable period after you write it. You canment interest expense. The interest charged onship or S corporation, reasonable methods ordi-
treat checks written on the same day as writtenthe part of the proceeds used for personal pur-narily include allocating the debt among all the
poses ($19,133) from the time you withdrew itin any order. assets or tracing the loan proceeds to the
until you either repay it or reallocate it to anotherentity’s expenditures.Amounts paid within 30 days. If you re- use is personal interest expense. The interestTreat the purchase of an interest in a partner-ceive loan proceeds in cash or if the loan pro-charged on the loan proceeds you left in theship or S corporation as a contribution to capitalceeds are deposited in an account, you can treataccount ($867) continues to be investment inter-to the extent the entity receives any proceeds ofany payment (up to the amount of the proceeds)est expense until you either repay it or reallocatethe purchase.made from any account you own, or from cash,it to another use.
as made from those proceeds. This applies to Example. You buy an interest in a partner-
Loan repayment. When you repay any part ofany payment made within 30 days before or ship for $20,000 using borrowed funds. The
a loan allocated to more than one use, treat it asafter the proceeds are received in cash or de- partnership’s only assets include machinery
being repaid in the following order.posited in your account. used in its business valued at $60,000 and
If the loan proceeds are deposited in an stocks valued at $15,000. You allocate the loan1) Personal use. proceeds based on the value of the assets.account, you can apply this rule even if the rules
2) Investments and passive activities (otherTherefore, you allocate $16,000 of the loan pro-stated earlier under Order of funds spent would
than those included in (3)). ceeds ($60,000/$75,000 × $20,000) and the in-otherwise require you to treat the proceeds as
terest expense on that part to trade or businessused for other purposes. If you apply this rule to3) Passive activities in connection with ause. You allocate the remaining $4,000any payments, disregard those payments (and rental real estate activity in which you ac-($15,000/$75,000 × $20,000) and the interest onthe proceeds from which they are made) when tively participate. that part to investment use.applying the rules stated under Order of funds 4) Former passive activities.spent. Reallocation.If you allocate the loan pro-
5) Trade or business use and expenses forIf you received the loan proceeds in cash, ceeds among the assets, you must make a real-
certain low-income housing projects. location if the assets or the use of the assetsyou can treat the payment as made on the date
change.you received the cash instead of the date you
Line of credit (continuous borrowings).actually made the payment. How to report. Individuals should reportThe following rules apply if you have a line oftheir share of deductible partnership or S corpo-Example. Frank gets a loan of $1,000 oncredit or similar arrangement. ration interest expense on either Schedule A orAugust 4 and receives the proceeds in cash. Schedule E of Form 1040, depending on the1) Treat all borrowed funds on which interestFrank deposits $1,500 in an account on August type of asset (or expenditure if the allocation isaccrues at the same fixed or variable rate18 and on August 28 writes a check on the based on the tracing of loan proceeds) to whichas a single loan.account for a passive activity expense. Also, the interest expense is allocated.
Frank deposits his paycheck, deposits other2) Treat borrowed funds or parts of borrowedFor interest allocated to trade or business
loan proceeds, and pays his bills during thefunds on which interest accrues at differentassets (or expenditures), report the interest in
same period. Regardless of these other transac-fixed or variable rates as different loans.Part II, Schedule E (Form 1040). On a separate
tions, Frank can treat $1,000 of the deposit heTreat these loans as repaid in the orderline, put “business interest” and the name of the
shown on the loan agreement.made on August 18 as being paid on August 4 partnership or S corporation in column (a) and
from the loan proceeds. In addition, Frank can the amount in column (i).
treat the passive activity expense he paid onLoan refinancing.Allocate the replacement For interest allocated to passive activity use,
August 28 as made from the $1,000 loan pro-loan to the same uses to which the repaid loanenter the interest on Form 8582 as a deduction
ceeds treated as deposited in the account.was allocated. Make the allocation only to thefrom the passive activity of the partnership or S
extent you use the proceeds of the new loan tocorporation. Show any deductible amount inOptional method for determining date ofrepay any part of the original loan. Part II, Schedule E (Form 1040). On a separatereallocation.You can use the following line, put “passive interest” and the name of themethod to determine the date loan proceeds are entity in column (a) and the amount in columnPartnershipsreallocated to another use. You can treat all (g).payments from loan proceeds in the accountand S Corporations For interest allocated to investment use,during any month as taking place on the later of enter the interest on Form 4952. Carry anyThe following rules apply to the allocation ofthe following dates. deductible amount allocated to royalties to Partinterest expense in connection with debt-fi-
II, Schedule E (Form 1040). On a separate line• The first day of that month. nanced acquisitions of interests in partnerships
enter “investment interest” and the name of theand S corporations. These rules also apply to• The date the loan proceeds are deposited partnership or S corporation in column (a) andthe allocation of interest expense in connectionin the account. the amount in column (i). Carry the balance ofwith debt-financed distributions from partner-
the deductible amount to line 13, Schedule AHowever, you can use this optional method onlyships and S corporations.
(Form 1040).if you treat all payments from the account duringThese rules do not apply if the partner-Any interest allocated to proceeds used forthe same calendar month in the same way. ship or S corporation is formed or usedpersonal purposes is generally not deductible.
Interest on a separate account.If you for the principal purpose of avoidingCAUTION
!
the interest allocation rules.have an account that contains only loan pro- Debt-financed distribution.A debt-financed
ceeds and interest earned on the account, you distribution occurs when a partnership or S cor-
can treat any payment from that account asDebt-financed acquisition.A debt-financed poration borrows funds and allocates those
being made first from the interest. When theacquisition is the use of loan proceeds to buy an funds to distributions made to partners or share-
interest earned is used up, any remaining pay-interest in, or to make a contribution to the capi- holders. The distributed loan proceeds and re-
ments are from loan proceeds. tal of, a partnership or S corporation. lated interest expense must be reported to the
Chapter 5 Interest Page 19

Page 20 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
partners or shareholders separately. This is be- use your half of the loan in your business, and• On a straight-line basis over the term of
cause the loan proceeds and the interest ex- you make one-half of the loan payments. Youthe loan.
pense must be allocated depending on how the can deduct your half of the total interest pay-• In proportion to stated interest payments.partner or shareholder uses the proceeds. ments as a business deduction.
This treatment of debt-financed distributions • In its entirety at maturity of the loan.
Mortgage. Generally, mortgage interest paidfollows the general allocation rules discussed You make this choice by deducting the OID in aor accrued on real estate you own legally orearlier. For example, if a shareholder uses dis- manner consistent with the method chosen onequitably is deductible. However, rather thantributed loan proceeds to invest in a passive your timely filed tax return for the tax year indeducting the interest currently, you may haveactivity, that shareholder’s portion of the S
which the loan is issued.to add it to the cost basis of the property ascorporation’s interest expense on the loan pro-
explained later under Capitalization of Interest.ceeds is allocated to a passive activity use.
Example. On January 1, 2002, you took outStatement. If you paid $600 or more ofOptional allocation method.The partner- a $100,000 discounted loan and receivedmortgage interest (including certain points) dur-ship or S corporation can choose to allocate the $98,500 in proceeds. The loan will mature oning the year on any one mortgage, you generallydistributed loan proceeds to other expenditures January 1, 2012 (a 10-year term), and thewill receive a Form 1098 or a similar statement.it makes during the tax year of the distribution. $100,000 principal is payable on that date. Inter-You will receive the statement if you pay interestThis allocation is limited to the difference be- est of $10,000 is payable on January 1 of eachto a person (including a financial institution or atween the other expenditures and any loan pro- year, beginning January 1, 2003. The $1,500cooperative housing corporation) in the courseceeds already allocated to them. For any
OID on the loan is de minimis because it is lessof that person’s trade or business. A govern-distributed loan proceeds that are more than the
than $2,500 ($100,000 × .0025 × 10). Youmental unit is a person for purposes of furnishingamount allocated to the other expenditures, the
the statement. choose to deduct the OID on a straight-line basisrules in the previous paragraph apply.
If you receive a refund of interest you over-over the term of the loan. Beginning in 2002, youHow to report.If the entity does not use thepaid in an earlier year, this amount will be re-can deduct $150 each year for 10 years.optional allocation method, it reports the interestported in box 3 of Form 1098. You cannot
expense on the loan proceeds on the line on Constant-yield method.If the OID is not dededuct this amount. For information on how to
Schedule K–1 (Form 1065 or Form 1120S) for minimis, you must use the constant-yieldreport this refund, see Refunds of interest later
“Other deductions.” The expense is identified on method to figure how much you can deduct eachin this chapter.
an attached schedule as “Interest expense allo- year. You figure your deduction for the first yearExpenses paid to obtain a mortgage.cated to debt-financed distributions.” The part- using the following steps.Certain expenses you pay to obtain a mortgagener or shareholder claims the interest expense
cannot be deducted as interest. These ex-depending on how the distribution was used. 1) Determine the issue price of the loan.penses, which include mortgage commissions,If the entity uses the optional allocation Generally, this equals the proceeds of theabstract fees, and recording fees, are capitalmethod, it reports the interest expense on the loan. If you paid points on the loan (asexpenses. If the property mortgaged is businessloan proceeds allocated to other expenditures discussed later), the issue price generallyor income-producing property, you can amortizeon the appropriate line or lines of Schedule K–1. is the difference between the proceedsthe costs over the life of the mortgage.For example, if the entity chooses to allocate the
and the points.loan proceeds and related interest to a rentalPrepayment penalty. If you pay off your
activity expenditure, the entity takes the interest 2) Multiply the result in (1) by the yield tomortgage early and pay the lender a penalty for
into account in figuring the net rental income ordoing this, you can deduct the penalty as inter-maturity.
loss reported on Schedule K–1. est. 3) Subtract any qualified stated interest pay-
ments from the result in (2). This is theMore information. For more information onInterest on employment tax deficiency.In-
OID you can deduct in the first year.allocating and reporting these interest ex-terest charged on employment taxes assessed
penses, see Notice 88–37 in Cumulative Bulle-on your business is deductible. To figure your deduction in any subsequenttin 1988–1. Also see Notice 89–35 in year, follow the above steps, except determineCumulative Bulletin 1989–1. Original issue discount (OID).OID is a form the adjusted issue price in step (1). To get theof interest. A loan (mortgage or other debt) gen-adjusted issue price, add to the issue price anyerally has OID when its proceeds are less than
OID previously deducted. Then follow steps (2)its principal amount. The OID is the difference
and (3) above.between the stated redemption price at maturityInterest You
and the issue price of the loan. The yield to maturity is generally shown in
 A loan’s stated redemption price at matur-Can Deduct the literature you receive from your lender. If you
ity is the sum of all amounts (principal anddo not have this information, consult your lender
interest) payable on it other than qualified statedYou can generally deduct all interest you pay or or tax advisor. In general, the yield to maturity isinterest. Qualified stated interest is stated in-accrue during the tax year on debts related to the discount rate that, when used in computingterest that is unconditionally payable in cash oryour trade or business. Interest relates to your the present value of all principal and interestproperty (other than another loan of the issuer)trade or business if you use the proceeds of the payments, produces an amount equal to theat least annually over the term of the loan at aloan for a trade or business expense. It does not principal amount of the loan.single fixed rate.matter what type of property secures the loan.
You generally deduct OID over the term ofYou can deduct interest on a debt only if you Example. The facts are the same as in thethe loan. Figure the amount to deduct each yearmeet all the following requirements. previous example, except that you deduct theusing the constant-yield method, unless the• You are legally liable for that debt. OID on a constant yield basis over the term ofOID on the loan is de minimis.
the loan. The yield to maturity on your loan is• Both you and the lender intend that theDe minimis OID. The OID is de minimis if it10.2467%, compounded annually. For 2002,debt be repaid. is less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025) of theyou can deduct $93 [($98,500 × .102467) −stated redemption price of the loan at maturity• You and the lender have a true $10,000]. For 2003, you can deduct $103multiplied by the number of full years from thedebtor-creditor relationship. [($98,593 × .102467) − $10,000].date of original issue to maturity (the term of the
loan). Loan or mortgage ends. If your loan orPartial liability.If you are liable for part of aIf the OID is de minimis, you can choose onemortgage ends, you may be able to deduct anybusiness debt, you can deduct only your shareof the following ways to figure the amount youremaining OID in the tax year in which the loanof the total interest paid or accrued. can deduct each year. or mortgage ends. A loan or mortgage may end
due to a refinancing, prepayment, foreclosure,Example. You and your brother borrow • On a constant-yield basis over the term of
money. You are liable for 50% of the note. You the loan. or similar event.
Page 20 Chapter 5 Interest

Page 21 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you refinance with the original lender,Capitalized interest.You cannot deduct in-
you generally cannot deduct the re-terest you are required to capitalize under theCapitalizationmaining OID in the year in which theuniform capitalization rules. See CapitalizationCAUTION
!
refinancing occurs, but you may be able to de- of Interest, later. In addition, if you buy propertyof Interestduct it over the term of the new mortgage orand pay interest owed by the seller (for example,
loan. See Interest paid with funds borrowed from by assuming the debt and any interest accruedUnder the uniform capitalization rules, you gen-
original lender under Interest You Cannot De- on the property), you cannot deduct the interest.erally must capitalize interest on debt equal toduct, later. Add this interest to the basis of the property.your expenditures to produce real property or
certain tangible personal property. The propertyCommitment fees or standby charges.
Points. The term “points” is often used to de- must be produced by you for use in your trade orFees you incur to have business funds available
scribe some of the charges paid by a borrower business or for sale to customers. You cannoton a standby basis, but not for the actual use of
when the borrower takes out a loan or a mort- capitalize interest related to property that youthe funds, are not deductible as interest pay-
gage. These charges are also called loan origi- acquire in any other manner.ments. You may be able to deduct them as
nation fees, maximum loan charges, or premiumbusiness expenses. Interest you paid or incurred during the pro-
charges. If any of these charges (points) areIf the funds are for inventory or certain prop-duction period must be capitalized if the propertysolely for the use of money, they are interest.erty used in your business, the fees are indirectproduced is designated property. DesignatedBecause points are prepaid interest, youcosts and you generally must capitalize themproperty is any of the following.cannot deduct the full amount in the year paid.under the uniform capitalization rules. See Capi-
(For an exception for points paid on your home • Real property.talization of Interest, later.
mortgage, see Publication 936.) Instead, the • Tangible personal property with a class lifeInterest on income tax.Interest charged onpoints reduce the issue price of the loan and of 20 years or more.income tax assessed on your individual incomeresult in original issue discount, deductible as
tax return is not a business deduction evenexplained in the preceding discussion. • Tangible personal property with an esti-
though the tax due is related to income frommated production period of more than 2your trade or business. Treat this interest as aPartial payments on a nontax debt.If you years.business deduction only in figuring a net operat-make partial payments on a debt (other than a
• Tangible personal property with an esti-ing loss deduction.debt owed the IRS), the payments are applied,
mated production period of more than 1in general, first to interest and any remainder toPenalties.Penalties on underpaid deficien-year if the estimated cost of production isprincipal. You can deduct only the interest. Thiscies and underpaid estimated tax are not inter-more than $1 million.rule does not apply when it can be inferred thatest. You cannot deduct them. Generally, youthe borrower and lender understood that a differ-cannot deduct any fines or penalties.ent allocation of the payments would be made. Property you produce.You produce propertyInterest on loans with respect to life insur-if you construct, build, install, manufacture, de-Installment purchase.If you make an install-ance policies.You generally cannot deductvelop, improve, create, raise, or grow it. Treatment purchase of business property, the con- interest on a debt incurred with respect to anyproperty produced for you under a contract astract between you and the seller generallylife insurance, annuity, or endowment contractproduced by you up to the amount you pay orprovides for the payment of interest. If no inter- that covers any individual unless that individualincur for the property.est or a low rate of interest is charged under the is a key person.
contract, a portion of the stated principal amount If the policy or contract covers a key person,Capitalized interest.Treat capitalized inter-payable under the contract may be recharacter- you can deduct the interest on up to $50,000 ofest as a cost of the property produced. Youized as interest (unstated interest). The amount debt for that person. However, the deduction for
recover your interest when you sell or use therecharacterized as interest reduces your basis any month cannot be more than the interest
property. If the property is inventory, recoverin the property and increases your interest ex- figured using Moody’s Corporate Bond Yield
capitalized interest through cost of goods sold. Ifpense. For more information on installment Average-Monthly Average Corporates (Moody’s
the property is used in your trade or business,sales and unstated interest, see Publication rate) for that month.
recover capitalized interest through an adjust-537. Who is a key person? A key person is anment to basis, depreciation, amortization, orofficer or 20% owner. However, the number ofother method.individuals you can treat as key persons is lim-
ited to the greater of the following. Partnerships and S corporations.The inter-Interest You
• Five individuals. est capitalization rules are applied first at the
Cannot Deduct partnership or S corporation level. The rules are• The lesser of 5% of the total officers andthen applied at the partners’ or shareholders’employees of the company or 20 individu-Certain interest payments cannot be deducted. level to the extent the partnership or S corpora-als.In addition, certain other expenses that may tion has insufficient debt to support the produc-
seem to be interest are not, and you cannot tion or construction costs.Exceptions for pre-June 1997, contracts.deduct them as interest. If you are a partner or a shareholder, youYou can generally deduct the interest if the con-You cannot currently deduct interest that may have to capitalize interest you incur duringtract was issued before June 9, 1997, and themust be capitalized, and you generally cannot the tax year for the production costs of the part-covered individual is someone other than andeduct personal interest. employee, officer, or someone financially inter-nership or S corporation. You may also have to
ested in your business. If the contract was pur-capitalize interest incurred by the partnership orInterest paid with funds borrowed from origi-chased before June 21, 1986, you can generallyS corporation for your own production costs. Tonal lender. If you use the cash method ofdeduct the interest no matter who is covered byproperly capitalize interest under these rules,accounting, you cannot deduct interest you paythe contract. you must be given the required information in anwith funds borrowed from the original lender
attachment to the Schedule K-1 you receivethrough a second loan, an advance, or any otherInterest allocated to unborrowed policy
from the partnership or S corporation.arrangement similar to a loan. You can deductcash value. Corporations and partnerships
the interest expense once you start making pay- generally cannot deduct any interest expense
Additional information.The procedures forments on the new loan. allocable to unborrowed cash values of life in-
applying the uniform capitalization rules are be-When you make a payment on the new loan, surance, annuity, or endowment contracts. This
yond the scope of this publication. For moreyou first apply the payment to interest and then rule applies to contracts issued after June 8,
information, see sections 1.263A–8 throughto the principal. All amounts you apply to the 1997, that cover someone other than an officer,
1.263A–15 of the regulations and Noticeinterest on the first loan are deductible, along director, employee, or 20% owner. For more
88–99. Notice 88–99 is in Cumulative Bulletinwith any interest you pay on the second loan, information, see section 264(f) of the Internal
1988–2.subject to any limits that apply. Revenue Code.
Chapter 5 Interest Page 21

Page 22 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
lender as interest. These transfers are consid-
ered to occur annually, generally on DecemberBelow-Market LoansWhen To 31. If you use the loan proceeds in your trade or
business, you can deduct the forgone interestIf you receive a below-market gift or demandDeduct Interest each year as a business interest expense. Theloan and use the proceeds in your trade or
lender must report it as interest income.business, you may be able to deduct the forgoneIf the uniform capitalization rules, discussed
interest. See Treatment of gift and demand Limit on forgone interest for gift loans ofunder Capitalization of Interest, earlier, do not
loans later in this discussion. $100,000 or less.For gift loans between indi-apply to you, deduct interest as follows.
A below-market loan is a loan on which noviduals, forgone interest treated as transferred
interest is charged or on which interest isback to the lender is limited to the borrower’s netCash method. Under the cash method, you charged at a rate below the applicable federalinvestment income for the year. This limit ap-can generally deduct only the interest you actu-rate. A gift or demand loan that is a below-mar-plies if the outstanding loans between the lender
ally paid during the tax year. You cannot deductket loan generally is considered an arm’s-lengthand borrower total $100,000 or less. If the
a promissory note you gave as payment be-transaction in which you, the borrower, are con-borrower’s net investment income is $1,000 or
cause it is a promise to pay and not an actualsidered as having received both the following.less, it is treated as zero. This limit does not
payment. apply to a loan if the avoidance of any federal tax• A loan in exchange for a note that requires
is one of the main purposes of the interest ar-the payment of interest at the applicablePrepaid interest.You generally cannot de- rangement.federal rate.duct any interest paid before the year it is due.
Interest paid in advance can be deducted only in• An additional payment. Treatment of term loans.If you receive athe tax year in which it is due. below-market term loan other than a gift or de-The additional payment is treated as a gift, divi-Discounted loan.If interest or a discount is mand loan, you are treated as receiving an addi-dend, contribution to capital, payment of com-
subtracted from your loan proceeds, it is not a tional cash payment (as a dividend, etc.) on thepensation, or other payment, depending on the
payment of interest and you cannot deduct it date the loan is made. This payment is equal tosubstance of the transaction.
when you get the loan. For more information, the loan amount minus the present value, at the
For any period, forgone interest  is:see Original issue discount (OID) under Interest applicable federal rate, of all payments due
under the loan. The same amount is treated asYou Can Deduct, earlier. 1) The interest that would be payable for thatoriginal issue discount on the loan. See Originalperiod if interest accrued on the loan at theRefunds of interest.If you pay interest and issue discount (OID) under Interest You Canapplicable federal rate and was payablethen receive a refund in the same tax year of any Deduct, earlier.annually on December 31,part of the interest, reduce your interest deduc-
minustion by the refund. If you receive the refund in a Exceptions for loans of $10,000 or less.Thelater tax year, include the refund in your income2) Any interest actually payable on the loanrules for below-market loans do not apply toto the extent the deduction for the interest re-for the period. certain loans on days on which the total out-duced your tax. standing loans between the borrower and lender
Applicable federal rates are publishedis $10,000 or less. This exception applies only to
by the IRS each month in the Internalthe following.Accrual method. Under an accrual method,
Revenue Bulletin. Internal Revenue
TIP
you can deduct only interest that has accrued
Bulletins are available on the IRS web site at1) Gift loans between individuals if the loan isduring the tax year. www.irs.gov. You can also contact an IRS of- not directly used to buy or carry
Prepaid interest.You generally cannot de-fice to get these rates. income-producing assets.
duct any interest paid before it is due. Instead,
2) Compensation-related loans ordeduct it in the year in which it is due.Loans subject to the rules.The rules for corporation-shareholder loans if the avoid-
Discounted loan.If interest or a discount is below-market loans apply to the following.ance of any federal tax is not a principal
subtracted from your loan proceeds, it is not a purpose of the interest arrangement.1) Gift loans (below-market loans where thepayment of interest and you cannot deduct it This exception does not apply to a term loanforgone interest is in the nature of a gift).when you get the loan. For more information, described in (2) above that was previously sub-see Original issue discount (OID) under Interest 2) Compensation-related loans (below-mar-ject to the below-market loan rules. Those rulesYou Can Deduct, earlier. ket loans between an employer and an will continue to apply even if the outstandingemployee or between an independent con-Tax deficiency.If you contest a federal in- balance is reduced to $10,000 or less.tractor and a person for whom the contrac-come tax deficiency, interest does not accruetor provides services).until the tax year the final determination of liabil- Exceptions for loans without significant tax
effect.The following loans are specifically ex-ity is made. If you do not contest the deficiency, 3) Corporation-shareholder loans.
empted from the rules for below-market loansthen the interest accrues in the year the tax was4) Tax avoidance loans (below-market loansbecause their interest arrangements do notasserted and agreed to by you. where the avoidance of federal tax is onehave a significant effect on the federal tax liabil-However, if you contest but pay the pro- of the main purposes of the interest ar-ity of the borrower or the lender.posed tax deficiency and interest, and you dorangement).
not designate the payment as a cash bond, then 1) Loans made available by lenders to the5) Loans to qualified continuing care facilitiesthe interest is deductible in the year paid. general public on the same terms and con-under a continuing care contract (made af-
ditions that are consistent with the lender’sRelated person. If you use an accrual ter October 11, 1985).
customary business practices.method, you cannot deduct interest owed to aExcept as noted in (5) above, these rulesrelated person who uses the cash method until 2) Loans subsidized by a federal, state, orapply to demand loans (loans payable in full atpayment is made and the interest is includible in municipal government that are made avail-any time upon the lender’s demand) outstandingthe gross income of that person. The relation- able under a program of general applica-after June 6, 1984, and to term loans (loans thatship is determined as of the end of the tax year tion to the public.are not demand loans) made after that date.
for which the interest would otherwise be de-
3) Certain employee-relocation loans.ductible. If a deduction is denied under this rule,Treatment of gift and demand loans.If you
the rule will continue to apply even if your rela- 4) Certain loans to or from a foreign person,receive a below-market gift loan or demand
tionship with the person ceases to exist before unless the interest income would be effec-loan, you are treated as receiving an additional
the interest is includible in the gross income of tively connected with the conduct of a U.S.payment (as a gift, dividend, etc.) equal to the
that person. See Related Persons in Publication trade or business and not exempt fromforgone interest on the loan. You are then
538. U.S. tax under an income tax treaty.treated as transferring this amount back to the
Page 22 Chapter 5 Interest

Page 23 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
5) Any other loan if the taxpayer can show you to apply the below-market interest rate rules
that the interest arrangement has no sig- to these loans. See Unstated Interest and Origi-When To
nificant effect on the federal tax liability ofnal Issue Discount in Publication 537.
the lender or the borrower. Whether an Deduct TaxesMore information. For more information oninterest arrangement has a significant ef-below-market loans, see section 7872 of thefect on the federal tax liability of the lender Generally, you can only deduct taxes in the yearInternal Revenue Code and section 1.7872–5Tor the borrower will be determined by all you pay them. This applies whether you use theof the regulations.the facts and circumstances. Consider all cash method or an accrual method of account-
the following factors. ing.
Under an accrual method, you can deduct aa) Whether items of income and deduction tax before you pay it if you meet the exceptiongenerated by the loan offset each for recurring items discussed under Economicother. Performance in Publication 538. You can also
choose to ratably accrue real estate taxes asb) The amount of the items. 6.
discussed later under Real Estate Taxes.c) The cost of complying with the
below-market loan provisions if they Limit on accrual of taxes.A taxing jurisdic-
were to apply. tion can require the use of a date for accruingTaxes
taxes that is earlier than the date it originallyd) Any reasons, other than taxes, for required. However, if you use an accrualstructuring the transaction as a method, and can deduct the tax before you paybelow-market loan. Introduction it, use the original accrual date for the year of
change and all future years to determine whenYou can deduct various federal, state, local, and
Exception for certain loans to a qualified you can deduct the tax.foreign taxes directly attributable to your trade or
continuing care facility.The below-market business as business expenses.
Example. Your state imposes a tax on per-interest rules do not apply to a loan made to a
You cannot deduct federal income sonal property used in a trade or business con-qualified continuing care facility under a continu-
taxes, estate and gift taxes, or stateducted in the state. This tax is assessed anding care contract if the lender (or lender’s
inheritance, legacy, and successionbecomes a lien as of July 1 (accrual date). Inspouse) is age 65 or older by the end of the
CAUTION
!
taxes. 2002, the state changed the assessment andcalendar year. For 2002, this exception applies
lien dates from July 1, 2003, to December 31,only to the part of the total outstanding loans
2002, for property tax year 2003. Use the origi-from the lender (or lender’s spouse) that doesTopics nal accrual date (July 1, 2003) to determinenot exceed $148,800. This chapter discusses: when you can deduct the tax. You must also useA qualified continuing care facility is one
the July 1 accrual date for all future years toor more facilities that are designed to provide• When to deduct taxes determine when you can deduct the tax.services under continuing care contracts and
• Real estate taxeswhere substantially all the residents have en- Uniform capitalization rules.Uniform capi-tered into continuing care contracts. In addition,• Income taxes talization rules apply to certain taxpayers whosubstantially all the facilities used to provide produce real property or tangible personal prop-• Employment taxesservices required under the continuing care con- erty for use in a trade or business or for sale totract must be owned or operated by the loan• Other taxes customers. They also apply to taxpayers whoborrower. acquire property for resale. Under these rules,A continuing care contract is a written con- you may have to either include certain costs inUseful Itemstract between an individual and a qualified con- inventory or capitalize certain expenses relatedYou may want to see:tinuing care facility that meets all the following to the property, such as taxes. For more infor-conditions. mation, see Publication 551.Publication
1) The individual and/or the individual’s Carrying charges. Carrying charges include❏ 15 Circular E, Employer’s Tax Guidespouse must be entitled to use the facility taxes you pay to carry or develop real estate orfor the rest of their life or lives. ❏ 378 Fuel Tax Credits and Refunds to carry, transport, or install personal property.
2) The residential use must begin in a sepa- You can choose to capitalize carrying charges❏ 533 Self-Employment Taxrate, independent living unit provided by not subject to the uniform capitalization rules if
❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methodsthe continuing care facility and continue they are otherwise deductible. For more infor-
until the individual (or individual’s spouse) mation, see chapter 8.❏ 551 Basis of Assetsis incapable of living independently. The
Refunds of taxes.If you receive a refund forfacility must provide various “personalForm (and Instructions) any taxes you deducted in an earlier year, in-care” services to the resident such as
clude the refund in income to the extent themaintenance of the residential unit, meals,❏ Sch A (Form 1040)Itemized Deductions deduction reduced your federal income tax inand daily aid and supervision relating to❏ Sch SE (Form 1040)Self-Employment the earlier year. For more information, see Re-routine medical needs. Tax covery of amount deducted in chapter 1.
3) The facility must be obligated to provide❏ 3115 Application for Change in You must include in income any inter-long-term nursing care if the resident is no Accounting Method est you receive on tax refunds.longer capable of living independently. TIP
4) The contract must require the facility toSee chapter 14 for information about getting
provide the “personal services” and publications and forms.
“long-term nursing care” without substan-
tial additional cost to the individual.
Real Estate Taxes
Sale or exchange of property.Different rules
generally apply to a loan connected with the sale Deductible real estate taxes are any state, local,
or exchange of property. If the loan does not or foreign taxes on real estate levied for the
provide adequate stated interest, part of the general public welfare. The taxing authority
principal payment may be considered interest. must base the taxes on the assessed value of
However, there are exceptions that may require the real estate and charge them uniformly
Chapter 6 Taxes Page 23

Page 24 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
against all property under its jurisdiction. De- He has not chosen to ratably accrue property
ductible real estate taxes generally do not in-taxes. November 30 of each year is the assess-Income Taxes
clude taxes charged for local benefits andment and lien date for the current real property
improvements that increase the value of the This section discusses federal, state, local, andtax year, which is the calendar year. He sold the
property. See Taxes for local benefits, later. foreign income taxes.property on June 30, 2002. Under his account-If you use an accrual method, you generallying method he would not be able to claim aFederal income taxes. You cannot deductcannot accrue real estate taxes until you paydeduction for the taxes because the sale oc-federal income taxes.them to the government authority. You can,curred before November 30. He is treated ashowever, choose to ratably accrue the taxes
State and local income taxes.A corporationhaving accrued his part of the tax, 180/365  (Janu-during the year. See Choosing to ratably accrue,
or partnership can deduct state income taxesary 1–June 29), on June 30 and he can deduct itlater.
imposed on the corporation or partnership asfor 2002.
Taxes for local benefits.Generally, you can- business expenses. An individual can deduct
not deduct taxes charged for local benefits and state income taxes only as an itemized deduc-
Choosing to ratably accrue.If you use animprovements that tend to increase the value of tion on Schedule A (Form 1040).
accrual method, you can choose to accrue realyour property. These include assessments for However, an individual can deduct a state
estate tax related to a definite period ratablystreets, sidewalks, water mains, sewer lines, tax on gross income (as distinguished from net
and public parking facilities. You should in- income) directly attributable to a trade or busi-over that period.
crease the basis of your property by the amount ness as a business expense.
Example. John Smith is a calendar yearof the assessment. Accrual of contested income taxes.If youYou can deduct taxes for these local benefitstaxpayer who uses an accrual method. His realuse an accrual method, can deduct taxes beforeonly if the taxes are for maintenance, repairs, orestate taxes for the real property tax year, July 1,you pay them, and contest a state or local in-interest charges related to those benefits. If part 2002, to June 30, 2003, are $1,200. July 1 is thecome tax liability, a special rule applies. Underof the tax is for maintenance, repairs, or interest,assessment and lien date. this special rule, you must accrue and deductyou must be able to show how much of the tax is any contested amount in the tax year in whichIf John chooses to ratably accrue the taxes,for these expenses to claim a deduction for that the liability is finally determined.$600 will accrue in 2002 ($1,200 × 6/12, Julypart of the tax. Filing a tax return is not considered con-1–December 31) and the balance will accrue intesting a liability. If you do not make an objectiveExample. X City, to improve downtown 2003. act of protest or show some affirmative evidencecommercial business, converted a downtown Separate choices.You can choose to rata-of denial of the liability, you can deduct anybusiness area street into an enclosed pedes- additional state or local income taxes found tobly accrue the taxes for each separate trade ortrian mall. The city assessed the full cost of be due for a prior year in the year for which theybusiness and for nonbusiness activities if youconstruction, financed with 10-year bonds, were originally imposed. You cannot deductaccount for them separately. Once you chooseagainst the affected properties. The city is pay- them in the year in which the liability is finallyto ratably accrue real estate taxes, you must useing the principal and interest with the annual determined.that method unless you get permission from thepayments made by the property owners.
The assessments for construction costs areIRS to change. See Changing, later. Foreign income taxes. Generally, you can
not deductible as taxes or as business ex- take either a deduction or a credit for incomeMaking the choice.If you choose to ratablypenses, but are depreciable capital expenses. taxes imposed on you by a foreign country or aaccrue the taxes for the first year in which youThe part of the payments used to pay the inter- U.S. possession. However, an individual cannotincur real estate taxes, attach a statement toest charges on the bonds is deductible as taxes. take a deduction or credit for foreign incomeyour income tax return for that year. The state-taxes paid on income that is exempt from U.S.Charges for services.Water bills, sewerage,ment should show all the following items.tax under the foreign earned income exclusionand other service charges assessed against or the foreign housing exclusion. For informationyour business property are not real estate taxes,• The trades or businesses to which theon these exclusions, see Publication 54, Taxbut are deductible as business expenses. choice applies and the accounting methodGuide for U.S. Citizens and Resident Aliensor methods used. Abroad. For information on the foreign tax credit,Purchase or sale of real estate.If real estate
see Publication 514, Foreign Tax Credit for Indi-is sold, the real estate taxes must be divided• The period to which the taxes relate.
viduals.between the buyer and the seller. • The computation of the real estate tax de-The buyer and seller must divide the real duction for that first year.estate taxes according to the number of days in
the real property tax year (the period to which Generally, you must file your return by the duethe tax imposed relates) that each owned the Employment Taxesdate (including extensions). However, if youproperty. Treat the seller as paying the taxes up
timely filed your return for the year withoutto but not including the date of sale. Treat the If you have employees, you must withhold vari-
choosing to ratably accrue, you can still makebuyer as paying the taxes beginning with the ous taxes from your employees’ pay. Most em-
the choice by filing an amended return within 6date of sale. You can usually find this informa- ployers must withhold their employees’ share of
tion on the settlement statement you received at months after the due date of the return (exclud- social security and Medicare taxes along with
closing. state and federal income taxes. You may alsoing extensions). Attach the statement to the
If you (the seller) cannot deduct taxes until need to pay certain employment taxes from youramended return and write “Filed pursuant to
they are paid because you use the cash method own funds. These include your share of socialsection 301.9100–2” on the statement. File the
and the buyer of your property is personally security and Medicare taxes as an employer,amended return at the same address you filedliable for the tax, you are considered to have along with unemployment taxes.the original return.paid your part of the tax at the time of the sale. You should treat the taxes you withhold from
If you choose to ratably accrue for a yearThis lets you deduct the part of the tax up to the your employees’ pay as wages on your tax re-
after the first year in which you incur real estatedate of sale even though you did not pay it. You turn. You can deduct the employment taxes you
taxes, file Form 3115. Generally, you must filemust also include the amount of that tax in the must pay from your own funds as taxes.
selling price of the property. this form during the tax year for which the choice
Example. You pay your employee $18,000If you (the seller) use an accrual method andis to be effective. For more information, see the
a year. However, after you withhold varioushave not chosen to ratably accrue real estateinstructions for Form 3115.
taxes, your employee receives $14,500. Youtaxes, you are considered to have accrued yourChanging. To change your choice to rata-also pay an additional $1,500 in employmentpart of the tax on the date you sell the property.
bly accrue real estate taxes, file Form 3115taxes. You should deduct the full $18,000 as
during the tax year for which the change isExample. Al Green, a calendar year accrual wages. You can deduct the $1,500 you pay from
requested.method taxpayer, owns real estate in X County. your own funds as taxes.
Page 24 Chapter 6 Taxes

Page 25 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
For more information on employment taxes, ❏ 547 Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
see Publication 15.
Form (and Instructions)
7.Unemployment fund taxes. As an employer,
❏ 1040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Returnyou may have to make payments to a state
unemployment compensation fund or to a state
See chapter 14 for information about gettingdisability benefit fund. Deduct these paymentsInsurance publications and forms.as taxes.
Important Changes Deductible PremiumsOther Taxes for 2002
You generally can deduct premiums you pay forThe following are other taxes you can deduct if the following kinds of insurance related to youryou incur them in the ordinary course of yourSelf-employed health insurance deduction.trade or business. trade or business. For 2002, the self-employed health insurance
deduction percentage increases to 70%. See1) Fire, theft, flood, or similar insurance.Excise taxes.You can deduct as a businessSelf-Employed Health Insurance Deduction.
expense all excise taxes that are ordinary and 2) Credit insurance that covers losses from
New health insurance credit for eligiblenecessary expenses of carrying on your trade or business bad debts.
recipients.You may be able to take this newbusiness. However, see Fuel taxes, later. 3) Group hospitalization and medical insur-credit only if you were an eligible trade adjust-ance for employees, including long-termment assistance (TAA), alternative TAA, or Pen-Franchise taxes.You can deduct corporate care insurance.sion Benefit Guaranty Corporation pensionfranchise taxes as a business expense.
recipient. By February 18, 2003, Form 8887, a) If a partnership pays accident andFuel taxes. Taxes on gasoline, diesel fuel,Health Insurance Credit Eligibility Certificate,health insurance premiums for its part-and other motor fuels that you use in your busi-showing that you were an eligible recipient ners, it generally can deduct them asness are usually included as part of the cost ofshould be sent to you. Use Form 8885,Health guaranteed payments to partners.the fuel. Do not deduct these taxes as a sepa-Insurance Credit for Eligible Recipients, to figure
b) If an S corporation pays accident andrate item. the amount, if any, of your health insurance
health insurance premiums for its 2%credit.You may be entitled to a credit or refund for
shareholder-employees, it generallyfederal excise tax you paid on fuels used for
can deduct them, but must also includecertain purposes. For more information, see
them in the shareholder’s wages sub-Publication 378.
ject to federal income tax withholding.Important Change See Publication 15–B.Occupational taxes. You can deduct as a
business expense an occupational tax chargedfor 2003
4) Liability insurance.at a flat rate by a locality for the privilege of
working or conducting a business in the locality.Self-employed health insurance deduction. 5) Malpractice insurance that covers your
For 2003, the self-employed health insurancepersonal liability for professional negli-Personal property tax.You can deduct any deduction percentage increases to 100%. See gence resulting in injury or damage to pa-tax imposed by a state or local government onSelf-Employed Health Insurance Deduction. tients or clients.personal property used in your trade or busi-
6) Workers’ compensation insurance set byness.
state law that covers any claims for bodily
Sales tax. Treat any sales tax you pay on a injuries or job-related diseases suffered by
Introductionservice or on the purchase or use of property as employees in your business, regardless of
part of the cost of the service or property. If the fault.You generally can deduct the ordinary and nec-
service or the cost or use of the property is aessary cost of insurance as a business expensea) If a partnership pays workers’ compen-deductible business expense, you can deductif it is for your trade, business, or profession.sation premiums for its partners, it gen-the tax as part of that service or cost. If theHowever, you may have to capitalize certain erally can deduct them as guaranteedproperty is merchandise bought for resale, theinsurance costs under the uniform capitalizationpayments to partners.sales tax is part of the cost of the merchandise. Ifrules. For more information, see Capitalized
the property is depreciable, add the sales tax toPremiums, later. b) If an S corporation pays workers’ com-
the basis for depreciation. For more information pensation premiums for its 2%
on basis, see Publication 551. shareholder-employees, it generallyTopics
can deduct them, but must also includeThis chapter discusses:Do not deduct state and local sales
them in the shareholder’s wages.taxes imposed on the buyer that you
• Deductible premiumsmust collect and pay over to the stateCAUTION
!
7) Contributions to a state unemployment in-or local government. Do not include these taxes• Nondeductible premiums surance fund are deductible as taxes ifin gross receipts or sales.
they are considered taxes under state law.• Capitalized premiums
8) Overhead insurance that pays for businessSelf-employment tax. You can deduct • When to deduct premiums
overhead expenses you have during longone-half of your self-employment tax as a busi-
periods of disability caused by your injuryness expense in figuring your adjusted grossUseful Items or sickness.income. This deduction only affects your incomeYou may want to see:tax. It does not affect your net earnings from 9) Car and other vehicle insurance that cov-self-employment or your self-employment tax. ers vehicles used in your business for lia-PublicationTo deduct the tax, enter on Form 1040, line bility, damages, and other losses. If you
29, the amount shown on the “Deduction for operate a vehicle partly for personal use,❏ 15–B Employer’s Tax Guide to Fringe
one-half of self-employment tax” line of Sched- deduct only the part of the insurance pre-Benefits
ule SE (Form 1040). mium that applies to the business use of❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable IncomeFor more information on self-employment the vehicle. If you use the standard mile-
tax, see Publication 533. ❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methods age rate to figure your car expenses, you
Chapter 7 Insurance Page 25

Page 26 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
cannot deduct any car insurance premi- may be used only to reduce future premi-• You had more than one source of incomeums. ums or increase future benefits. subject to self-employment tax.
10) Life insurance covering your officers and• It must not provide for a cash surrender• You file Form 2555 or Form 2555–EZ (re-employees if you are not directly or indi- value or other money that can be paid,lating to foreign earned income).rectly a beneficiary under the contract. assigned, pledged, or borrowed.
• You are using amounts paid for qualified11) Business interruption insurance that pays• It generally must not pay or reimburse ex-long-term care insurance to figure the de-for lost profits if your business is shut penses incurred for services or items thatduction.down due to a fire or other cause. would be reimbursed under Medicare, ex-
cept where Medicare is a secondary payerIf you are claiming the new health insurance
or the contract makes per diem or othercredit for eligible recipients (discussed at the
Self-Employed Health periodic payments without regard to ex-beginning of this chapter), complete Form 8885
penses.Insurance Deduction before you figure this deduction.
More than one health plan and business.You may be able to deduct 70% of the amountQualified long-term care services.Quali- If you have more than one health plan during thepaid in 2002 for medical and dental insurancefied long-term care services are: year and each plan is established under a differ-and qualified long-term care insurance for you,• Necessary diagnostic, preventive, thera-ent business, you must use separate work-your spouse, and your dependents if you are peutic, curing, treating, mitigating, and re-sheets (Worksheet 7–A) to figure each plan’sone of the following. habilitative services, and net earnings limit. Include the premium you paid
• A self-employed individual with a net profit under each plan on line 1 or line 2 of that sepa-• Maintenance or personal care services.reported on Schedule C, C–EZ, or F. rate worksheet and your net profit (or wages)
The services must be required by a chronically illfrom that business on line 6 (or line 13). For a• A partner with net earnings from self-em-individual and prescribed by a licensed healthplan that provides long-term care insurance, theployment reported on line 15a of Schedulecare practitioner. total of the amounts entered for each person onK–1 (Form 1065).
line 2 of all worksheets cannot be more than theChronically ill individual.A chronically ill• A shareholder owning more than 2% of appropriate limit shown on line 2 for that person.individual is a person who has been certified asthe outstanding stock of an S corporationone of the following.with wages from the corporation reported
on Form W–2. • An individual who has been unable, due to
loss of functional capacity for at least 90The insurance plan must be established under Nondeductibledays, to perform at least two activities ofyour business. You may be allowed this deduc-daily living without substantial assistancePremiumstion whether you paid the premiums yourself orfrom another individual. Activities of dailyyour partnership or S corporation paid them andliving are eating, toileting, transferringYou cannot deduct premiums on the followingyou included the premium amounts in your (general mobility), bathing, dressing, andkinds of insurance.gross income. Take the deduction on line 30 ofcontinence.Form 1040.
1) Self-insurance reserve funds.  You can-• An individual who requires substantial su-not deduct amounts credited to a reserveDeductible percentage increases after 2002. pervision to be protected from threats to
set up for self-insurance. This applies evenFor tax years beginning after 2002, the deducti-health and safety due to severe cognitive
if you cannot get business insurance cov-ble percentage of health insurance premiums impairment.
erage for certain business risks. However,increases to 100%.
The certification must have been made by a your actual losses may be deductible. See
licensed health care practitioner within the previ-Qualified long-term care insurance.You Publication 547.
ous 12 months.can include premiums paid on a qualified 2) Loss of earnings. You cannot deduct pre-long-term care insurance contract for you, yourBenefits received.For information on ex- miums for a policy that pays for lost earn-spouse, or your dependents when figuring yourcluding benefits you receive from a long-termings due to sickness or disability.deduction. But, for each person covered, youcare contract from gross income, see Publica-However, see the discussion on overheadcan include only the smaller of the followingtion 525. insurance, item (8), under Deductible Pre-amounts. miums, earlier.Other coverage. You cannot take the deduc-
1) The amount paid for that person. tion for any month you were eligible to partici-3) Certain life insurance and annuities. 
pate in any employer (including your spouse’s)2) The amount shown below. (Use the a) For contracts issued before June 9,subsidized health plan at any time during thatperson’s age at the end of the year.) 1997, you cannot deduct the premiumsmonth. This rule is applied separately to plans
that provide long-term care insurance and plans on a life insurance policy covering you,a) Age 40 or younger–$240
that do not provide long-term care insurance. an employee, or any person with a fi-b) Age 41 to 50–$450 However, any medical insurance payments not nancial interest in your business if you
deductible on line 30 of Form 1040 can be in- are directly or indirectly a beneficiary ofc) Age 51 to 60–$900
cluded as medical expenses on Schedule A the policy. You are included amongd) Age 61 to 70–$2,390 (Form 1040) if you itemize deductions. possible beneficiaries of the policy if the
policy owner is obligated to repay ae) Age 71 or older–$2,990 Effect on itemized deductions.Subtract the loan from you using the proceeds of thehealth insurance deduction from your medical policy. A person has a financial interestinsurance when figuring medical expenses onQualified long-term care insurance con- in your business if the person is anSchedule A (Form 1040) if you itemize deduc-tract.A qualified long-term care insurance owner or part owner of the business ortions.contract is an insurance contract that only pro- has lent money to the business.vides coverage of qualified long-term care serv-Effect on self-employment tax.Do not sub-ices. The contract must meet all the following b) For contracts issued after June 8,tract the health insurance deduction when figur-requirements. 1997, you generally cannot deduct theing net earnings for your self-employment tax. premiums on any life insurance policy,• It must be guaranteed renewable. endowment contract, or annuity con-How to figure the deduction.Generally, you
tract if you are directly or indirectly a• It must provide that refunds, other than can use the worksheet in the Form 1040 instruc-
beneficiary. The disallowance appliesrefunds on the death of the insured or tions to figure your deduction. However, if any of
without regard to whom the policy cov-complete surrender or cancellation of the the following apply, you must use the worksheet
ers.contract, and dividends under the contract in this chapter.
Page 26 Chapter 7 Insurance

Page 27 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
policy are not taxed as income even if theyWorksheet 7–A. Self-Employed Health Insurance Deduction
are used to liquidate the debt.Worksheet (Keep for your records.)
1.Enter total payments made during the year for health insurance
coverage established under your business for you, your spouse, and
your dependents. (Do not include payments for any month you were Capitalized Premiumseligible to participate in a health plan subsidized by your or your
spouse’s employer or any amount you claim on line 11 of Form 8885. Under the uniform capitalization rules, you mustAlso, do not include payments for qualified long-term care insurance.)1. capitalize the direct costs and part of the indirect
2.For coverage under a qualified long-term care insurance contract, costs for certain production or resale activities.
enter for each person covered the smaller of the following amounts. Include these costs in the basis of property you
produce or acquire for resale, rather than claim-a) Total payments made for that person during the year.
ing them as a current deduction. You recover theb) The amount shown below. (Use the person’s age at the end of costs through depreciation, amortization, or costthe year.) of goods sold when you use, sell, or otherwise
$240—if that person is age 40 or younger dispose of the property.
Indirect costs include premiums for insur-$450—if age 41 to 50 ance on your plant or facility, machinery, equip-
$900—if age 51 to 60 ment, materials, property produced, or property
acquired for resale.$2,390—if age 61 to 70
$2,990—if age 71 or older Uniform capitalization rules.You may be
subject to the uniform capitalization rules if you(Do not include payments for any month you were eligible to
do any of the following, unless the property isparticipate in a long-term care insurance plan subsidized by your
produced for your use other than in a businessor your spouse’s employer.) If more than one person is covered,
or an activity carried on for profit.figure separately the amount to enter for each person. Then enter
the total of those amounts........................... 2.
1) Produce real property or tangible personal3.Add the total of lines 1 and 2............................ 3. property. For this purpose, tangible per-
sonal property includes a film, sound re-4.Percentage used to figure deduction for 2002................. 4. .70
cording, video tape, book, or similar5.Multiply line 3 by the percentage on line 4................... 5. property.
6.Enter your net profit and any other earned income* from the trade or
2) Acquire property for resale.business under which the insurance plan is established. (If the
business is an S corporation, skip to line 13.)................. 6. However, these rules do not apply to the follow-
ing property.7.Enter the total of all net profits from: line 31, Schedule C (Form 1040);
line 3, Schedule C–EZ (Form 1040); line 36, Schedule F (Form
1) Personal property you acquire for resale if1040); or line 15a, Schedule K–1 (Form 1065); plus any other income
your average annual gross receipts areallocable to the profitable businesses. See the instructions for
$10 million or less for the 3 prior tax years.Schedule SE (Form 1040). (Do not include any net losses shown on
these schedules.)................................... 7. 2) Property you produce if you meet either of
8.Divide line 6 by line 7................................. 8. the following conditions.
9.Multiply Form 1040, line 29, by the percentage on line 8......... 9. a) Your indirect costs of producing the
10.Subtract line 9 from line 6.............................. 10. property are $200,000 or less.
11.Enter the amount, if any, from Form 1040, line 31, attributable to the b) You use the cash method of accounting
same trade or business in which the insurance plan is established . . .11. and do not account for inventories.
12.Subtract line 11 from line 10............................ 12.
13.Enter your wages from an S corporation in which you are a More information. For more information on
more-than-2% shareholder and in which the insurance plan is these rules, see Uniform Capitalization Rules in
established....................................... 13. Publication 538 and the regulations under Inter-
nal Revenue Code section 263A.14.Enter the amount from Form 2555, line 43, attributable to the amount
entered on line 6 or 13 above, or the amount from Form 2555–EZ,
line 18, attributable to the amount entered on line 13 above....... 14.
15.Subtract line 14 from line 12 or 13, whichever applies........... 15.
When To Deduct
16.Compare the amounts on lines 5 and 15 above. Enter the smaller of
the two amounts here and on Form 1040, line 30. (Do not include Premiums
this amount when figuring a medical expense deduction on
Schedule A (Form 1040).).............................. 16. You can usually deduct insurance premiums in
the tax year to which they apply.* Earned income includes net earnings and gains from the sale, transfer, or licensing of property you
created. It does not include capital gain income. Cash method. If you use the cash method of
accounting, you generally deduct insurance pre-
miums in the tax year you actually paid them,
even if you incurred them in an earlier year.c) Partners. If, as a partner in a partner- 4)Insurance to secure a loan. If you take
However, see Prepayment, later.ship, you take out an insurance policyout a policy on your life or on the life of
on your own life and name your part- another person with a financial interest inAccrual method. If you use an accrualners as beneficiaries to induce them toyour business to get or protect a businessmethod of accounting, you cannot deduct insur-retain their investments in the partner-loan, you cannot deduct the premiums asance premiums before the tax year in which youship, you are considered a beneficiary.a business expense. Nor can you deductincur a liability for them. In addition, you cannotYou cannot deduct the insurance pre- the premiums as interest on business deduct insurance premiums before the tax yearmiums. loans or as an expense of financing loans.in which you actually pay them (unless the ex-
In the event of death, the proceeds of the ception for recurring items applies). For more
Chapter 7 Insurance Page 27

Page 28 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
IF you . . . THEN . . .information about accrual methods of account-
ing, see chapter 1. For information about thechoose to deduct research and deduct all research and experimental costs in theexception for recurring items, see Publicationexperimental costs as a current first year you pay or incur the costs and all later538. business expense years.
Prepayment. You cannot deduct expenses indo not deduct research and if you meet the requirements, amortize them over atadvance, even if you pay them in advance. Thisexperimental costs as a current least 60 months, starting with the month you first
rule applies to any expense paid far enough inbusiness expense receive an economic benefit from the research. See
advance to, in effect, create an asset with a Research and Experimental Costs in chapter 9.
useful life extending substantially beyond the
end of the current tax year.
whether to deduct or capitalize explorationcharges not subject to the uniform capitalizationExample. In 2002, you signed a 3-year in- rules, but only if they are otherwise deductible.costs.surance contract. Even though you paid the pre- You can choose to capitalize carryingYou may be subject to the alternativemiums for 2002, 2003, and 2004 when you charges separately for each project you haveminimum tax (AMT) if you deduct anysigned the contract, you can only deduct the and for each type of carrying charge. For unim-of the expenses discussed in this chap-premium for 2002 on your 2002 tax return. YouCAUTION
!
proved and unproductive real property, yourter, other than carrying charges and the costs ofcan deduct in 2003 and 2004 the premium allo- choice is good for only 1 year. You must decideremoving architectural barriers and retired as-cable to those years. whether to capitalize carrying charges each yearsets. the property remains unimproved and unpro-Dividends received.If you receive dividends For more information on the alternative mini-ductive. For other real property, your choice tofrom business insurance and you deducted themum tax, see the instructions for one of thecapitalize carrying charges remains in effect un-premiums in prior years, at least part of thefollowing forms. til construction or development is completed.dividends generally are income. For more infor-
For personal property, your choice is effectivemation, see Recovery of amount deducted in • Form 6251, Alternative Minimum Tax—In-until the date you install or first use it, whicheverchapter 1. dividuals. is later.
• Form 4626, Alternative Minimum Tax— How to make the choice.To make the choiceCorporations. to capitalize a carrying charge, write a statement
saying which charges you choose to capitalize.
Attach it to your original tax return for the yearTopics
the choice is to be effective. However, if youThis chapter discusses:8. timely filed your return for the year without mak-
ing the choice, you can still make the choice by• Carrying charges
filing an amended return within 6 months of the
• Research and experimental costs due date of the return (excluding extensions).Costs You
Attach the statement to the amended return and• Intangible drilling costs
write “Filed pursuant to section 301.9100–2” on
• Exploration costsCan Deduct the statement. File the amended return at the
same address you filed the original return.• Development costs
or Capitalize • Circulation costs
• Environmental cleanup costs
Research and• Retired asset removal costsImportant Change Experimental Costs• Barrier removal costs
for 2002
The costs of research and experimentation are
Useful ItemsThe deduction for qualified environmental generally capital expenses. However, you can
cleanup (remediation) costs was scheduled toYou may want to see: choose to deduct these costs as a current busi-
expire for costs paid or incurred after 2001. It ness expense. Your choice to deduct these
has been extended to include costs you pay orPublication costs is binding for the year it is made and for all
incur before 2004. For more information on the later years unless you get IRS approval to make❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions ofenvironmental cleanup cost deduction, see En- a change.
Assetsvironmental Cleanup Costs, later. If you meet certain requirements, you may
choose to defer and amortize research and ex-
Form (and Instructions) perimental costs. For information on choosing to
defer and amortize these costs, see Research❏ 3468 Investment Credit and Experimental Costs in chapter 9.Introduction
❏ 8826 Disabled Access CreditThis chapter discusses two ways of treating cer- Research and experimental costs defined.
tain costs—deduction or capitalization. Research and experimental costs are reasona-See chapter 14 for information about gettingYou generally deduct a cost as a current ble costs you incur in your trade or business forpublications and forms.business expense by subtracting it from your activities intended to provide information that
income in either the year you incur it or the year would eliminate uncertainty about the develop-
you pay it. ment or improvement of a product. Uncertainty
If you capitalize a cost, you may be able to exists if the information available to you does not
Carrying Chargesrecover it over a period of years through periodic establish how to develop or improve a product or
deductions for amortization, depletion, or depre- the appropriate design of a product. Whether
Carrying charges include the taxes and interestciation. When you capitalize a cost, you add it to costs qualify as research and experimental
you pay to carry or develop real property or tothe basis of property to which it relates. costs depends on the nature of the activity to
carry, transport, or install personal property.A partnership, corporation, estate, or trust which the costs relate rather than on the nature
Certain carrying charges must be capitalizedmakes the choice to deduct or capitalize the of the product or improvement being developed
under the uniform capitalization rules. (For infor-costs discussed in this chapter except for explo- or the level of technological advancement.
mation on capitalization of interest, see chapterration costs for mineral deposits. Each individual The costs of obtaining a patent, including
5.) You can choose to capitalize carryingpartner, shareholder, or beneficiary chooses attorneys’ fees paid or incurred in making and
Page 28 Chapter 8 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize

Page 29 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
perfecting a patent application, are research and You can choose to deduct only the costs of the 10-year period beginning with the tax year in
items with no salvage value. These include which you paid or incurred them. These rules doexperimental costs. However, costs paid or in-
wages, fuel, repairs, hauling, and supplies re- not apply to a nonproductive well.curred to obtain another’s patent are not re-
lated to drilling wells and preparing them forsearch and experimental costs. For more
production. Your cost for any drilling or develop-information on costs paid or incurred to obtain
ment work done by contractors under any formanother’s patent, see Section 197 Intangibles in
of contract is also an IDC. However, seechapter 9. Exploration Costs
Amounts paid to contractor that must be capital-Product. The term “product” includes any ofized, next. The costs of determining the existence, location,the following items. You can also choose to deduct the cost ofextent, or quality of any mineral deposit are
drilling bore holes to determine the location andordinarily capital expenditures if the costs lead• Formula.
delineation of offshore hydrocarbon deposits ifto the development of a mine. You recover these• Invention. the shaft is capable of conducting hydrocarbonscosts through depletion as the mineral is re-
to the surface on completion. It does not mattermoved from the ground. However, you can• Patent.
whether there is any intent to produce hydrocar-choose to deduct domestic exploration costs• Pilot model. bons. paid or incurred before the development stage
If you do not choose to deduct your IDCs asbegan (except those for oil, gas, and geothermal• Process.
a current business expense, you can choose towells).• Technique. deduct them over the 60-month period begin-
How to make the choice.You choose to de-ning with the month they were paid or incurred.• Property similar to the items listed above. duct exploration costs by taking the deduction
Amounts paid to contractor that must be on your income tax return, or on an amendedIt also includes products used by you in your
capitalized.Amounts paid to a contractor income tax return, for the first tax year for whichtrade or business or held for sale, lease, or
must be capitalized if they are either: you wish to deduct the costs paid or incurredlicense.
during the tax year. Your return must adequately• Amounts properly allocable to the cost ofCosts not included.Research and experi- describe and identify each property or mine, anddepreciable property, ormental costs do not include expenses for any of clearly state how much is being deducted forthe following activities. • Amounts paid only out of production oreach one. The choice applies to the tax year you
proceeds from production if these make this choice and all later tax years.• Advertising or promotions. amounts are depletable income to the re-Partnerships. Each partner, not the part-• Consumer surveys. cipient. nership, chooses whether to capitalize or to de-
• Efficiency surveys. duct that partner’s share of exploration costs.
How to make the choice.You choose to de-• Management studies. Reduced corporate deductions for explora-duct IDCs as a current business expense bytion costs. A corporation (other than an S• Quality control testing. taking the deduction on your income tax returncorporation) can deduct only 70% of its domes-for the first tax year you have eligible costs. No• Research in connection with literary, his- tic exploration costs. It must capitalize the re-formal statement is required. If you file Scheduletorical, or similar projects. maining 30% of costs and amortize them overC (Form 1040), enter these costs under “Otherthe 60-month period starting with the month the• The acquisition of another’s patent, model,expenses.” exploration costs are paid or incurred. A corpo-production, or process. For oil and gas wells, your choice is bindingration may also elect to capitalize and amortizefor the year it is made and for all later years. Formining exploration costs over a 10–year period.geothermal wells, your choice can be revokedWhen and how to choose. You make the For more information on this method of amorti-by the filing of an amended return on which youchoice to deduct research and experimental zation, see section 59(e) of the Internal Reve-do not take the deduction. You can file thecosts by deducting them on your tax return for nue Code.amended return for the year up to the normalthe year in which you first pay or incur research The 30% the corporation capitalizes cannottime of expiration for filing a claim for credit orand experimental costs. If you do not make the be added to its basis in the property to figurerefund, generally, within 3 years after the datechoice to deduct research and experimental cost depletion. However, the amount amortizedyou filed the original return or within 2 years aftercosts in the first year in which you pay or incur is treated as additional depreciation and is sub-the date you paid the tax, whichever is later.the costs, you can deduct the costs in a later ject to recapture as ordinary income on a dispo-
year only with approval from the IRS. Energy credit for costs of geothermal wells.sition of the property. See Section 1250
If you capitalize the drilling and developmentProperty under Depreciation Recapture in chap-
Research credit.If you pay or incur qualifiedcosts of geothermal wells that you place in serv-ter 3 of Publication 544.
research expenses, you may be able to take theice during the tax year, you may be able to claimThese rules also apply to the deduction of
research credit. For more information about thea business energy credit. See Form 3468 fordevelopment costs by corporations. See Devel-
research credit, see the instructions to Formmore information. opment Costs, later.
6765, Credit for Increasing Research Activities. Recapture of exploration expenses.WhenNonproductive well. If you capitalize your
your mine reaches the producing stage, youIDCs, you have another option if the well is
must recapture any exploration costs you chosenonproductive. You can deduct the IDCs of the
to deduct. Use either of the following methods.nonproductive well as an ordinary loss. YouIntangible must indicate and clearly state your choice onMethod 1—Include the deducted costs inyour tax return for the year the well is completed.Drilling Costs gross income for the tax year the mine reachesOnce made, the choice for oil and gas wells isthe producing stage. Your choice must bebinding for all later years. You can revoke yourThe costs of developing oil, gas, or geothermal clearly indicated on the return. Increase yourchoice for a geothermal well by filing anwells are ordinarily capital expenditures. You adjusted basis in the mine by the amount in-amended return that does not claim the loss.can usually recover them through depreciation cluded in income. Generally, you must choose
or depletion. However, you can choose to de-Costs incurred outside the United States.this recapture method by the due date (includ-
duct intangible drilling costs (IDCs) as a currentYou cannot deduct as a current business ex- ing extensions) of your return. However, if you
business expense. These are certain drilling andpense all the IDCs paid or incurred for an oil, timely filed your return for the year without
development costs for wells in the United Statesgas, or geothermal well located outside the making the choice, you can still make the
in which you hold an operating or working inter-United States. However, you can choose to in- choice by filing an amended return within 6
est. You can deduct only costs for drilling orclude the costs in the adjusted basis of the well months of the due date of the return (excluding
preparing a well for the production of oil, gas, orto figure depletion or depreciation. If you do not extensions). Make the choice on your
geothermal steam or hot water. make this choice, you can deduct the costs over amended return and write “Filed pursuant to
Chapter 8 Costs You Can Deduct or CapitalizePage 29

Page 30 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
section 301.9100–2” on the form where you office where you file your return. Generally, you cussed later) are met. This special tax treatment
are including the income. File the amended must make the choice by the due date of the is generally available for qualified environmental
return at the same address you filed the origi- return (including extensions). However, if you cleanup costs you pay or incur before January 1,
nal return. timely filed your return for the year without mak- 2004.
ing the choice, you can still make the choice byMethod 2—Do not claim any depletion deduc- Qualified environmental cleanup costs.filing an amended return within 6 months of thetion for the tax year the mine reaches the pro- Qualified environmental cleanup costs are gen-due date of the return (excluding extensions).ducing stage and any later tax years until the erally costs you pay or incur to abate or control aClearly indicate the choice on your amendeddepletion you would have deducted equals the hazardous substance at a qualified contami-return and write “Filed pursuant to sectionexploration costs you deducted. nated site.301.9100–2.” File the amended return at the
same address you filed the original return.Hazardous substance. Hazardous sub-You also must recapture deducted explora-
stances are defined in section 101(14) of thetion costs if you receive a bonus or royalty fromForeign development costs. The rules dis-
Comprehensive Environmental Response,mine property before it reaches the producingcussed earlier for foreign exploration costs apply
Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 andstage. Do not claim any depletion deduction forto foreign development costs.
certain substances are designated as hazard-the tax year you receive the bonus or royalty andReduced corporate deductions for develop-ous in section 102 of the Act. Substances areany later tax years, until the depletion you wouldment costs. The rules discussed earlier fornot hazardous if a removal or remedial action ishave deducted equals the exploration costs youreduced corporate deductions for explorationprohibited under sections 104 and 104(a)(3) ofdeducted. costs also apply to corporate deductions for de-the Act.Generally, if you dispose of the mine beforevelopment costs.you have fully recaptured the exploration costs Qualified contaminated site.A qualifiedyou deducted, recapture the balance by treating contaminated site is any area that meets both ofall or part of your gain as ordinary income. the following requirements.Under these circumstances, you generally
Circulation Coststreat as ordinary income all of your gain if it is 1) You hold it for use in a trade or business,
less than your adjusted exploration costs with for the production of income, or as inven-A publisher can deduct as a current businessrespect to the mine. If your gain is more than tory.expense the costs of establishing, maintaining,your adjusted exploration costs, treat as ordi- 2) There has been a release, threat of re-or increasing the circulation of a newspaper,nary income only a part of your gain, up to the lease, or disposal of a hazardous sub-magazine, or other periodical. For example, aamount of your adjusted exploration costs. stance at or on the site.publisher can deduct the cost of hiring extra
employees for a limited time to get new sub-Foreign exploration costs.If you pay or incur You must get a statement from the designatedscriptions through telephone calls. Circulationexploration costs for a mine or other natural state environmental agency that the site meetscosts are deductible even if they normally woulddeposit located outside the United States, you requirement (2).be capitalized.cannot deduct all the costs in the current year. A site is not eligible if it is on, or proposed for,This rule does not apply to the followingYou can choose to include the costs (other than the national priorities list under sectioncosts that must be capitalized.for an oil, gas, or geothermal well) in the ad- 105(a)(8)(B) of the Comprehensive Environ-justed basis of the mineral property to figure cost• The purchase of land or depreciable prop-mental Response, Compensation, and Liabilitydepletion. (Cost depletion is discussed in chap-erty. Act of 1980. To find out if a site is on the nationalter 10.) If you do not make this choice, you must priorities list, contact the U.S. Environmental• The acquisition of circulation through thededuct the costs over the 10-year period begin- Protection Agency.purchase of any part of the business ofning with the tax year in which you pay or incur
another publisher of a newspaper, maga-Expenditures for depreciable property.them. These rules also apply to foreign develop-
zine, or other periodical, including theYou cannot deduct the cost of acquiring depre-ment costs.
purchase of another publisher’s list of sub-ciable property used in connection with the
scribers. abatement or control of hazardous substances
at a qualified contaminated site. However, the
part of the depreciation for such property that isDevelopment Costs Other treatment of circulation costs.If you otherwise allocated to the qualified contami-do not want to deduct circulation costs as anated site shall be treated as a qualified environ-You can deduct costs paid or incurred during thecurrent business expense, you can choose onemental cleanup cost.tax year for developing a mine or any otherof the following ways to recover these costs.
natural deposit (other than an oil or gas well)
When and how to choose. You choose to• Capitalize all circulation costs that arelocated in the United States. These costs must
deduct environmental cleanup costs by takingproperly chargeable to a capital account.be paid or incurred after the discovery of ores or
the deduction on the income tax return (filed byminerals in commercially marketable quantities.• Amortize circulation costs over the 3-yearthe due date including extensions) for the taxa-Development costs include those incurred forperiod beginning with the tax year theyble year in which the costs are paid or incurred.you by a contractor. Also, development costswere paid or incurred. The costs are deducted differently depending oninclude depreciation on improvements used in
the type of business entity involved.the development of ores or minerals. They do
How to make the choice.You choose to capi-not include costs for the acquisition or improve- Individuals. Deduct the environmentaltalize circulation costs by attaching a statementment of depreciable property. cleanup costs on the “Other Expenses” line ofto your return for the first tax year the choiceInstead of deducting development costs in Schedule C, E, or F (Form 1040). If the scheduleapplies. Your choice is binding for the year it isthe year paid or incurred, you can choose to requires you to separately identify each expensemade and for all later years, unless you get IRStreat them as deferred expenses and deduct included in “Other Expenses” write “Section 198approval to revoke it.them ratably as the units of produced ores or Election” on the line next to the environmental
minerals benefited by the expenses are sold. cleanup costs.
This choice applies each tax year to expenses
All other entities.All other taxpayers (in-paid or incurred in that year. Once made, the
cluding S corporations, partnerships, and trusts)Environmental Cleanupchoice is binding for the year and cannot be
deduct the environmental cleanup costs on therevoked for any reason.
“Other Deductions” line of the appropriate fed-Costs
How to make the choice. The choice to de- eral income tax return. On the schedule at-
duct development costs ratably as the ores or Environmental cleanup (remediation) costs are tached to the return that separately identifies
minerals are sold must be made for each mine generally capital expenditures. However, you each expense included in “Other Deductions”
or other natural deposit by a clear indication on can choose to deduct these costs as a current write “Section 198 Election” on the line next to
your return or by a statement filed with the IRS business expense if certain requirements (dis- the environmental cleanup costs.
Page 30 Chapter 8 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize

Page 31 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
More than one environmental cleanup you can add any costs over this limit to the basis
1) At least one accessible parking spacecost. If, for any taxable year, you pay or incurof the property and depreciate these excess
close to a facility must be set aside andmore than one environmental cleanup cost, youcosts.
marked for use by persons with disabili-can choose to deduct one or more of such ex-Partners and partnerships. The $15,000 ties.penditures for that year. You can choose tolimit applies to a partnership and also to eachdeduct one expenditure and choose to capitalize 2) A parking space must be open on one sidepartner in the partnership. A partner can allocateanother expenditure (whether or not they are of to allow room for a person in a wheelchairthe $15,000 limit in any manner among thethe same type or paid or incurred with respect to or on braces or crutches to get in and outpartner’s individually incurred costs and thethe same qualified contaminated site). A choice of a car onto a level surface suitable forpartner’s distributive share of partnership costs.to deduct an expenditure for one year has no wheeling and walking.If the partner cannot deduct the entire share ofeffect on other years. You must make a separatepartnership costs, the partnership can add anychoice for each year in which you intend to 3) A parking space marked for use by per-costs not deducted to the basis of the improveddeduct qualified environmental cleanup costs. sons with disabilities, when placed be-property. tween two regular diagonal or head-onRecapture. This deduction may have to be A partnership must be able to show that anyparking spaces, must be at least 12 feetrecaptured as ordinary income under sectionamount added to basis was not deducted by thewide.1245 when you sell or otherwise dispose of thepartner and that it was over a partner’s $15,000
property that would have received an addition tolimit (as determined by the partner). If the part-4) A parking space must be located so that a
basis if you had not chosen to deduct the expen-nership cannot show this, it is presumed that theperson in a wheelchair or on braces or
diture. For more information on recapturing thepartner was able to deduct the distributive sharecrutches does not have to wheel or walk
deduction, see Depreciation and amortizationof the partnership’s costs in full. behind parked cars.
under Gain Treated as Ordinary Income in Pub-
lication 544. Example. John Duke’s distributive share ofRamps.
ABC partnership’s deductible expenses for theCosts to clean up land.For more informationremoval of architectural barriers was $14,000.1) A ramp must not rise more than 1 inch inon costs you can deduct for the environmentalJohn had $12,000 of similar expenses in his soleeach foot of length.cleanup of land see Environmental cleanup proprietorship. He chose to deduct $7,000 ofcosts in chapter 13. 2) A ramp must have at least one handrailthem. John allocated the remaining $8,000 ofthat is 32 inches high, measured from theMore information. For more information the $15,000 limit to his share of ABC’s ex- surface of the ramp. The handrail must beabout the environmental cleanup cost deduc-penses. John can add the excess $5,000 of hissmooth and must extend at least 1 foottion, see section 198 of the Internal Revenueown expenses to the basis of the property usedpast the top and bottom of the ramp. How-Code. in his business. Also, if ABC can show that John
ever, this does mean that a handrail exten-could not deduct $6,000 ($14,000 – $8,000) of
sion that is itself a hazard is required.his share of the partnership’s expenses because
of how John applied the limit, ABC can add3) A ramp must have a nonslip surface.
$6,000 to the basis of its property.Retired Asset Removal 4) A ramp must have a level platform at the
Qualification standards.You can deduct top and at the bottom. If a door swings outCosts your costs as a current expense only if the bar-onto the platform or toward the ramp, the
rier removal meets one or more of the followingplatform must be at least 5 feet deep and 5If you retire and remove a depreciable asset inspecific standards for improved access for thefeet wide. If a door does not swing ontoconnection with the installation or production ofdisabled or the elderly. the platform or toward the ramp, the plat-a replacement asset, you can deduct the costs
form must be at least 3 feet deep and 5of removing the retired asset. However, if youGrading. The ground must be graded to the
feet wide. A platform must extend at leastreplace a component (part) of a depreciablelevel of a normal entrance to make the facility
1 foot past the opening side of any door-asset, capitalize the removal costs if the re-accessible to people with physical disabilities.
way.placement is an improvement and deduct the Walks.costs if the replacement is a repair. 5) A ramp must have level platforms no far-
1) A public walk must be at least 48 inchesther than 30 feet apart and at any turn.
wide and cannot slope more than 5%. A
6) A curb ramp with a nonslip surface mustfairly long walk of maximum or near maxi-
be provided at an intersection. The curbBarrier Removal Costs mum steepness must have level areas at
ramp must not be less than 4 feet wideregular intervals. A walk or driveway must
and must not rise more than 1 inch in eachThe cost of an improvement to a business assethave a nonslip surface.
foot of length. The two surfaces mustis normally a capital expense. However, you can2) A walk must have a continuing common blend smoothly.choose to deduct the costs of making a facility orsurface and must not have steps or sud-public transportation vehicle more accessible toden changes in level. Entrances. A building must have at leastand usable by those who are disabled or elderly.
one main entrance that a person in a wheelchairYou must own or lease the facility or vehicle for3) Where a walk crosses another walk, a
can use. The entrance must be on a level acces-use in connection with your trade or business.driveway, or a parking lot, they must blend
sible to an elevator.A facility is all or any part of buildings, struc-to a common level. However, this does not
tures, equipment, roads, walks, parking lots, orrequire the removal of curbs that are aDoors and doorways.similar real or personal property. A public trans-safety feature for those with disabilities,
portation vehicle is a vehicle, such as a bus orespecially blindness. 1) A door must have a clear opening of at
railroad car, that provides transportation service least 32 inches and must be operable by a4) A sloping walk must have a level platformto the public (including service for your custom- single effort.at the top and at the bottom. If a doorers, even if you are not in the business of provid-swings out onto the platform toward the2) The floor on the inside and outside of aing transportation services). walk, the platform must be at least 5 feetdoorway must be level for at least 5 feetYou cannot deduct any costs that you paid ordeep and 5 feet wide. If a door does not from the door in the direction the door sw-incurred to completely renovate or build a facilityswing onto the platform or toward the walk,ings and must extend at least 1 foot pastor public transportation vehicle or to replacethe platform must be at least 3 feet deepthe opening side of the doorway.depreciable property in the normal course ofand 5 feet wide. A platform must extend atbusiness. 3) There must not be any sharp slopes orleast 1 foot past the opening side of any
sudden changes in level at a doorway. TheDeduction limit.The most you can deduct as doorway.
threshold must be flush with the floor. Thea cost of removing barriers to the disabled and
door closer must be selected, placed, andthe elderly for any tax year is $15,000. However,Parking lots.
Chapter 8 Costs You Can Deduct or CapitalizePage 31

Page 32 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
set so as not to impair the use of the door measured from the top of the shelf and the the right or left of the door at a height of 54
bottom of the mirror. to 66 inches above the finished floor.by persons with disabilities.
6) A toilet room for men must have 2) A door that might prove dangerous if aStairs. wall-mounted urinals with the opening of visually impaired person used it, such as a
the basin 15 to 19 inches from the finisheddoor leading to a loading platform, boiler1) Stairsteps must have round nosing of be-floor or floor-mounted urinals that are levelroom, stage, or fire escape, must be identi-tween 1 and 11/2 inch radius. with the main floor. fiable by touch.
2) Stairs must have a handrail 32 inches 7) Towel racks, towel dispensers, and otherhigh, measured from the tread at the face Warning signals.dispensers and disposal units must not beof the riser. mounted higher than 40 inches from the1) An audible warning signal must be accom-3) Stairs must have at least one handrail that floor. panied by a simultaneous visual signal forextends at least 18 inches past the top the benefit of hearing impaired persons.Water fountains.step and the bottom step. But this does not
2) A visual warning signal must be accompa-mean that a handrail extension that is itself1) A water fountain and a cooler must have nied by a simultaneous audible signal fora hazard is required. up-front spouts and controls. the benefit of visually impaired persons.
4) Each step must not be more than 7 inches2) A water fountain and a cooler must behigh. Hazards. Hanging signs, ceiling lights, andhand-operated or hand-and-foot-operated.similar objects and fixtures must be at least 7
Floors. 3) A water fountain mounted on the side of afeet above the floor.
floor-mounted cooler must not be more
International accessibility symbol.The1) Floors must have a nonslip surface. than 30 inches above the floor.
international accessibility symbol must be dis-2) Floors on each story of a building must be4) A wall-mounted, hand-operated water played on routes to a wheelchair-accessible en-on the same level or must be connected cooler must be mounted with the basin 36trance to a facility, at the entrance itself, and atby a ramp of the type discussed previ- inches from the floor. wheelchair-accessible entrances to public trans-ously. portation vehicles. This symbol is the outline5) A water fountain must not be fully re-
drawing of a person in a wheelchair and iscessed and must not be set into an alcoveToilet rooms. shown in the following illustration.unless the alcove is at least 36 inches
wide.1) A toilet room must have enough space for
persons in wheelchairs to move around.
Public telephones.
2) A toilet room must have at least one toilet
stall that: 1) A public telephone must be placed so that
a person in a wheelchair can reach the dial
a) Is at least 36 inches wide, and the headset.
b) Is at least 56 inches deep, 2) A public telephone must be equipped for a
person who is hearing impaired and itc) Has a door, if any, that is at least 32
must be identified as such with instructionsinches wide and swings out,
for its use.
d) Has handrails on each side that are 33
3) Coin slots of public telephones must notinches high and parallel to the floor, 11/2
be more than 48 inches from the floor.inches in outside diameter, 11/2 inches
away from the wall, and fastened se- Elevators.curely at the ends and center, and
1) An elevator must be accessible to, ande) Has a toilet with a seat 19 to 20 inches
usable by, persons with disabilities and thefrom the finished floor.
elderly on the levels they use to enter theRail facilities.building and all levels and areas normally3) A toilet room must have, in addition to or
used.instead of the toilet stall described in (2), at 1) A rail facility must have a fare control area
least one toilet stall that: with at least one entrance with a clear2) Cab size must measure at least 54 by 68
opening at least 36 inches wide.inches to allow for turning a wheelchair.a) Is at least 66 inches wide,
2) A boarding platform edge bordering a3) Door clear opening width must be at leastb) Is at least 60 inches deep, drop-off or other dangerous condition must32 inches.
be marked with a strip of floor materialc) Has a door, if any, that is at least 324) All controls needed must be within 48 todifferent in color and texture from the restinches wide and swings out, 54 inches from the cab floor. These con- of the floor surface. The gap between thed) Has a handrail on one side, 33 inches trols must be usable by a person with a boarding platform and vehicle doorwayhigh and parallel to the floor, 11/2 inches visual impairment and must be identifiablemust be as small as possible.by touch.in outside diameter, 11/2 inches away
from the wall, and fastened securely at Buses.
Controls. Switches and controls for light,the ends and center, and
heat, ventilation, windows, draperies, fire1) A bus must have a mechanism such as ae) Has a toilet with a seat 19 to 20 inchesalarms, and all similar controls needed or usedlift or ramp to enter the bus and enoughfrom the finished floor with a centerlineoften must be placed within the reach of a per-clearance to let a wheelchair user reach a18 inches from the side wall on whichson in a wheelchair. These switches and con-secure location.the handrail is located. trols must not be higher than 48 inches from the
2) The bus must have a wheelchair-securingfloor.
4) A toilet room must have sinks with narrow device. However, this does not mean that
Identification.aprons. Drain pipes and hot water pipes a wheelchair-securing device that is itself a
under a sink must be covered or insulated. barrier or hazard is required.1) Raised letters or numbers must be used to
5) A mirror and a shelf above a sink must not 3) The vertical distance from a curb or fromidentify rooms and offices. These identifi-
be higher than 40 inches above the floor,cation marks must be placed on the wall to street level to the first front doorstep must
Page 32 Chapter 8 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize

Page 33 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
not be more than 8 inches. Each front band of bright contrasting color running the
doorstep after the first step up from thefull width of the step.
curb or street level must also not be more5) A stepwell next to the driver must have,9.than 8 inches high. The steps at the frontwhen the door is open, at least 2 foot-can-and rear doors must be at least 12 inchesdles of light measured on the step tread.deep. Other stepwells must have, at all times, at
Amortization4) The bus must have clearly legible signs least 2 foot-candles of light measured on
that indicate that seats in the front of thethe step tread.
bus are priority seats for persons who6) Doorways on a light rail vehicle must havehave a disability or are elderly. The signs Introductionoutside lighting that provides at least 1must encourage other passengers to make foot-candle of light on the street surface forAmortization is a method of recovering (deduct-these seats available to those having prior-
a distance of 3 feet from the bottom steping) certain capital costs over a fixed period ofity who wish to use them.
edge. This lighting must be below windowtime. It is similar to the straight line method of5) Handrails and stanchions must be pro- level and must be shielded to protect thedepreciation.vided in the entrance to the bus so that eyes of entering and exiting passengers.The various amortizable costs covered inpassengers who have a disability or are this chapter are included in the list below. How-elderly can grasp them from outside theOther barrier removals.To be deductible,ever, this chapter does not discuss amortizationbus and use them while boarding and pay-expenses of removing any barrier not coveredof bond premium . For information, see chaptering the fare. This system must include aby the above standards must meet all three of3 of Publication 550.rail across the front of the bus interior thatthe following tests. 
passengers can lean against while paying Topicsfares. Overhead handrails must be contin-1) The removed barrier must be a substantialThis chapter discusses:uous except for a gap at the rear doorway.barrier to access or use of a facility or
public transportation vehicle by persons6) Floors and steps must have nonslip sur- • How to deduct amortization
who have a disability or are elderly.faces. Step edges must have a band of • Amortizing costs of going into businessbright contrasting color running the full2) The removed barrier must have been a
• Amortizing costs of getting a leasewidth of the step. barrier for at least one major group of per-
sons who have a disability or are elderly• Amortizing costs of section 197 intangibles7) A stepwell next to the driver must have,
(such as people who are blind, deaf, orwhen the door is open, at least 2 foot-can- • Amortizing reforestation costswheelchair users).dles of light measured on the step tread.
• Amortizing costs of pollution control facili-Other stepwells must have, at all times, at3) The barrier must be removed without cre-tiesleast 2 foot-candles of light measured onating any new barrier that significantly im-the step tread. pairs access to or use of the facility or• Amortizing costs of research and experi-
vehicle by a major group of persons who mentation8) The doorways of the bus must have
have a disability or are elderly.outside lighting that provides at least 1
foot-candle of light on the street surface for Useful Itemsa distance of 3 feet from the bottom stepHow to make the choice. If you choose to You may want to see:edge. This lighting must be below windowdeduct your costs for removing barriers to thelevel and must be shielded to protect thedisabled or the elderly, claim the deduction onPublicationeyes of entering and exiting passengers.your income tax return (partnership return for
❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of9) The fare box must be located as far for-partnerships) for the tax year the expenses were
Assetsward as practical and must not block trafficpaid or incurred. Identify the deduction as a
in the vestibule. separate item. The choice applies to all the qual-❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses
ifying costs you have during the year, up to the❏ 946 How To Depreciate PropertyRapid and light rail vehicles. $15,000 limit. If you make this choice, you must
maintain adequate records to support your de-1) Passenger doorways on the vehicle sides Form (and Instructions)duction.must have clear openings at least 32 in-
For your choice to be valid, you generally❏ 3468 Investment Creditches wide.
must file your return by its due date, including❏ 4562 Depreciation and Amortization2) Audible or visual warning signals must beextensions. However, if you timely filed your
provided to alert passengers who have areturn for the year without making the choice,❏ 6251 Alternative Minimum Tax—disability or are elderly of closing doors.you can still make the choice by filing an Individuals
amended return within 6 months of the due date3) Handrails and stanchions must permit safe
See chapter 14 for information about gettingof the return (excluding extensions). Clearly indi-boarding, moving around, sitting and
publications and forms.cate the choice on your amended return andstanding assistance, and getting off by
write “Filed pursuant to section 301.9100–2.”persons who have a disability or are eld-
File the amended return at the same addresserly. On a level-entry vehicle, handrails,
you filed the original return. Your choice is irrev-stanchions, and seats must be located to
ocable after the due date, including extensions,allow a wheelchair user to enter the vehi- How To Deduct
of your return.cle and position the wheelchair in a loca-
Amortizationtion that does not block the movement of
other passengers. On a vehicle with stepsDisabled access credit.If you make your
The purpose of this section is to explain how youthat must be used in boarding, handrailsbusiness accessible to persons with disabilities
deduct amortization.and stanchions must be provided in theand your business is an eligible small business,
entrance so that persons who have a disa-you may be able to take the disabled accessForm 4562. You deduct amortization that be-bility or are elderly can grasp them fromcredit. If you choose to take the credit, you mustgins during the current year by completing Partoutside the vehicle and use them whilereduce the amount you deduct or capitalize byVI of Form 4562 and attaching it to your currentboarding. the amount of the credit. year’s return.
For more information about the disabled ac-4) Floors must have nonslip surfaces. Step For later years, do not report your deduction
cess credit, see Form 8826.edges on a light rail vehicle must have a for amortization on Form 4562 unless you must
Chapter 9 Amortization Page 33

Page 34 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
file the form for another reason. You must file Start-up costs include costs for the following• It is incurred before the end of the first tax
Form 4562 in any of the following situations. items. year in which the corporation is in busi-
ness. A corporation using the cash• You deduct amortization that begins this• An analysis or survey of potential markets,method of accounting can amortize orga-year. products, labor supply, transportation facil- nizational costs incurred within the first taxities, etc.• You claim depreciation for property placed year, even if it does not pay them in that
in service this year. • Advertisements for the opening of the year.
business.• You claim a section 179 expense deduc- The following are examples of organizationaltion. • Salaries and wages for employees who costs.are being trained and their instructors.• You claim a deduction for any vehicle re- • The cost of temporary directors.ported on a form other than Schedule C • Travel and other necessary costs for se-
(Form 1040) or Schedule C–EZ (Form curing prospective distributors, suppliers, • The cost of organizational meetings.
1040). or customers. • State incorporation fees.
• You claim depreciation on any vehicle or• Salaries and fees for executives and con-• The cost of accounting services for settingother listed property (regardless of when it sultants, or for similar professional serv-up the corporation.was placed in service). ices.
• The cost of legal services (such as draft-• You claim depreciation on a return for a ing the charter, bylaws, terms of the origi-Nonqualifying costs.Start-up costs do notcorporation (other than an S corporation). nal stock certificates, and minutes ofinclude deductible interest, taxes, or researchorganizational meetings).and experimental costs. See Research and Ex-Other forms to use.If you do not have to fileperimental Costs, later.Form 4562 for years after the year amortization Nonqualifying costs.The following costs arePurchasing an active trade or business.begins, claim amortization directly on the “Other not organizational costs. They are capital ex-Amortizable start-up costs for purchasing an ac-expenses” line of Schedule C or F (Form 1040) penses that you cannot amortize.tive trade or business include only investigativeor the “Other deductions” line of Form 1065,
costs incurred in the course of a general searchForm 1120, Form 1120-A, or Form 1120-S. • Costs for issuing and selling stock or se-
for or preliminary investigation of the business.However, if you are amortizing reforestation curities, such as commissions, profes-
These are the costs that help you decidecosts, see Where to report under Reforestation sional fees, and printing costs.
whether to purchase a new business and whichCosts, later.
• Costs associated with the transfer of as-active business to purchase. Costs you incur in
sets to the corporation.an attempt to purchase a specific business are
capital expenses that you cannot amortize.
Going Into Business Costs of OrganizingExample. In June, you hired an accounting
a Partnershipfirm and a law firm to assist you in the potentialWhen you go into business, treat all costs you
purchase of XYZ. They researched XYZ’s indus-incur to get your business started as capital The costs of organizing a partnership are thetry and analyzed the financial projections ofexpenses. Capital expenses are part of your direct costs of creating the partnership.XYZ. In September, the law firm prepared andbasis in the business. Generally, you recover
submitted a letter of intent to XYZ. The lettercosts for particular assets through depreciation Qualifying costs.You can amortize an orga-stated that a binding commitment would resultdeductions. However, you generally cannot re- nizational cost only if it meets all the followingonly after a purchase agreement was signed.cover other costs until you sell the business or tests.The law firm and accounting firm continued tootherwise go out of business. See Capital Ex-
provide services including a review of XYZ’s• It is for the creation of the partnership andpenses in chapter 1 for a discussion of how to
books and records and the preparation of a not for starting or operating the partner-treat these costs if you do not go into business.
purchase agreement. In October, you signed aship trade or business.You can choose to amortize certain costs for
purchase agreement with XYZ.setting up your business over a period of 60 • It is chargeable to a capital account.The costs to investigate the business beforemonths or more. The cost must qualify as one of
submitting the letter of intent to XYZ are amortiz-• It could be amortized over the life of thethe following.
able investigative costs. The costs for servicespartnership if the partnership had a fixed• A business start-up cost. after that time relate to the attempt to purchaselife.
the business and must be capitalized.• An organizational cost for a corporation. • It is incurred by the due date of the part-
Disposition of business.If you completely nership return (excluding extensions) for• An organizational cost for a partnership.
dispose of your business before the end of thethe first tax year in which the partnership
amortization period, you can deduct any remain-is in business. However, if the partnership
ing deferred start-up costs. However, you canBusiness Start-Up Costs uses the cash method of accounting and
deduct these deferred start-up costs only to thepays the cost after the end of its first taxStart-up costs are costs for creating an activeextent they qualify as a loss from a business.year, see Cash method partnership undertrade or business or investigating the creation or How To Amortize, later.acquisition of an active trade or business.Costs of Organizing • It is for a type of item normally expected toStart-up costs include any amounts paid or in-
a Corporation benefit the partnership throughout its en-curred in connection with any activity engaged in
tire life.for profit and for the production of income inThe costs of organizing a corporation are theanticipation of the activity becoming an activedirect costs of creating the corporation. Organizational costs include the followingtrade or business.
fees.Qualifying costs.You can amortize an orga-Qualifying costs.A start-up cost is amortiz-nizational cost only if it meets all the followingable if it meets both the following tests. • Legal fees for services incident to the or-tests. ganization of the partnership, such as ne-• It is a cost you could deduct if you paid or• It is for the creation of the corporation. gotiation and preparation of theincurred it to operate an existing active partnership agreement.trade or business (in the same field as the• It is chargeable to a capital account.
one you entered into). • Accounting fees for services incident to• It could be amortized over the life of thethe organization of the partnership.• It is a cost you pay or incur before the day corporation if the corporation had a fixed
your active trade or business begins. life. • Filing fees.
Page 34 Chapter 9 Amortization

Page 35 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Nonqualifying costs. The following costs Once you make the choice to amortize You do not need to separately list any
cannot be amortized. partnership organizational cost that isstart-up or organizational costs, you cannot re-
less than $10. Instead, you can list thevoke it.
TIP
• The cost of acquiring assets for the part- total amount of these costs with the dates thenership or transferring assets to the part- first and last costs were incurred.Corporations and partnerships.If your busi-nership. ness is organized as a corporation or partner-After a partnership makes the choice to• The cost of admitting or removing part-ship, only your corporation or partnership canamortize organizational costs, it can file anners, other than at the time the partnershipchoose to amortize its start-up or organizationalamended return to include additional organiza-is first organized. costs. A shareholder or partner cannot maketional costs not included in the partnership’s
this choice. You, as shareholder or partner, can-original return and statement.• The cost of making a contract concerning
not amortize any costs you incur in setting upthe operation of the partnership trade or
your corporation or partnership. The corporationbusiness (including a contract between a
or partnership can amortize these costs.partner and the partnership).
You, as an individual, can choose toGetting a Lease• The costs for issuing and marketing inter-
amortize costs you incur to investigateests in the partnership (such as broker-
If you get a lease for business property, youan interest in an existing partnership.age, registration, and legal fees and
TIP
recover the cost by amortizing it over the term ofThese costs qualify as business start-up costs ifprinting costs). These “syndication fees”
the lease. The term of the lease for amortizationyou acquire the partnership interest.are capital expenses that cannot be de-
purposes generally includes all renewal optionspreciated or amortized.
(and any other period for which you and theStart-up costs.If you choose to amortize yourlessor reasonably expect the lease to be re-Liquidation of partnership.If a partnership isstart-up costs, complete Part VI of Form 4562newed). However, renewal periods are not in-liquidated before the end of the amortizationand prepare a separate statement that containscluded if 75% or more of the cost of getting theperiod, the unamortized amount of qualifyingthe following information. lease is for the term of the lease remaining onorganizational costs can be deducted in the the acquisition date (not including any period for• A description of the business to which thepartnership’s final tax year. However, these which you may choose to renew, extend, orstart-up costs relate.costs can be deducted only to the extent they continue the lease).qualify as a loss from a business. • A description of each start-up cost in- Enter your deduction in Part VI of Form 4562curred. if you must file that form, or on the appropriateHow To Amortize line of your tax return.• The month your active business began (or
was acquired).You deduct start-up and organizational costs in For more information on the costs of getting
equal amounts over a period of 60 months or a lease, see Cost of Getting a Lease in• The number of months in your amortiza-more. You can choose a period for start-up costs chapter 4.tion period (not less than 60).that is different from the period you choose for
organizational costs, as long as both are not lessFiling the statement early. You canthan 60 months. Once you choose an amortiza-choose to amortize your start-up costs by filingtion period, you cannot change it. the statement with a return for any tax yearSection 197 IntangiblesTo figure your deduction, divide your totalbefore the year your active business begins. Ifstart-up or organizational costs by the months inyou file the statement early, the choice becomesYou must generally amortize over 15 years thethe amortization period. The result is the amounteffective in the month of the tax year your activecapitalized costs of “section 197 intangibles” youyou can deduct for each month. business begins. acquired after August 10, 1993. You must amor-
tize these costs if you hold the section 197Revised statement. You can file a revisedCash method partnership.A partnership us- intangibles in connection with your trade or busi-statement to include any start-up costs not in-ing the cash method of accounting cannot de- ness or in an activity engaged in for the produc-cluded in your original statement. However, youduct an organizational cost it has not paid by the tion of income.cannot include on the revised statement anyend of the tax year. However, any cost the part-
You may not be able to amortize sec-cost you previously treated on your return as anership could have deducted as an organiza-
tion 197 intangibles acquired in a trans-cost other than a start-up cost. You can file thetional cost in an earlier tax year (if it had been
action that did not result in a significantrevised statement with a return filed after thepaid that year) can be deducted in the tax year of
CAUTION
!
change in ownership or use. See Anti-Churningreturn on which you chose to amortize yourpayment.
Rules, later.start-up costs.
When to begin amortization.The amortiza- Your amortization deduction each year is the
Organizational costs.If you choose to amor-tion period starts with the month you begin busi- applicable part of the intangible’s adjusted basis
tize your corporation’s or partnership’s organi-ness operations. (for purposes of determining gain), figured by
zational costs, complete Part VI of Form 4562amortizing it ratably over 15 years (180 months).
and prepare a separate statement that containsThe 15-year period begins with the later of:
How To Make the Choice the following information.
• The month the intangible is acquired, or
• A description of each cost.To choose to amortize start-up or organizational
• The month the trade or business or activitycosts, you must attach Form 4562 and an ac- • The amount of each cost. engaged in for the production of incomecompanying statement (explained later) to your
begins.• The date each cost was incurred.return for the first tax year you are in business. If
you have both start-up and organizational costs, You cannot deduct amortization for the month• The month your corporation or partnershipattach a separate statement to your return for you dispose of the intangible.began active business (or acquired theeach type of cost. business). If you pay or incur an amount that increasesGenerally, you must file the return by the due the basis of an amortizable section 197 intangi-• The number of months in your amortiza-date (including any extensions). However, if you ble after the 15-year period begins, amortize ittion period (not less than 60).timely filed your return for the year without mak- over the remainder of the 15-year period begin-ing the choice, you can still make the choice by ning with the month the basis increase occurs.Partnerships. The statement prepared forfiling an amended return within 6 months of the
a cash basis partnership must also indicate thedue date of the return (excluding extensions). You are not allowed any other depreciation
amount paid before the end of the year for eachFor more information, see the instructions for or amortization deduction for an amortizable
cost.Part VI of Form 4562. section 197 intangible.
Chapter 9 Amortization Page 35

Page 36 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Cost attributable to other property.The Workforce in place, etc.This includes the or renewing) a liquor license, a taxicab medal-
rules for section 197 intangibles do not apply to composition of a workforce (for example, its ex- lion or license, or a television or radio broadcast-
any amount that is included in determining the perience, education, or training). It also includes ing license.
cost of property that is not a section 197 intangi-the terms and conditions of employment,
Covenant not to compete. Section 197 in-ble. For example, if the cost of computerwhether contractual or otherwise, and any other
tangibles include a covenant not to compete (orsoftware is not separately stated from the cost of value placed on employees or any of their attrib-
similar arrangement) entered into in connectionhardware or other tangible property and you utes.
with the acquisition of an interest in a trade orconsistently treat it as part of the cost of the For example, you must amortize the part of
business, or a substantial portion of a trade orhardware or other tangible property, these rules the purchase price of a business that is for the
business. An interest in a trade or businessdo not apply. Similarly, none of the cost of ac- existence of a highly skilled workforce. Also, you
includes an interest in a partnership or a corpo-quiring real property held for the production of must amortize the cost of acquiring an existing
ration engaged in a trade or business.rental income is considered the cost of goodwill, employment contract or relationship with em-
going concern value, or any other section 197 ployees or consultants. An arrangement that requires the former
intangible. owner to perform services (or to provide prop-Business books and records, etc.This in- erty or the use of property) is not similar to acludes the intangible value of technical manuals,covenant not to compete to the extent the
Section 197 training manuals or programs, data files, andamount paid under the arrangement representsIntangibles Defined accounting or inventory control systems. It alsoreasonable compensation for those services orincludes the cost of customer lists, subscriptionfor that property or its use.The following assets are section 197 in- lists, insurance expirations, patient or client files,tangibles. and lists of newspaper, magazine, radio, andFranchise, trademark, or trade name. A
television advertisers. franchise, trademark, or trade name is a section1) Goodwill.
197 intangible. You must amortize its purchasePatents, copyrights, etc.This includes pack-2) Going concern value. or renewal costs, other than certain contingentage design, computer software, and any interestpayments that you can deduct currently. For3) Workforce in place. in a film, sound recording, videotape, book, orinformation on currently deductible contingentother similar property, except as discussed later4) Business books and records, operating payments, see Franchise, trademark, tradeunder Assets That Are Not Section 197 In-systems, or any other information base, name under Miscellaneous Expenses intangibles.including lists or other information con- chapter 13.cerning current or prospective customers.Customer-based intangible.This is the com-
Contract for the use of, or a term interest in, a5) A patent, copyright, formula, process, de- position of market, market share, and any other
section 197 intangible. Section 197 in-sign, pattern, know-how, format, or similarvalue resulting from the future provision of
tangibles include any right under a license, con-item. goods or services because of relationships with
tract, or other arrangement providing for the usecustomers in the ordinary course of business.6) A customer-based intangible. of any section 197 intangible. It also includesFor example, you must amortize the part of the
any term interest in any section 197 intangible,7) A supplier-based intangible. purchase price of a business that is for the
whether the interest is outright or in trust.existence of the following intangibles.8) Any item similar to items (3) through (7).
• A customer base.9) A license, permit, or other right granted by Assets That Are Not
a governmental unit or agency (including• A circulation base. Section 197 Intangiblesissuances and renewals). • An undeveloped market or market growth.The following assets are not section 197 in-10) A covenant not to compete entered into in• Insurance in force. tangibles.connection with the acquisition of an inter-
est in a trade or business. • A mortgage servicing contract. 1) Any interest in a corporation, partnership,
11) A franchise, trademark, or trade name (in-• An investment management contract. trust, or estate.
cluding renewals). • Any other relationship with customers in-2) Any interest under an existing futures con-
12) A contract for the use of, or a term interest volving the future provision of goods ortract, foreign currency contract, notional
in, any item in this list. services. principal contract, interest rate swap, or
similar financial contract.
You cannot amortize any of the in- Accounts receivable or other similar rights to3) Any interest in land.tangibles listed in items (1) through (8)income for goods or services provided to cus-
that you created (rather than acquired)tomers before the acquisition of a trade or busi-4) Most computer software. (See ComputerCAUTION
!
unless you created them in connection with theness are not section 197 intangibles. software, later.)
acquisition of assets constituting a trade or busi- 5) Any of the following assets not acquired inSupplier-based intangible.This is the valueness or a substantial part of a trade or business. connection with the acquisition of a traderesulting from the future acquisition of goods or
or business or a substantial part of a tradeservices used or sold by the business becauseGoodwill. This is the value of a trade or busi- or business.of business relationships with suppliers.ness based on expected continued customer For example, you must amortize the part ofpatronage due to its name, reputation, or any a) An interest in a film, sound recording,the purchase price of a business that is for theother factor. video tape, book, or similar property.existence of the following intangibles.
Going concern value. This is the additional b) A right to receive tangible property or• A favorable relationship with distributorsvalue of a trade or business that attaches to services under a contract or from a(such as favorable shelf or display spaceproperty because the property is an integral part governmental agency.at a retail outlet).of an ongoing business activity. It includes value
c) An interest in a patent or copyright.based on the ability of a business to continue to• A favorable credit rating.
function and generate income even though d) Certain rights that have a fixed duration• A favorable supply contract.there is a change in ownership (but does not or amount. (See Rights of fixed dura-
include any other section 197 intangible). It also tion or amount, later.)
includes value based on the immediate use orGovernment-granted license, permit, etc.
availability of an acquired trade or business, This is any right granted by a governmental unit6) An interest under either of the following.
such as the use of earnings during any period in or an agency or instrumentality of a governmen-
which the business would not otherwise be tal unit. For example, you must amortize the a) An existing lease or sublease of tangi-
available or operational. capitalized costs of acquiring (including issuing ble property.
Page 36 Chapter 9 Amortization

Page 37 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
b) A debt that was in existence when the• A covenant not to compete. stituted for “at least 80%” in that definition
interest was acquired. and the determination is made without re-• A franchise, trademark, or trade name. gard to subsections (a)(4) and (e)(3)(C) of
7) A professional sports franchise or any item• A customer-related information base, section 1563. (For an exception, see sec-
acquired in connection with the franchise. customer-based intangible, or similar item.tion 1.197–2(h)(6)(iv) of the regulations.)
8) A right to service residential mortgages un- • A trust fiduciary and a corporation if more
less the right is acquired in connection with than 20% of the value of the corporation’sAnti-Churning Rules
the acquisition of a trade or business or a outstanding stock is owned, directly or in-
substantial part of a trade or business. directly, by or for the trust or grantor of theAnti-churning rules prevent you from amortizing
trust.most section 197 intangibles if the transaction in9) Certain transaction costs incurred by par-which you acquired them did not result in aties to a corporate organization or reorgan- • The grantor and fiduciary, and the fiduci-significant change in ownership or use. Theseization in which any part of a gain or loss is ary and beneficiary, of any trust.rules apply to goodwill and going concern value,not recognized. • The fiduciaries of two different trusts, andand to any other section 197 intangible that is
Intangible property that is not amortizable the fiduciaries and beneficiaries of two dif-not otherwise depreciable or amortizable.
under the rules for section 197 intangibles can ferent trusts, if the same person is theUnder the anti-churning rules, you cannot
be depreciated if it meets certain requirements. grantor of both trusts.use 15-year amortization for the intangible if any
You generally must use the straight line methodof the following conditions apply. • The executor and beneficiary of an estate.over its useful life. For certain intangibles, the
1) You or a related person (defined later)depreciation period is specified in the law and • A tax-exempt educational or charitable or-
held or used the intangible at any timeregulations. For example, the depreciation pe- ganization and a person who directly or
from July 25, 1991, through August 10,riod for computer software that is not a section indirectly controls the organization (or
1993.197 intangible is 36 months. whose family members control it).
For more information on depreciating intan-2) You acquired the intangible from a person• A corporation and a partnership if thegible property, see Intangible Property under who held it at any time during the period insame persons own more than 20% of theCan You Use MACRS To Depreciate Your Prop- (1) and, as part of the transaction, the uservalue of the outstanding stock of the cor-erty? in chapter 1 of Publication 946. did not change. poration and more than 20% of the capital
or profits interest in the partnership.Computer software. Section 197 intangibles3) You granted the right to use the intangible
do not include the following types of computerto a person (or a person related to that• Two S corporations, and an S corporation
software. person) who held or used it at any time and a regular corporation, if the same per-
during the period in (1). This applies only ifsons own more than 20% of the value of1) Software that meets all the following re-the transaction in which you granted the the outstanding stock of each corporation.quirements. right and the transaction in which you ac-
• Two partnerships if the same personsquired the intangible are part of a series ofa) It is (or has been) readily available for own, directly or indirectly, more than 20%related transactions. See Related person,purchase by the general public. of the capital or profits interests in bothlater, for information about the kinds ofpartnerships.b) It is subject to a nonexclusive license.persons that are related.
• A partnership and a person who owns,c) It has not been substantially modified.
directly or indirectly, more than 20% of theExceptions. The anti-churning rules do notThis requirement is considered met if
capital or profits interests in the partner-apply in the following situations.the cost of all modifications is not more
ship.than the greater of 25% of the price of• You acquired the intangible from a dece-the publicly available unmodified • Two persons who are engaged in tradesdent and its basis was stepped up to itssoftware or $2,000. or businesses under common control (asfair market value.
described in section 41(f)(1) of the Internal
• The intangible was amortizable as a sec-2) Software that is not acquired in connection Revenue Code).
tion 197 intangible by the seller or trans-with the acquisition of a trade or business
feror you acquired it from. This exceptionor a substantial part of a trade or business. When to determine relationship.Persons
does not apply if the transaction in whichare treated as related if the relationship existed
Computer software defined. Computer you acquired the intangible and the trans-at the following time.
software includes all programs designed to action in which the seller or transferor ac-
• In the case of a single transaction, imme-cause a computer to perform a desired function. quired it are part of a series of related
diately before or immediately after theIt also includes any database or similar item that transactions.
transaction in which the intangible was ac-is in the public domain and is incidental to the• The gain-recognition exception, dis- quired.operation of qualifying software. cussed later, applies.
• In the case of a series of related transac-Rights of fixed duration or amount.Section
tions (or a series of transactions that com-197 intangibles do not include any right under aRelated person. For purposes of the prise a qualified stock purchase undercontract or from a governmental agency if theanti-churning rules, the following are related per-section 338(d)(3) of the Internal Revenueright is acquired in the ordinary course of a tradesons. Code), immediately before the earliestor business (or in an activity engaged in for the
• An individual and his or her brothers, sis-transaction or immediately after the lastproduction of income) but not as part of a
ters, half-brothers, half-sisters, spouse,transaction.purchase of a trade or business and either:
ancestors (parents, grandparents, etc.),
and lineal descendants (children, grand-Ownership of stock. In determining1) Has a fixed life of less than 15 years, or
children, etc.). whether an individual directly or indirectly owns2) Is of a fixed amount that, except for the any of the outstanding stock of a corporation, the• A corporation and an individual who owns,rules for section 197 intangibles, would be following rules apply.directly or indirectly, more than 20% of therecovered under a method similar to the
value of the corporation’s outstanding Rule 1. Stock directly or indirectly owned byunit-of-production method of cost recovery.
stock. or for a corporation, partnership, estate, or trustHowever, this does not apply to the following is considered owned proportionately by or for its• Two corporations that are members of theintangibles. shareholders, partners, or beneficiaries.same controlled group as defined in sec-• Goodwill. tion 1563(a) of the Internal Revenue Rule 2. An individual is considered to own
• Going concern value. Code, except that “more than 20%” is sub- the stock directly or indirectly owned by or for his
Chapter 9 Amortization Page 37

Page 38 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
or her family. Family includes only brothers and amortization than you should have, you must tion. Revenue Procedure 2002–9 and section
sisters, half-brothers and half-sisters, spouse, reduce your basis by the correct amortization 2.01 of its Appendix, which is in Internal Reve-
ancestors, and lineal descendants. plus any of the excess for which you received a nue Bulletin No. 2002–3, have instructions for
tax benefit. getting automatic approval and list exceptions toRule 3. An individual owning (other than by the automatic approval procedures.applying rule 2) any stock in a corporation is
considered to own the stock directly or indirectly Exceptions. You generally cannot use theAmended Returnowned by or for his or her partner. automatic approval procedure in any of the fol-
lowing situations.If you did not deduct the correct amortization,Rule 4. For purposes of applying rule 1, 2, or
you can file an amended return to make any of3, treat stock constructively owned by a person • You (your federal income tax return) arethe following corrections.under rule 1 as actually owned by that person. under examination.
Do not treat stock constructively owned by an• Correction of a mathematical error made• You are before a federal court or an ap-individual under rule 2 or 3 as owned by thein any year. peals office for any income tax issue andindividual for reapplying rule 2 or 3 to make
• Correction of a posting error made in any the method of accounting to be changed isanother person the constructive owner of the
year. an issue under consideration by the fed-stock.
eral court or appeals office.• Correction of the amortization deductionGain-recognition exception.This exception for a section 197 intangible for which you• You changed the same method of ac-to the anti-churning rules applies if the personhave not adopted a method of accounting. counting (with or without obtaining IRS ap-you acquired the intangible from (the transferor) proval) during the last 5 years (includingmeets both the following requirements. You have adopted a method of accounting forthe year of change).
• That person would not be related to you a section 197 intangible if you did not deduct the• You filed a Form 3115 to change the same(as described under Related person, ear- correct amortization for the intangible on two or method of accounting during the last 5lier) if the 20% test for ownership of stockmore consecutively filed tax returns for reasonsyears (including the year of change), butand partnership interests were replaced byother than a mathematical or posting error. Youdid not make the change because thea 50% test. cannot file amended returns to correct the Form 3115 was withdrawn, not perfected,amount of amortization.• That person chose to recognize gain on denied, or not granted.
the disposition of the intangible and payWhen to file.If an amended return is allowed,Also, see the other exceptions listed in sectionincome tax on the gain at the highest taxyou must file it by the later of the following dates.4.02 and section 2.01(2)(c) of the Appendix ofrate. See chapter 2 in Publication 544 for Revenue Procedure 2002–9.• 3 years from the date you filed your origi-information on making this choice. nal return for the year in which you did not
deduct the correct amount. (A return filedDisposition ofIf this exception applies, the anti-churningearly is considered filed on the due date.)rules apply only to the amount of your adjusted Section 197 Intangibles
basis in the intangible that is more than the gain• 2 years from the time you paid your tax for
A section 197 intangible is treated as deprecia-recognized by the transferor. that year.
ble property used in your trade or business. IfNotification.If the person you acquired the you held the intangible for more than 1 year, anyintangible from chooses to recognize gain underChanging Your gain on its disposition, up to the amount of allow-the rules for this exception, that person mustAccounting Method able amortization, is ordinary income (sectionnotify you in writing by the due date of the return 1245 gain). Any remaining gain, or any loss, is aIf you cannot correct your amortization deduc-on which the choice is made. section 1231 gain or loss. If you held the intangi-tions for a section 197 intangible by filingble 1 year or less, any gain or loss on its disposi-Anti-abuse rule.You cannot amortize any amended returns, you can claim the correcttion is an ordinary gain or loss. For moresection 197 intangible acquired in a transactionamount only by changing your method of ac-information on ordinary or capital gain or loss onfor which the principal purpose was either of thecounting for the intangible. You will then be ablebusiness property, see chapter 3 in Publicationfollowing. to take into account any unclaimed or excess544.amortization from years before the year of• To avoid the requirement that the intangi-
change.ble be acquired after August 10, 1993. Nondeductible loss.You cannot deduct any
loss on the disposition or worthlessness of aApproval required. You must get IRS ap-• To avoid any of the anti-churning rules.
section 197 intangible that you acquired in theproval to change your method of accounting.
same transaction (or series of related transac-File Form 3115, Application for Change in Ac-More information. For more information tions) as other section 197 intangibles you stillcounting Method, to request a change to a per-about the anti-churning rules, including addi- have. Instead, increase the adjusted basis ofmissible method of accounting for amortization.tional rules for partnerships, see section each remaining amortizable section 197 intangi-Revenue Procedure 97–27, which is in Cumula-1.197–2(h) of the regulations. ble by a proportionate part of the nondeductibletive Bulletin 1997–1, gives general instructions
loss. Figure the increase by multiplying the non-for getting approval. You do not need IRS ap-
Incorrect Amount of deductible loss on the disposition of the intangi-proval to correct any mathematical or posting
ble by the following fraction.error. See Amended Return, earlier.Amortization Deducted
Automatic approval.You may be able to get • The numerator is the adjusted basis ofIf you did not deduct the correct amortization forautomatic approval from the IRS to change youreach remaining intangible on the date ofa section 197 intangible in any year, you may bemethod of accounting for a section 197 intangi-the disposition.able to make a correction for that year by filingble if you meet both the following conditions.an amended return. See Amended Return, later. • The denominator is the total adjusted ba-
If you are not allowed to make the correction on• You did not deduct amortization or you ses of all remaining amortizable section
an amended return, you can change your ac- deducted the incorrect amount of amorti- 197 intangibles on the date of the disposi-
counting method to claim the correct amortiza-zation for the intangible in at least the 2tion.
tion. See Changing Your Accounting Method, years immediately preceding the year of
later. change. Covenant not to compete.A covenant not to
Basis adjustment. If you could have de- compete, or similar arrangement, is not consid-• You owned the intangible at the beginning
ducted amortization but you did not take the ered disposed of or worthless before you dis-of the year of change.
deduction, you must reduce the basis of the pose of your entire interest in the trade or
section 197 intangible by the amortization you File Form 3115 to request a change to a business for which you entered into the cove-
were entitled to deduct. If you deducted more permissible method of accounting for amortiza- nant.
Page 38 Chapter 9 Amortization

Page 39 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Nonrecognition transfers.If you acquire a can amortize these costs only if you include theExample. You are single and a partner in
section 197 intangible in a nonrecognition trans-reimbursement in your income. two partnerships, both of which incurred qualify-
fer, you are treated as the transferor with respect ing reforestation costs of more than $10,000 for
to the part of your adjusted basis in the intangi- the year. Each partnership chose to amortizeQualified timber property.Qualified timber
ble that is not more than the transferor’s ad- these costs up to the $10,000 annual limit. Yourproperty is property that contains trees in signifi-
justed basis. You amortize this part of the share of that $10,000 is $6,000 for one partner-cant commercial quantities. It can be a woodlot
adjusted basis over the intangible’s remaining ship and $8,000 for the other. Although youror other site that you own or lease. The property
amortization period in the hands of the trans- qualifying costs total $14,000, the amount youqualifies only if it meets all the following require-
feror. Nonrecognition transfers include transfers can amortize is limited to $10,000.ments.
to a corporation, partnership contributions and Estates. Estates can choose to amortize up• It is located in the United States.distributions, like-kind exchanges, and involun- to $10,000 of qualifying reforestation costs eachtary conversions. • It is held for the growing and cutting oftax year. These amortizable costs are dividedIn a like-kind exchange or involuntary con-timber you will either use in, or sell for usebetween the estate and the income beneficiaryversion of a section 197 intangible, you mustin, the commercial production of timberbased on the income of the estate allocable tocontinue to amortize the part of your adjustedproducts. each. The amortizable cost allocated to the ben-basis in the acquired intangible that is not more eficiary is subject to the beneficiary’s annual• It consists of at least one acre planted withthan your adjusted basis in the exchanged or limit.tree seedlings in the manner normallyconverted intangible over the remaining amorti-
used in forestation or reforestation. Maximum annual amortization deduction.zation period of the exchanged or converted
The maximum annual amortization deductionintangible. Amortize over a new 15-year period
Qualified timber property does not includefor costs incurred in any tax year is $1,428.57the part of your adjusted basis in the acquired
property on which you have planted shelter belts($10,000 ÷ 7), or $714.29 ($5,000 ÷ 7) if marriedintangible that is more than your adjusted basis
or ornamental trees, such as Christmas trees.filing separately. The maximum deduction in thein the exchanged or converted intangible.
first and last tax year of the 84-month amortiza-
Amortization period.The 84-month amorti-Example. You own a section 197 intangible tion period is one half of the maximum annual
zation period starts on the first day of the firstyou have amortized for 4 full years. It has a deduction, or $714.29 ($357.15 if married filing
month of the second half of the tax year youremaining unamortized basis of $30,000. You separately).
incur the costs (July 1 for a calendar year tax-exchange the asset plus $10,000 for a like-kind
payer), regardless of the month you actuallyLife tenant and remainderman.If one per-section 197 intangible. The nonrecognition pro-
incur the costs. You can claim amortization de-son holds the property for life with the remaindervisions of like-kind exchanges apply. You amor-
ductions for no more than 6 months of the firstgoing to another person, the life tenant is entitledtize $30,000 of the $40,000 adjusted basis of the
and last (eighth) tax years of the period.acquired intangible over the 11 years remaining to the full amortization (up to the annual limit) for
in the original 15-year amortization period for the qualifying reforestation costs incurred by the life
Example. Last year (a full 12-month taxtransferred asset. You amortize the other tenant. Any remainder interest in the property is
year), John Jones incurred qualifying reforesta-$10,000 of adjusted basis over a new 15-year ignored for amortization purposes.
tion costs of $8,400. His monthly amortizationperiod.
deduction ($100) is figured by dividing $8,400 byRecapture. If you dispose of qualified timber
84 months. Since it was the first year of the property within 10 years after the tax year you
84-month period, he can deduct only $600 incur qualifying reforestation expenses, report
($100 × 6 months). any gain as ordinary income up to the amortiza-
Reforestation Costs tion you took. See chapter 3 of Publication 544
for more information.Annual limit.Each year, you can choose toYou can choose to amortize a limited amount of
amortize up to $10,000 ($5,000 if you are mar-reforestation costs for qualified timber property Investment credit.Amortizable reforestationried filing separately) of qualifying costs you payover a period of 84 months. Reforestation costs costs qualify for the investment credit, whetheror incur during the tax year. You cannot carryare the direct costs of planting or seeding for or not they are amortized. See the instructionsover or carry back qualifying costs over the an-forestation or reforestation. for Form 3468 for information on the investmentnual limit. The annual limit applies to qualifyingThe choice to amortize reforestation costs credit.costs for all your qualified timber property.incurred by a partnership, S corporation, or es-
If your qualifying costs are more thantate must be made by the partnership, corpora- How to make the choice.To choose to amor-$10,000 for more than one piece of qualifiedtion, or estate. A partner, shareholder, or tize qualifying reforestation costs, enter your de-timber property, you can divide the annual limitbeneficiary cannot make that choice. duction in Part VI of Form 4562 and attach aamong any of the properties in any manner youstatement that contains the following informa-A trust cannot choose to amortize re-wish. tion.forestation costs and cannot deduct its
share of any amortizable reforestationCAUTION
!
Example. You incurred $10,000 of qualify-• A description of the costs and the datescosts of a partnership, S corporation, or estate.ing costs on each of four qualified timber proper-you incurred them.
ties last year. You can allocate $2,500 to each
• A description of the type of timber beingproperty, $5,000 to two properties, or the entireQualifying costs.Qualifying costs include grown and the purpose for which it is$10,000 to any one property, or you can divideonly those costs you must capitalize and include grown.the $10,000 among some or all of the propertiesin the adjusted basis of the property. They in-
in any other manner.clude costs for the following items. Attach a separate statement for each property
for which you amortize reforestation costs.Partnerships and S corporations.A part-• Site preparation.
nership or S corporation can choose to amortizeGenerally, you must make the choice on a• Seeds or seedlings. up to $10,000 of qualifying reforestation coststimely filed return (including extensions) for the
each tax year. A partner’s or shareholder’stax year in which you incurred the costs. How-• Labor.
share of these amortizable costs is figuredever, if you timely filed your return for the year• Tools. under the general rules for allocating items ofwithout making the choice, you can still make
income, loss, deductions, etc., of a partnershipthe choice by filing an amended return within 6• Depreciation on equipment used in plant-
or S corporation. months of the due date of the return (excludinging and seeding.
The partner or shareholder is also subject to extensions). Attach Form 4562 and the state-Costs you can deduct currently are not qualify-the annual limit of $10,000 ($5,000 if married ment to the amended return and write “Fileding costs. filing separately) on qualifying costs. This limit pursuant to section 301.9100–2” on Form 4562.
applies to all the partner’s or shareholder’s qual- File the amended return at the same addressIf the government reimburses you for refores-
ifying costs, regardless of their source. you filed the original return.tation costs under a cost-sharing program, you
Chapter 9 Amortization Page 39

Page 40 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Where to report.The following chart shows must be certified by state and federal certifying for the year without making the choice, you can
where to report your amortization deduction for authorities. still make the choice by filing an amended return
qualifying reforestation costs after you enter it The facility must not significantly increase within 6 months of the due date of the return
on Form 4562. the output or capacity, extend the useful life, or (excluding extensions). Attach Form 4562 to the
reduce the total operating costs of the plant or amended return and write “Filed pursuant toIf you file . . . The deduction goes on . . .other property. Also, it must not significantly section 301.9100–2” on Form 4562. File the
change the nature of the manufacturing or pro- amended return at the same address you filedSchedule C
(Form 1040) Line 27 duction process or facility. the original return.
The federal certifying authority will not certifyYour choice is binding for the year it is madeSchedule F your property to the extent it appears you willand for all later years unless you get IRS ap-(Form 1040) Line 34 recover (over the property’s useful life) all or partproval to change to a different method.
of its cost from the profit based on its operationForm 1120 Line 26
(such as through sales of recovered wastes).More information. For more information onForm 1120-A Line 22 The federal certifying authority will describe theamortizing research and development costs,
nature of the potential cost recovery. You mustsee section 174 of the Internal Revenue CodeForm 1120S Schedules K and K-1
then reduce the amortizable basis of the facilityand the related regulations.
Form 1065 Schedules K and K-1 by this potential recovery.
None of the Line 34 of Form 1040 New identifiable treatment facility.A new
above (identify as “RFST”) identifiable treatment facility is tangible depre-
ciable property that is identifiable as a treatment
You cannot report your amortization deductionfacility. It does not include a building and its
on Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040). structural components unless the building is ex-10.clusively a treatment facility.Partner or shareholder.If you are a part-
ner in a partnership or a shareholder in an SBasis reduction for corporations.A corpo-
corporation, see the instructions for Scheduleration must reduce the amortizable basis of a
K-1 (Form 1065 or Form 1120S) for informationpollution control facility by 20% before figuringDepletion
on where to report any allocated amortization forthe amortization deduction.
qualifying reforestation costs. However, if youMore information. For more information onhave qualifying reforestation costs from otherthe amortization of pollution control facilities,Important Changesources, your total deduction may be limited.see section 169 of the Internal Revenue CodeSee Annual limit, earlier. and the related regulations. Marginal production of oil and gas.TheEstate. If the estate does not file Schedule
suspension of the taxable income limit on per-C or F for the activity in which the qualifying
centage depletion from the marginal productionreforestation costs were incurred, include the
of oil and natural gas that was scheduled toamortization deduction on line 15a of FormResearch and expire for tax years beginning after 2001 has1041.
been extended to tax years beginning beforeExperimental Costs 2004. For more information on marginal produc-Revoking the choice.You must get IRS ap-
tion, see section 613A(c)(6) of the Internal Rev-proval to revoke your choice to amortize qualify-You can amortize your research and experimen-enue Code.ing reforestation costs. Your application total costs, deduct them as current business ex-revoke the choice must include your name, ad-penses, or write them off over a 10-year period.dress, the years for which your choice was inIf you choose to amortize these costs, deducteffect, and your reason for revoking it. You, orthem in equal amounts over 60 months or more.your duly authorized representative, must sign Important ReminderThe amortization period begins the month youthe application and file it at least 90 days beforefirst receive an economic benefit from the ex-the due date (without extensions) for filing yourpenditures. For a definition of “research andAlternative minimum tax.Individuals, corpo-income tax return for the first tax year for whichexperimental costs” and information on deduct-rations, estates, and trusts who claim depletionyour choice is to end. ing them as current business expenses, seedeductions may be liable for alternative mini-
chapter 8. mum tax.
For more information on alternative mini-Optional write-off method. Rather thanSend the application to: mum tax, see the following sources.amortize these costs or deduct them as a cur-
rent expense, you have the option of deductingCommissioner of Internal Revenue If you are: See:(writing off) research and experimental costsWashington, DC 20224 ratably over a 10-year period beginning with theAn individual the instructions for Form
tax year in which you incurred the costs. 6251, Alternative Minimum
For more information on the optional write-off Tax—Individuals.
method, see Internal Revenue Code section
A corporation Form 4626, Alternative59(e).Pollution Minimum Tax—
Costs you can amortize. You can amortize Corporations.Control Facilities costs chargeable to a capital account if you meetAn estate or trust Form 1041, U.S. Incomeboth the following requirements. Tax Return for EstatesYou can choose to amortize over 60 months the
• You paid or incurred the costs in your and Trusts, and itscost of a certified pollution control facility.
instructions.trade or business.
Certified pollution control facility.A certi- • You are not deducting the costs currently.fied pollution control facility is a new identifiable
treatment facility used in connection with a plant
or other property in operation before 1976, toHow to make the choice.To choose to amor-
reduce or control water or atmospheric pollution tize research and experimental costs, enter yourIntroductionor contamination. The facility must do so by deduction in Part VI of Form 4562 and attach it
Depletion is the using up of natural resources byremoving, changing, disposing, storing, or to your income tax return. Generally, you must
mining, quarrying, drilling, or felling. The deple-preventing the creation or emission of pollu- file the return by the due date (including exten-
tion deduction allows an owner or operator totants, contaminants, wastes, or heat. The facility sions). However, if you timely filed your return
Page 40 Chapter 10 Depletion

Page 41 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figuring the cost depletion deduction.account for the reduction of a product’s Cost Depletion
Once you have figured your property’s basis forreserves.
depletion, the total recoverable units, and theTo figure cost depletion you must first determineThere are two ways of figuring depletion:
number of units sold during the tax year, you canthe following.cost depletion and percentage depletion. For
figure your cost depletion deduction by takingmineral property, you generally must use the• The property’s basis for depletion. the following steps.method that gives you the larger deduction; for
• The total recoverable units of mineral instanding timber, you must use cost depletion. Step Action Resultthe property’s natural deposit.
Topics  1 Divide your property’s Rate per• The number of units of mineral sold during
basis for depletion by unit.the tax year.This chapter discusses:
total recoverable units.
• Who can claim depletion? Basis for depletion.To figure the property’s 2 Multiply the rate per Cost
unit by units sold depletionbasis for depletion, subtract all the following• Mineral property
during the tax year. deduction.from the property’s adjusted basis.• Timber
1) Amounts recoverable through:
Percentage Depletiona) Depreciation deductions,
b) Deferred expenses (including deferredTo figure percentage depletion, you multiply a
exploration and development costs),certain percentage, specified for each mineral,Who Can and by your gross income from the property during
the tax year.Claim Depletion? c) Deductions other than depletion.
If you have an economic interest in mineral prop-2) The residual value of land and improve-Gross income. When figuring your percent-erty or standing timber, you can take a deductionments at the end of operations. age depletion, subtract from your gross incomefor depletion. More than one person can have an from the property the following amounts.3) The cost or value of land acquired for pur-economic interest in the same mineral deposit orposes other than mineral production.timber. • Any rents or royalties you paid or incurred
You have an economic interest if both the for the property.Adjusted basis.The adjusted basis of yourfollowing apply. property is your original cost or other basis, plus• The part of any bonus you paid for a lease
certain additions and improvements, and minuson the property allocable to the product• You have acquired by investment any in-
certain deductions such as depletion allowed orsold (or that otherwise gives rise to grossterest in mineral deposits or standing tim-
allowable and casualty losses. Your adjustedincome) for the tax year.ber. basis can never be less than zero. See Publica-A bonus payment includes amounts you paid as• You have a legal right to income from thetion 551, Basis of Assets, for more informationa lessee to satisfy a production payment re-extraction of the mineral or cutting of theon adjusted basis. tained by the lessor.timber to which you must look for a return
Total recoverable units.The total recover-of your capital investment. Use the following fraction to figure the part ofable units is the sum of the following. the bonus you must subtract.A contractual relationship that allows you an
• The number of units of mineral remainingeconomic or monetary advantage from products No. of units sold in the tax yearat the end of the year (including units re-of the mineral deposit or standing timber is not, BonusRecoverable units from the ×covered but not sold).in itself, an economic interest. A production pay- Paymentspropertyment carved out of, or retained on the sale of,• The number of units of mineral sold during
mineral property is not an economic interest.the tax year (determined under your For oil and gas wells and geothermal depos-
method of accounting, as explained next).its, gross income from the property is defined
later under Oil and Gas Wells. For property other
You must estimate or determine recoverablethan a geothermal deposit or an oil and gas well,
units (tons, pounds, ounces, barrels, thousandsMineral Property gross income from the property is defined later
of cubic feet, or other measure) of mineral prod-under Mines and Geothermal Deposits.
ucts using the current industry method and theThe term “mineral property” means each sepa-
most accurate and reliable information you canrate interest you own in each mineral deposit in Taxable income limit.The percentage deple-obtain.each separate tract or parcel of land. You can tion deduction cannot be more than 50% (100%treat two or more separate interests as oneNumber of units sold. You determine the for oil and gas property) of your taxable incomeproperty or as separate properties. See sectionnumber of units sold during the tax year basedfrom the property figured without the depletion614 of the Internal Revenue Code and the re-on your method of accounting. Use the followingdeduction.lated regulations for rules on how to treat sepa-table to make this determination. Taxable income from the property meansrate mineral interests.
gross income from the property minus all allowa-Mineral property includes oil and gas wells,IF you use THEN the units sold ble deductions (excluding any deduction for de-mines, and other natural deposits (including ge-... during the year are ... pletion) attributable to mining processes,othermal deposits). the cash the units sold for which including mining transportation. These deducti-There are two ways of figuring depletion onmethod of you receive payment ble items include the following.mineral property. accounting during the tax year
(regardless of the year of • Operating expenses.• Cost depletion. sale). • Certain selling expenses.• Percentage depletion. an accrual the units sold based on • Administrative and financial overhead.Generally, you must use the method that givesmethod of your inventories.
you the larger deduction. However, unless youaccounting • Depreciation.
are an independent producer or royalty owner, • Intangible drilling and development costs.you generally cannot use percentage depletionThe number of units sold during the tax year
for oil and gas wells. See Oil and Gas Wells, • Exploration and development expendi-does not include any for which depletion deduc-
later. tures.tions were allowed or allowable in earlier years.
Chapter 10 Depletion Page 41

Page 42 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The following rules apply when figuring your a third person holds a significant ownership in- son if any sale by the related person produces
taxable income from the property for purposes terest in both of you. gross income from which you may benefit be-
of the taxable income limit. For example, a corporation, partnership, es- cause of your direct or indirect ownership inter-
tate, or trust and anyone who holds a significant est in the person.
• Do not deduct any net operating loss de-ownership interest in it are related persons. A You are not considered to be selling throughduction from the gross income from thepartnership and a trust are related persons if one a related person who is a retailer if all the follow-property. person holds a significant ownership interest in ing apply.
each of them.• Corporations do not deduct charitable con- • You do not have a significant ownershipFor purposes of the related person rules,tributions from the gross income from the interest in the retailer.significant ownership interest means direct orproperty.
• You sell your production to persons whoindirect ownership of 5% or more in any one of• If, during the year, you dispose of an item are not related to either you or the retailer.the following.of section 1245 property that was used in
• The retailer does not buy oil or natural gas• The value of the outstanding stock of aconnection with mineral property, reduce
from your customers or persons related tocorporation.any allowable deduction for mining ex-
your customers.penses by the part of any gain you must• The interest in the profits or capital of areport as ordinary income that is allocable • There are no arrangements for the retailerpartnership.to the mineral property. See section to acquire oil or natural gas you produced• The beneficial interests in an estate or1.613–5(b)(1) of the regulations for infor- for resale or made available for purchasetrust.mation on how to figure the ordinary gain by the retailer.allocable to the property.
Any interest owned by or for a corporation,• Neither you nor the retailer knows of or
partnership, trust, or estate is considered to be controls the final disposition of the oil orFor tax years beginning after 1997 andowned directly both by itself and proportionately natural gas you sold or the original sourcebefore 2004, percentage depletion onby its shareholders, partners, or beneficiaries. of the petroleum products the retailer ac-the marginal production of oil or natural
TIP
quired for resale.gas is not limited to taxable income from theRetailers who cannot claim percentage de-
property figured without the depletion deduction.pletion.You cannot claim percentage deple-
Transferees who cannot claim percentagetion if both the following apply.
depletion. You cannot claim percentage de-
pletion if you received your interest in a proven1) You sell oil or natural gas or their by-prod-Oil and Gas Wells
oil or gas property by transfer after 1974 anducts directly or through a related person in
You cannot claim percentage depletion for an oil before October 12, 1990. For a definition of theany of the following situations.
or gas well unless at least one of the following term “transfer,” see section 1.613A–7(n) of the
a) Through a retail outlet operated by youapplies. regulations. For a definition of the term “interest
or a related person. in proven oil or gas property,” see section• You are either an independent producer or 1.613A–7(p) of the regulations.b) To any person who is required undera royalty owner.
an agreement with you or a related per-Figuring percentage depletion.Generally,• The well produces natural gas that is ei- son to use a trademark, trade name, oras an independent producer or royalty owner,ther sold under a fixed contract or pro- service mark or name owned by you oryou figure your percentage depletion by comput-duced from geopressured brine. a related person in marketing or distrib-ing your average daily production of domestic oiluting oil, natural gas, or their by-prod-or gas and comparing it to your depletable oil orIf you are an independent producer or royaltyucts. gas quantity. If your average daily productionowner, see Independent Producers and Royalty
c) To any person given authority under andoes not exceed your depletable oil or gas quan-Owners, next.
agreement with you or a related persontity, you figure your percentage depletion byFor information on the depletion deduction to occupy any retail outlet owned, multiplying the gross income from the oil or gasfor wells that produce natural gas that is eitherleased, or controlled by you or a relatedproperty (defined later) by 15%. If your averagesold under a fixed contract or produced from person. daily production of domestic oil or gas exceedsgeopressured brine, see Natural Gas Wells,
your depletable oil or gas quantity, you mustlater. 2) The combined gross receipts from salesmake an allocation as explained later under Av-
(not counting resales) of oil, natural gas, orerage daily production exceeds depletable
their by-products by all retail outlets takenquantities.Independent Producers and
into account in (1) are more than $5 millionIn addition, there is a limit on the percentageRoyalty Owners for the tax year. depletion deduction. See Taxable income limit,
If you are an independent producer or royalty later.For the purpose of determining if this ruleowner, you figure percentage depletion using aapplies, do not count the following. Average daily production.Figure your aver-rate of 15% of the gross income from the prop-
age daily production by dividing your total do-• Bulk sales (sales in very large quantities)erty based on your average daily production of
mestic production for the tax year by the numberof oil or natural gas to commercial or in-domestic crude oil or domestic natural gas up to
of days in your tax year.dustrial users.your depletable oil or natural gas quantity. How-
ever, certain refiners, as explained next, and Partial interest.If you have a partial inter-• Bulk sales of aviation fuels to the Depart-certain retailers and transferees of proven oil est in the production from a property, figure yourment of Defense.and gas properties, as explained later, cannot share of the production by multiplying total pro-• Sales of oil or natural gas or their by-prod-claim percentage depletion. For information on duction from the property by your percentage ofucts outside the United States if none offiguring the deduction, see Figuring percentage interest in the revenues from the property.your domestic production or that of a re-depletion, later. You have a partial interest in the productionlated person is exported during the taxfrom a property if you have a net profits interestRefiners who cannot claim percentage de- year or the prior tax year. in the property. To figure the share of productionpletion.You cannot claim percentage deple- for your net profits interest, you must first deter-tion if you or a related person refine crude oil andRelated person. To determine if you andmine your percentage participation (as mea-you and the related person refined more than another person are related persons, see Re- sured by the net profits) in the gross revenue50,000 barrels on any day during the tax year.lated person under Refiners who cannot claimfrom the property. To figure this percentage, youpercentage depletion, earlier.Related person. You and another person divide the income you receive for your net profits
are related persons if either of you holds a signif-Sales through a related person.You are interest by the gross revenue from the property.
icant ownership interest in the other person or if considered to be selling through a related per- Then multiply the total production from the prop-
Page 42 Chapter 10 Depletion

Page 43 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
erty by your percentage participation to figure If you do not sell the oil or gas on the property,tion allowance, later.) Each partner or share-
your share of the production. but manufacture or convert it into a refined prod- holder must decide whether to use cost or
uct before sale or transport it before sale, the percentage depletion. If a partner or shareholder
Example. John Oak owns oil property ingross income from the property is the represen- uses percentage depletion, he or she must ap-
which Paul Elm owns a 20% net profits interest.tative market or field price (RMFP) of the oil or ply the 65%-of-taxable-income limit using his or
During the year, the property produced 10,000gas, before conversion or transportation. her taxable income from all sources.
barrels of oil, which John sold for $200,000.If you sold gas after you removed it from the
Partner’s or shareholder’s adjusted basis.John had expenses of $90,000 attributable topremises for a price that is lower than the RMFP,
The partnership or S corporation must allocatethe property. The property generated a net profitdetermine gross income from the property for
to each partner or shareholder his or her shareof $110,000 ($200,000 − $90,000). Paul re-percentage depletion purposes without regard
of the adjusted basis of each oil or gas propertyceived income of $22,000 ($110,000 × .20) forto the RMFP.
held by the partnership or S corporation. Thehis net profits interest. Gross income from the property does not
partnership or S corporation makes the alloca-Paul determined his percentage participationinclude lease bonuses, advance royalties, or
tion as of the date it acquires the oil or gasto be 11% by dividing $22,000 (the income heother amounts payable without regard to pro-
property.received) by $200,000 (the gross revenue fromduction from the property.
Each partner’s share of the adjusted basis ofthe property). Paul determined his share of the
the oil or gas property generally is figured ac-Average daily production exceeds deplet-oil production to be 1,100 barrels (10,000 bar-
cording to that partner’s interest in partnershipable quantities.If your average daily produc-rels × 11%).
capital. However, in some cases, it is figuredtion for the year is more than your depletable oil
Depletable oil or natural gas quantity.Gen- according to the partner’s interest in partnershipor natural gas quantity, figure your allowance for
erally, your depletable oil quantity is 1,000 bar- income.depletion for each domestic oil or natural gas
rels. Your depletable natural gas quantity is The partnership or S corporation adjusts theproperty as follows.
6,000 cubic feet multiplied by the number of partner’s or shareholder’s share of the adjusted
1) Figure your average daily production of oilbarrels of your depletable oil quantity that you basis of the oil and gas property for any capital
or natural gas for the year.choose to apply. If you claim depletion on both expenditures made for the property and for any
oil and natural gas, you must reduce your de- change in partnership or S corporation interests.2) Figure your depletable oil or natural gas
pletable oil quantity (1,000 barrels) by the num-quantity for the year. Each partner or shareholder must sep-ber of barrels you use to figure your depletable arately keep records of his or her share3) Figure depletion for all oil or natural gasnatural gas quantity. If you have production from of the adjusted basis in each oil andproduced from the property using a per-
RECORDS
marginal wells, see section 613A(c)(6) of the gas property of the partnership or S corporation.centage depletion rate of 15%.Internal Revenue Code to figure your depletable The partner or shareholder must reduce his oroil or natural gas quantity. 4) Multiply the result figured in (3) by a frac-her adjusted basis by the depletion allowed or
tion, the numerator of which is the resultallowable on the property each year. The part-Example. You have both oil and natural gasfigured in (2) and the denominator of whichner or shareholder must use that reduced ad-production. To figure your depletable naturalis the result figured in (1). This is yourjusted basis to figure cost depletion or his or hergas quantity, you choose to apply 360 barrels ofdepletion allowance for that property forgain or loss if the partnership or S corporationyour 1000-barrel depletable oil quantity. Yourthe year. disposes of the property.depletable natural gas quantity is 2.16 million
cubic feet of gas (360 × 6000). You must reduceTaxable income limit.If you are an indepen-Reporting the deduction. Information thatyour depletable oil quantity to 640 barrels (1000dent producer or royalty owner of oil and gas,you, as a partner or shareholder, use to figure− 360). your deduction for percentage depletion is lim-your depletion deduction on oil and gas proper-Business entities and family members. ited to the smaller of the following. ties is reported by the partnership or S corpora-You must allocate the depletable oil or gas tion on line 25 of Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) or• Your taxable income from the property fig-quantity among the following related persons in on line 23 of Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S). De-ured without the deduction for depletion.proportion to each entity’s or family member’s duct oil and gas depletion for your partnership orFor a definition of taxable income from theproduction of domestic oil or gas for the year. S corporation interest on line 20 of Schedule Eproperty, see Taxable income limit, earlier,
(Form 1040). The depletion deducted on Sched-• Corporations, trusts, and estates if 50% orunder Mineral Property.
ule E is included in figuring income or loss frommore of the beneficial interest is owned by
• 65% of your taxable income from all rental real estate or royalty properties. The linethe same or related persons (considering
sources, figured without the depletion al-instructions for Schedule E explain where toonly persons that own at least 5% of the
lowance, any net operating loss carryback,report this income or loss and whether you needbeneficial interest).
and any capital loss carryback. to file either of the following forms.• You and your spouse and minor children.
You can carry over to the following year any• Form 6198, At-Risk Limitations.For purposes of this allocation, a related personamount you cannot deduct because of the
• Form 8582, Passive Activity Loss Limita-is anyone mentioned under Related persons in 65%-of-taxable-income limit. Add it to your de-
tions.chapter 12 except that item (1) in that discussionpletion allowance (before applying any limits) for
includes only an individual, his or her spouse,the following year.
and minor children. Electing large partnerships must figure de-Temporary suspension of taxable income
pletion allowance.An electing large partner-Controlled group of corporations.Mem- limit for marginal production.For tax years
ship, rather than each partner, generally mustbers of the same controlled group of corpora-beginning after 1997 and before 2004, percent-
figure the depletion allowance. The partnershiptions are treated as one taxpayer when figuringage depletion on the marginal production of oil
figures the depletion allowance without takingthe depletable oil or natural gas quantity. Theyor natural gas is not limited to taxable income
into account the 65 percent-of-taxable-incomeshare the depletable quantity. Under this rule, afrom the property figured without the depletion
limit and the depletable oil or natural gas quan-controlled group of corporations is defined indeduction. For information on marginal produc-
tity. Also, the adjusted basis of a partner’s inter-section 1563(a) of the Internal Revenue Code,tion, see section 613A(c)(6) of the Internal Rev-
est in the partnership is not affected by theexcept that the stock ownership requirement inenue Code.
depletion allowance.that definition is “more than 50%” rather than “at
An electing large partnership is one thatleast 80%.”
meets both the following requirements.Partnerships and S Corporations
Gross income from the property.For pur- • The partnership had 100 or more partnersposes of percentage depletion, gross income Generally, each partner or shareholder, and notin the preceding year.from the property (in the case of oil and gas the partnership or S corporation, figures the de-
wells) is the amount you receive from the sale of pletion allowance separately. (However, see• The partnership chooses to be an electing
the oil or gas in the immediate vicinity of the well.Electing large partnerships must figure deple-large partnership.
Chapter 10 Depletion Page 43

Page 44 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Disqualified persons.An electing large to be treated because of physical and otherBorax, granite, limestone, marble,partnership does not figure the depletion allow- requirements, the additional authorized trans-mollusk shells, potash, slate,ance of its partners that are disqualified per- portation is considered mining and included insoapstone, and carbon dioxidesons. Disqualified persons must figure it the computation of gross income from mining.produced from a well........ 1 4 %
themselves, as explained earlier. If you wish to include transportation ofCoal, lignite, and sodium chloride 10%All the following are disqualified persons. more than 50 miles in the computationClay and shale used or sold for• Refiners who cannot claim percentage de- of gross income from mining, file anuse in making sewer pipe or brickspletion (discussed under Independent Pro- application in duplicate with the IRS. Include onor used or sold for use as sinteredducers and Royalty Owners, earlier). the application the facts concerning the physicalor burned lightweight aggregates 71/2% and other requirements which prevented the• Retailers who cannot claim percentageClay used or sold for use in construction and operation of the plant within 50depletion (discussed under Independent making drainage and roofing tile, miles of the point of extraction. Send this appli-Producers and Royalty Owners, earlier). flower pots, and kindred products, cation to:
and gravel, sand, and stone (other• Any partner whose average daily produc-
than stone used or sold for use bytion of domestic crude oil and natural gas Internal Revenue Servicea mine owner or operator asis more than 500 barrels during the tax Washington, DC 20224dimension or ornamental stone) 5%year in which the partnership tax year Attention: Associate Chief Counsel, Pass-
ends. Average daily production is dis- throughs and Special IndustriesYou can find a complete list of minerals and
cussed earlier. their percentage depletion rates in section
613(b) of the Internal Revenue Code. Disposal of coal or iron ore.You cannot take
Natural Gas Wells a depletion deduction for coal (including lignite)Corporate deduction for iron ore and coal.
or iron ore mined in the United States if both theThe percentage depletion deduction of a corpo-You can use percentage depletion for a well that following apply.ration for iron ore and coal (including lignite) isproduces natural gas either sold under a fixedreduced by 20% of: • You disposed of it after holding it for morecontract or produced from geopressured brine.
than 1 year.• The percentage depletion deduction forNatural gas sold under a fixed contract. the tax year (figured without regard to this• You disposed of it under a contract underNatural gas sold under a fixed contract qualifiesreduction), minus which you retain an economic interest infor a percentage depletion rate of 22%. This is
the coal or iron ore.• The adjusted basis of the property at thedomestic natural gas sold by the producer under
close of the tax year (figured without thea contract that does not provide for a price in- Treat any gain on the disposition as a capitaldepletion deduction for the tax year).crease to reflect any increase in the seller’s tax gain.
liability because of the repeal of percentage de-
Disposal to related person.This rule doespletion for gas. The contract must have been inGross income from the property.For prop- not apply if you dispose of the coal or iron ore toeffect from February 1, 1975, until the date oferty other than a geothermal deposit or an oil orone of the following persons.sale of the gas. Price increases after February 1,gas well, gross income from the property means
1975, are presumed to take the increase in taxthe gross income from mining. Mining includes• A related person (as listed in chapter 12).
liability into account unless demonstrated other-all the following. • A person owned or controlled by the samewise by clear and convincing evidence.
interests that own or control you.• Extracting ores or minerals from the
Natural gas from geopressured brine.Qual- ground.
ified natural gas from geopressured brine is eli- Geothermal deposits. Geothermal deposits• Applying certain treatment processes.gible for a percentage depletion rate of 10%. located in the United States or its possessionsThis is natural gas that is both the following.• Transporting ores or minerals (generally,qualify for a percentage depletion rate of 15%. A
not more than 50 miles) from the point ofgeothermal deposit is a geothermal reservoir of• Produced from a well you began to drill extraction to the plants or mills in whichnatural heat stored in rocks or in a watery liquidafter September 1978 and before 1984. the treatment processes are applied. or vapor. For percentage depletion purposes, a• Determined in accordance with section geothermal deposit is not considered a gas well.503 of the Natural Gas Policy Act of 1978Excise tax. Gross income from mining in- Figure gross income from the property for ato be produced from geopressured brine.cludes the separately stated excise tax receivedgeothermal steam well in the same way as for oilby a mine operator from the sale of coal toand gas wells. See Gross income from the prop-compensate the operator for the excise tax theerty, earlier, under Oil and Gas Wells. Percent-Mines and mine operator must pay to finance black lungage depletion on a geothermal deposit cannotGeothermal Deposits benefits. be more than 50% of your taxable income from
the property.Extraction. Extracting ores or mineralsCertain mines, wells, and other natural deposits,
from the ground includes extraction by mineincluding geothermal deposits, qualify for per-
owners or operators of ores or minerals from thecentage depletion. Lessor’s Gross Income
waste or residue of prior mining. This does not
A lessor’s gross income from the property thatMines and other natural deposits.For a nat- apply to extraction from waste or residue of prior
qualifies for percentage depletion usually is theural deposit, the percentage of your gross in- mining by the purchaser of the waste or residue
total of the royalties received from the lease.come from the property that you can deduct as or the purchaser of the rights to extract ores or
However, for oil, gas, or geothermal property,depletion depends on the type of deposit. minerals from the waste or residue.
gross income does not include lease bonuses,The following is a list of the percentage de-Treatment processes. The processes in- advanced royalties, or other amounts payablepletion rates for the more common minerals. cluded as mining depend on the ore or mineralwithout regard to production from the property.mined. To qualify as mining, the treatmentDEPOSITS RATE processes must be applied by the mine owner orBonuses and advanced royalties.Bonusesoperator. For a listing of treatment processesSulphur, uranium, and, if from and advanced royalties are payments a lesseeconsidered as mining, see section 613(c)(4) ofdeposits in the United States, makes before production to a lessor for the grantthe Internal Revenue Code and the related regu-asbestos, lead ore, zinc ore, nickel of rights in a lease or for minerals, gas, or oil tolations.ore, and mica............. 2 2 % be extracted from leased property. If you are the
Transportation of more than 50 miles.If lessor, your income from bonuses and ad-Gold, silver, copper, iron ore, and
the IRS finds that the ore or mineral must be vanced royalties received is subject to an allow-certain oil shale, if from deposits in
the United States........... 1 5 % transported more than 50 miles to plants or mills ance for depletion.
Page 44 Chapter 10 Depletion

Page 45 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figuring cost or percentage depletion. 2) Add to the amount determined in (1) the
To figure cost depletion on a bonus, multiplycost of any timber units acquired during
your adjusted basis in the property by a fraction,the year and any additions to capital.
the numerator of which is the bonus and the 11.3) Figure the number of timber units to takedenominator of which is the total bonus and
into account by adding the number of tim-royalties expected to be received. To figure cost
ber units acquired during the year to thedepletion on advanced royalties, use the com-
number of timber units on hand in the ac-putation explained earlier under Cost Depletion, Businesstreating the number of units for which the ad-count at the beginning of the year and then
vanced royalty is received as the number of adding (or subtracting) any correction to
units sold. Bad Debtsthe estimate of the number of timber units
To figure percentage depletion (for other remaining in the account.
than gas, oil, or geothermal property), any bo-
4) Divide the result of (2) by the result of (3).nus or advanced royalty payments are part of
This is your depletion unit. Introductionyour gross income from the property.
If someone owes you money you cannot collect,Terminating the lease.If you receive a bo-
Example. You bought a timber tract foryou have a bad debt. There are two kinds of badnus on a lease that expires, terminates, or is
$160,000 and the land was worth as much asdebts—business and nonbusiness. This chap-abandoned before you derive any income from
the timber. Your basis for the timber is $80,000.ter covers business bad debts.the extraction of mineral, include in income for
the year of expiration, termination, or abandon-Based on an estimated one million board feetGenerally, a business bad debt is one that
ment, the depletion deduction you took. Also(1,000 MBF) of standing timber, you figure yourcomes from operating your trade or business.
increase your adjusted basis in the property todepletion unit to be $80 per MBF ($80,000 ÷ You can deduct business bad debts on yourrestore the depletion deduction you previously1,000). If you cut 500 MBF of timber, your deple-business tax return.subtracted. tion allowance would be $40,000 (500 MBF × All other bad debts are nonbusiness badFor advanced royalties, include in income for$80). debts and are deductible only as short-term cap-the year of lease termination, the depletion
ital losses on Schedule D (Form 1040). For moreclaimed on minerals for which the advanced
information on nonbusiness bad debts, see Pub-When to claim depletion.Claim your deple-royalties were paid if the minerals were not pro-
lication 550.tion allowance as a deduction in the year of saleduced before termination. Increase your ad-
justed basis in the property by the amount youor other disposition of the products cut from the
Topicsinclude in income. timber, unless you choose to treat the cutting of
timber as a sale or exchange. Include allowable This chapter discusses:
Delay rentals.These are payments for defer-depletion for timber products not sold during thering development of the property. Since delay • Definition of business bad debttax year the timber is cut as a cost item in therentals are ordinary rent, they are ordinary in-closing inventory of timber products for the year.• When a debt becomes worthlesscome that is not subject to depletion. TheseThe inventory is your basis for determining gainrentals can be avoided by either abandoning the • How to treat business bad debtsor loss in the tax year you sell the timber prod-lease, beginning development operations, or
ucts. • Recovery of a business bad debtobtaining production.
• Where to deduct business bad debtsExample. Assume the same facts as in the
previous example except that you sold only half
of the timber products in the cutting year. YouUseful ItemsTimber
would deduct $20,000 of the $40,000 depletionYou may want to see:
that year. You would add the remaining $20,000You can figure timber depletion only by the cost
depletion to your closing inventory of timbermethod. Percentage depletion does not apply to Publication
timber. Base your depletion on your cost or otherproducts.
❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Incomebasis in the timber. Your cost does not include
the cost of land or any amounts recoverable ❏ 536 Net Operating Losses (NOLs) forChoosing to treat the cutting of timber as athrough depreciation. Individuals, Estates, and Trustssale or exchange. You can choose, underDepletion takes place when you cut standingcertain circumstances, to treat the cutting of❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions oftimber. You can figure your depletion deduction
timber held for more than 1 year as a sale or Assetswhen the quantity of cut timber is first accurately
exchange. You must make the choice on yourmeasured in the process of exploitation. ❏ 550 Investment Income and Expensesincome tax return for the tax year to which it
❏ 556 Examination of Returns, AppealFiguring cost depletion.To figure your costapplies. If you make this choice, subtract the
Rights, and Claims for Refunddepletion allowance, you multiply the number ofadjusted basis for depletion from the fair market
timber units cut by your depletion unit. value of the timber on the first day of the tax year
See chapter 14 for information about gettingin which you cut it to figure the gain or loss on theTimber units. When you acquire timber publications and forms.cutting. You generally report the gain asproperty, you must make an estimate of the
long-term capital gain. The fair market valuequantity of marketable timber that exists on the
property. You measure the timber using boardthen becomes your basis for figuring your ordi-
feet, log scale, cords, or other units. If you laternary gain or loss on the sale or other disposition
Business Bad Debtdetermine that you have more or less units ofof the products cut from the timber. For more
timber, you must adjust the original estimate.information, see Timber in chapter 2 of Publica-DefinedThe term timber property means your eco- tion 544, Sales and Other Dispositions of As-
nomic interest in standing timber in each tract orsets. A business bad debt is a loss from the worth-block representing a separate timber account.
lessness of a debt that was either:Depletion unit.You figure your depletionForm T. Attach Form T (Timber), Forest Activi-unit each year by taking the following steps. • Created or acquired in your trade or busi-ties Schedule, to your income tax return if you
ness, orare claiming a deduction for timber depletion or1) Determine your cost or adjusted basis of
choosing to treat the cutting of timber as a sale• Closely related to your trade or businessthe timber on hand at the beginning of the
or exchange.year. when it became partly or totally worthless.
Chapter 11 Business Bad Debts Page 45

Page 46 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
A debt is closely related to your trade or busi- Otherwise, a loss from these debts is a nonbusi-Business loan guarantee.If you guarantee a
ness if your primary motive for incurring the debt debt that becomes worthless, the debt can qual-ness bad debt.
is business related. ify as a business bad debt if all the following
Example 1.  In 2001 Arnie died, leaving hisThe bad debts of a corporation are always requirements are met.
business, including the accounts receivable, tobusiness bad debts. • You made the guarantee in the course ofhis son Carl. Certain receivables become worth-your trade or business.Credit sales.Business bad debts are mainlyless in 2002. Carl can deduct the loss as a
the result of credit sales to customers. Goods • You have a legal duty to pay the debt.business bad debt because the debt was closely
and services customers have not paid for arerelated to his business when it became worth-• You made the guarantee before the debtrecorded in your books as either accounts re-less. became worthless. You meet this require-ceivable or notes receivable. If you are unable to
ment if you reasonably expected youcollect any part of these receivables, the uncol-Example 2.  In 2001 Charlie died, leaving would not have to pay the debt without fulllectible part is a business bad debt. his business to his son George, but leaving thereimbursement from the issuer. Accounts or notes receivable valued at fairreceivables to his daughter Diane. The receiv-
market value when received are deductible only • You receive reasonable consideration forables become worthless in 2002. Diane is not
at that value, even though the fair market value making the guarantee. You meet this re-engaged in any trade or business during 2001 or
may be less than face value. If you bought an quirement if you made the guarantee in2002. Therefore, Diane’s loss is a nonbusiness
account receivable for less than its face value, accord with normal business practice orbad debt even though the original debt was
the amount you can deduct if it becomes worth- for a good faith business purpose.incurred in a business.
less is the amount you paid for it.
Liquidation.If you liquidate your business
You can take a bad debt deduction Example. Jane Zayne owns the Zayneand some of your accounts receivable become
only if the amount owed you was previ- Dress Company. She guaranteed payment of aworthless, they are business bad debts.
ously included in gross income. This $20,000 note for Elegant Fashions, a dress out-
CAUTION
!
applies to amounts owed you from all sources of let. Elegant Fashions is one of Zayne’s largestTypes of Business Badtaxable income, including sales, services, rents, clients. Elegant Fashions later filed for bank-
Debtsand interest. ruptcy and defaulted on the loan. Ms. Zayne
made full payment to the bank. She can take aThe following are situations that may result in aAccrual method. If you use an accrual business bad debt deduction, since her guaran-business bad debt.method of accounting, you generally report in- tee was made in the course of her trade or
come as you earn it. You can only take a bad business for a good faith business purpose. SheLoans to clients and suppliers.If you makedebt deduction for an uncollectible receivable if was motivated by the desire to retain one of hera loan to a client, supplier, employee, or distribu-you have previously included the uncollectible better clients and keep a sales outlet.tor for a business reason and it becomes worth-amount in income. less, you have a business bad debt. Employee. Any guarantee you make to pro-If you qualify, you can use the tect or improve your job is closely related to yournonaccrual-experience method of accounting Example. John Smith, an advertising agent,trade or business as an employee.discussed later. Under this method, you do notmade loans to certain clients to keep their busi-have to accrue income that, based on your ex- Deductible in the year paid.If you make aness. One of these clients went bankrupt andperience, you do not expect to collect. payment on a loan you guaranteed, you cancould not repay him. Since the main reason fordeduct it in the year paid, unless you have rightsCash method. If you use the cash methodmaking the loan was business related, the debtagainst the borrower.of accounting, you generally report incomewas a business debt and John can take a busi-
when you receive payment. You cannot take aness bad debt deduction. Rights against a borrower. When you
bad debt deduction for amounts owed to you make payment on a loan you guaranteed, you
Debts of political parties.If a political partybecause you never included those amounts in may have the right to take the place of the
(or other organization that accepts contributionsincome. For example, a cash basis architect lender. The debt is then owed to you. If you have
cannot take a bad debt deduction if a client does or spends money to influence elections) owesthis right, or some other right to demand pay-
not pay the bill because the architect’s fee wasyou money and the debt becomes worthless,ment from the borrower, you cannot take a bad
not previously included in income. you can take a bad debt deduction only if youdebt deduction until these rights become partly
use an accrual method of accounting and meet or totally worthless.Debts from a former business. If you sellall the following tests.
your business but keep its receivables, these Joint debtor. If two or more debtors jointly
debts are business debts since they arose out of owe you money, your inability to collect from one1) The debt arose from the sale of goods or
your trade or business. If one of these debts does not enable you to deduct a proportionateservices in the ordinary course of your
later becomes worthless, the loss is still a busi- amount as a bad debt.trade or business.
ness bad debt. These debts would also be busi-2) More than 30% of your receivables ac-Bankruptcy claim. If a person who owes youness debts if sold to the new owner of the crued in the year of the sale were frommoney becomes bankrupt, the amount you canbusiness. sales to political parties. deduct as a bad debt is the amount owed to youIf you sell your business to one person and
minus the amount you receive from distributionsell your receivables to someone else, the activi-3) You made substantial continuing efforts toof the bankrupt person’s assets.ties of the new holder of the debts determinecollect on the debt.
whether they are business or nonbusiness debts Sale of mortgaged property.If mortgaged orfor that person. A loss from the debts is a busi- pledged property is sold for less than the debt,Loan or capital contribution.You cannotness bad debt to the new holder if that person the unpaid, uncollectible balance of the debt is atake a bad debt deduction for a loan you made toacquired the debts in his or her trade or business bad debt.a corporation if, based on the facts and circum-or if the debts were closely related to the newstances, the loan is actually a contribution toholder’s trade or business when they becamecapital.worthless. Otherwise, a loss from these debts is
a nonbusiness bad debt. Debts of an insolvent partner.If your busi-When Debt Is
ness partnership breaks up and one of yourDebt acquired from a decedent.The char-
former partners is insolvent and cannot pay anyacter of a loss from debts of a business acquired Worthless
of the partnership’s debts, you may have to payfrom a decedent is determined in the same way
more than your share. If you pay any part of theas debts sold by a business. If you are in a trade You do not have to wait until a debt is due to
insolvent partner’s share of the debts, you canor business, a loss from the debts is a business determine whether it is worthless. A debt be-
take a bad debt deduction for the amount youbad debt if the debts were closely related to your comes worthless when there is no longer any
pay.trade or business when they became worthless. chance the amount owed will be paid.
Page 46 Chapter 11 Business Bad Debts

Page 47 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
It is not necessary to go to court if you can fulfills the charge-off requirement for the later selling goods, or acquiring receivables or other
year.show that a judgment from the court would be rights to receive payment.
uncollectible. You must only show that you haveTotally worthless debts.If a debt becomestaken reasonable steps to collect the debt.totally worthless, you can deduct the entireInterest or penalty charged.Generally, youBankruptcy of your debtor is generally good evi-amount, except any amount deducted in an ear-cannot use the nonaccrual-experience methoddence of the worthlessness of at least a part oflier tax year when the debt was only partly worth-for amounts due on which you charge interest oran unsecured and unpreferred debt. less. a late payment penalty. However, do not treat a
You do not have to make an actual discount offered for early payment as the charg-Property received for debt.If you receive charge-off on your books to claim a bad debting of interest or a penalty if both the followingproperty in partial settlement of a debt, reducededuction for a totally worthless debt. However,apply.the debt by the fair market value of the propertyyou may want to do so. If you do not and the IRSreceived. You can deduct the remaining debt aslater rules the debt is only partly worthless, you• You otherwise accrue the full amount duea bad debt if and when it becomes worthless.will not be allowed a deduction for the debt inas gross income at the time you provideIf you later sell the property, any gain on thethat tax year. A deduction of a partly worthlessthe services.sale is due to the appreciation of the property. Itbad debt is limited to the amount actually • You treat the discount allowed for earlyis not a recovery of a bad debt. For informationcharged off. payment as an adjustment to gross in-on the sale of an asset, see Publication 544.
Filing a claim for refund.If you did not deduct come in the year of payment.
a bad debt on your original return for the year itExample. Patti owed Margaret $5,000. In
became worthless, you can file a claim for apartial satisfaction of the debt, Patti gave Mar- How to apply this method.You can apply thecredit or refund. If the bad debt was totally worth-garet property worth $2,000. Margaret deducted nonaccrual-experience method under either ofless, you must file the claim by the later of thethe remaining $3,000 as a bad debt but did not the following systems.following dates.get a tax benefit from the deduction as she had
no taxable income. Margaret later sold the prop- • Separate receivable system.• 7 years from the date your original returnerty for a $1,000 gain. Even though Margaret didwas due (not including extensions). • Periodic system.not get a tax benefit from the earlier bad debt
• 2 years from the date you paid the tax.deduction, she must include the $1,000 gain in Under the separate receivable system, apply the
her income. It is not a recovery of her bad debt. nonaccrual-experience method separately toIf the claim is for a partly worthless bad debt,each account receivable. Under the periodicyou must file the claim by the later of the follow-system, apply the nonaccrual-experienceing dates. method to total qualified accounts receivable at
How To Treat • 3 years from the date you filed your origi-the end of your tax year.
nal return. Treat each of these systems as a separateThere are two ways to treat business bad debts.• 2 years from the date you paid the tax.method of accounting. You generally cannot
• The specific charge-off method. change from one system to the other withoutYou may have longer to file the claim if you wereIRS approval.physically or mentally unable to handle your• The nonaccrual-experience method.
Generally, you also need IRS approval tofinancial affairs for a time. For details and moreGenerally, you must use the specific charge-off change from a different accounting method toinformation about filing a claim, see Publicationmethod. However, you can use the either system under the nonaccrual-experience556.nonaccrual-experience method if you meet the method.Use one of the following forms to file a claim.requirements discussed later under
For more information on the separate receiv-Nonaccrual-Experience Method.
able system, see section 1.448–2T of the regu-Table 11–1. Forms Used To File a
lations. For more information on the periodicClaimSpecific Charge-Off Method system, see Notice 88–51 in Cumulative Bulle-
tin 1988–1.IF you are an... THEN file...If you use the specific charge-off method, you
can deduct specific business bad debts thatIndividual  Form 1040Xbecome either partly or totally worthless during
Corporation  Form 1120Xthe tax year.
RecoveryS Corporation  Form 1120SPartly worthless debts.You can deduct spe- (check box F(5))cific bad debts that become partly uncollectible. If you deduct a bad debt on your tax return andYour tax deduction is limited to the amount youPartnership  Form 1065 later recover (collect) all or part of it, you maycharge off on your books during the year. You do (check box G(5)) have to include all or part of the recovery innot have to charge off and deduct your partly gross income. The amount you include is limitedworthless debts annually. You can delay the to the amount you actually deducted. However,charge off until a later year. You cannot, how- you can exclude the amount deducted that didNonaccrual-Experienceever, deduct any part of a debt after the year it not reduce your tax. Report the recovery asMethodbecomes totally worthless. “Other income” on the appropriate business
Significantly modified debt. An exception form or schedule.If you use an accrual method of accounting and
to the charge-off rule exists for debt which hasqualify under the rules explained in this section,See  Recoveries in Publication 525 for morebeen significantly modified and on which theyou can use the nonaccrual-experience methodinformation.holder recognized gain. For more information,for bad debts. Under this method, you do not
Net operating loss (NOL) carryover.If asee section 1.166-(3)(a)(3) of the regulations.accrue income you expect to be uncollectible.
bad debt deduction increases an NOL carryoverIf you determine, based on your experience,Deduction disallowed.You can generally that has not expired before the beginning of thethat certain amounts (accounts receivable) aretake a partial bad debt deduction only in the year tax year in which the recovery takes place, youuncollectible, do not include them in your grossyou make the charge-off on your books. If, under treat the deduction as having reduced your tax.income for the tax year.audit, the IRS does not allow your deduction and A bad debt deduction that contributes to a netthe debt becomes partly worthless in a later taxAmounts must be for performing services. operating loss helps lower taxes in the year toyear, you can deduct the amount you charge offYou can use the nonaccrual-experience methodwhich you carry the net operating loss.in that year plus the disallowed amount chargedonly for amounts earned by performing services.
off in the earlier year. The charge-off in the More information.See Publication 536 forYou cannot use this method for amounts owed
earlier year, unless reversed on your books, more information about net operating losses.to you from activities such as lending money,
Chapter 11 Business Bad Debts Page 47

Page 48 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
fueling property only if you use the property in
your trade or business. Deductions forWhere To Deduct
Clean-Fuel VehicleUse the following table to find where to deductTopics
your business bad debts. This chapter discusses: and Refueling Property
Table 11–2. Where To Deduct a • The deduction for clean-fuel vehicle prop-You are allowed a limited deduction for the costBad Debt erty of clean-fuel vehicle property and clean-fuel ve-
hicle refueling property. These deductions are• The deduction for clean-fuel vehicle refuel-THEN deduct your bad allowed only in the tax year you place the prop-ing propertyIF you are a... debt on...
erty in service.
• Recapture of the deductionssole proprietor  line 9 of Schedule C You cannot claim these deductions for the
(Form 1040) part of the property’s cost you claim as a section• The electric vehicle credit
179 deduction. For information on the sectionfarmer  line 34 of Schedule F • Recapture of the credit 179 deduction, see Publication 946.(Form 1040)
 line 15 of Form 1120corporation Deduction for Clean-FuelUseful Items
You may want to see: line 15 of Form 1120–A Vehicle Property
 line 10 of Form 1120S The deduction for this property may be claimedPublication
regardless of whether the property is used in apartnership  line 12 of Form 1065 ❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Cartrade or business.
Expenses
Clean-fuel vehicle property.Clean-fuel vehi-❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of cle property is either of the following kinds ofAssets property.
❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property 1) A motor vehicle (defined earlier) produced
by an original equipment manufacturer andForm (and Instructions) designed to be propelled by a clean-burn-12.
ing fuel. The only part of a vehicle’s basis❏ 8834 Qualified Electric Vehicle Credit
that qualifies for the deduction is the part
attributable to:See chapter 14 for information about getting
publications and forms.Electric and a) A clean-fuel engine that can use a
clean-burning fuel,
Clean-Fuel b) The property used to store or deliver
the fuel to the engine, orDefinitionsVehicles c) The property used to exhaust gasesThe following definitions apply throughout thisfrom the combustion of the fuel.chapter.
2) Any property installed on a motor vehicleImportant Change (including installation costs) to enable it toClean-burning fuels. The following are
be propelled by a clean-burning fuel if:clean-burning fuels.for 2002
a) The property is an engine (or modifica-1) Natural gas.Electric and clean-fuel vehicles.The maxi- tion of an engine) that can use a
2) Liquefied natural gas.mum clean-fuel vehicle deduction and qualified clean-burning fuel, or
electric vehicle credit were scheduled to be 25%3) Liquefied petroleum gas. b) The property is used to store or deliverlower for 2002 and both were scheduled to be that fuel to the engine or to exhaust4) Hydrogen.phased out completely by 2005. The full deduc- gases from the combustion of that fuel.tion and credit are now allowed for qualified5) Electricity.
property placed in service in 2002 and 2003. For vehicles that may be propelled by both a6) Any other fuel that is at least 85% alcoholThe phaseout of the deduction and the credit will clean-burning fuel and any other fuel, your de-(any kind) or ether.begin in 2004, and no deduction or credit will be duction is generally the additional cost of permit-allowed for property placed in service after ting the use of the clean-burning fuel.2006. Motor vehicle.A motor vehicle is any vehicle Clean-fuel vehicle property does not
that has four or more wheels and is manufac- include an electric vehicle that qualifies
tured primarily for use on public streets, roads,for the electric vehicle credit, dis-CAUTION
!
and highways. It does not include a vehicle oper-cussed later.Introduction ated exclusively on a rail or rails.
You are allowed a limited deduction for the cost Qualified property.Your property must meet
of clean-fuel vehicle property and clean-fuel ve- the following requirements to qualify for the de-Nonqualifying property. This is property
hicle refueling property you place in service dur- duction.used in the following ways.
ing the tax year. Also, you are allowed a tax
1) It must be acquired for your own use andcredit of 10% of the cost of any qualified electric1) Predominantly outside the United States.
not for resale.vehicle you place in service during the tax year.2) Predominantly to furnish lodging or in con-
2) Its original use must begin with you.You can take the electric vehicle creditnection with the furnishing of lodging.
or the deduction for clean-fuel vehicle 3) Either—3) By certain tax-exempt organizations.property regardless of whether you use
TIP
the vehicle in a trade or business. However, you4) By governmental units or foreign persons a) The motor vehicle of which it is a part
can take a deduction for clean-fuel vehicle re-or entities. must satisfy any federal or state emis-
Page 48 Chapter 12 Electric and Clean-Fuel Vehicles

Page 49 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Deduction for nonbusiness clean-fuel vehi-sions standards that apply to each fuel If the deduction limit applies, you must
cle property by individuals.Individuals canby which the vehicle is designed to be specify on your tax return the property
claim the deduction for clean-fuel vehicle prop-propelled, or (and the portion of the property’s cost)CAUTION
!
erty used for nonbusiness purposes by includingyou are using as a basis for the deduction.b) It must satisfy any federal and state the deduction in the total on line 34 of Formemissions certification, testing, and 1040. Also, enter the amount of your deductionRelated persons. For this purpose, the fol-warranty requirements that apply. and “Clean-Fuel” on the dotted line next to linelowing are considered related persons.
34. If you use the vehicle partly for business, see4) It cannot be nonqualifying property, de-1) An individual and his or her brothers andthe next two discussions.fined earlier. sisters, half-brothers, half-sisters, spouse,Deduction for business clean-fuel vehicleancestors, and lineal descendants. property by employees.Employees who useDeduction limit. The maximum deduction clean-fuel vehicle property for business, or2) An individual and a corporation if the indi-you can claim for qualified clean-fuel vehicle partly for business and partly for nonbusinessvidual owns, directly or indirectly, moreproperty with respect to any motor vehicle is one purposes, should include the entire deduction inthan 50% in value of the outstanding stockof the following. the total on line 34 of Form 1040. Also, enter theof the corporation.
amount of your deduction and “Clean-Fuel” on1) $50,000 for a truck or van with a gross3) Two corporations that are members of thethe dotted line next to line 34.vehicle weight rating over 26,000 pounds same controlled group as defined in sec-or for a bus with a seating capacity of at Sole proprietors.Sole proprietors must claimtion 267(f) of the Internal Revenue Code.least 20 adults (excluding the driver). deductions for clean-fuel vehicle property and
4) A grantor and a fiduciary of any trust.clean-fuel vehicle refueling property used for2) $5,000 for a truck or van with a gross vehi- business on the Other expenses line of eithercle weight rating over 10,000 pounds but5) Fiduciaries of two separate trusts if theSchedule C (Form 1040) or Schedule F (Formnot more than 26,000 pounds. same person is a grantor of both trusts.1040). If clean-fuel vehicle property is used
3) $2,000 for a vehicle not included in (1) or6) A fiduciary and a beneficiary of the samepartly for nonbusiness purposes, claim the non-
(2). business part of the deduction as explained ear-trust.
lier under Deduction for nonbusiness clean-fuel7) A fiduciary and a beneficiary of two sepa-vehicle property by individuals.rate trusts if the same person is a grantorDeduction for Clean-Fuel
Partnerships. Partnerships claim the deduc-of both trusts.Vehicle Refueling Property tions for clean-fuel vehicle property and8) A fiduciary of a trust and a corporation ifclean-fuel vehicle refueling property on line 20 ofYour property must meet the following require-the trust or a grantor of the trust owns,Form 1065.ments to qualify for this deduction. directly or indirectly, more than 50% in
S corporations.S corporations claim the de-value of the outstanding stock of the cor-1) It must be depreciable property. ductions for clean-fuel vehicle property andporation. clean-fuel vehicle refueling property on line 19 of2) Its original use must begin with you.
9) A person and a tax-exempt educational orForm 1120S.3) It cannot be nonqualifying property, de-charitable organization that is controlled di-C corporations.C corporations claim the de-fined earlier. rectly or indirectly by that person or byductions for clean-fuel vehicle property andmembers of the family of that person.clean-fuel vehicle refueling property on line 26 ofClean-fuel vehicle refueling property. Form 1120 (line 22 of Form 1120–A).10) A corporation and a partnership if theClean-fuel vehicle refueling property is anysame persons own more than 50% inproperty (other than a building or its structuralvalue of the outstanding stock of the cor-Recapture ofcomponents) used to do either of the following.
poration and more than 50% of the capitalthe Deductions
or profits interest in the partnership.1) Store or dispense a clean-burning fuel (de-
If the property ceases to qualify, you may havefined earlier) into the fuel tank of a motor11) Two S corporations or an S corporationto recapture the deduction. You recapture thevehicle propelled by the fuel, but only if theand a regular corporation if the same per-deduction by including it, or part of it, in yourstorage or dispensing is at the point wheresons own more than 50% in value of theincome.the fuel is delivered into the tank. outstanding stock of each corporation.
2) Recharge motor vehicles propelled by 12) A partnership and a person if the person,electricity, but only if the property is lo- Clean-Fuel Vehicle Propertydirectly or indirectly owns, more than 50%cated at the point where the vehicles areof the capital or profits interests in the part-recharged. You must recapture the deduction for clean-fuelnership. vehicle property if the property ceases to qualify
Recharging property. This property in- 13) Two partnerships if the same persons within 3 years after the date you placed it in
cludes any equipment used to provide electricityown, directly or indirectly, more than 50%service. The property will cease to qualify if it is
to the battery of a motor vehicle propelled byof the capital or profits interest in both part-changed in any of the following ways.
electricity. It includes low-voltage rechargingnerships.
1) It is modified so that it can no longer beequipment, high-voltage (quick) charging equip-
14) An executor of an estate and a beneficiarypropelled by a clean-burning fuel.ment, and ancillary connection equipment such
of the estate.as inductive charging equipment. It does not 2) It ceases to be a qualified clean-fuel vehi-include property used to generate electricity,To determine whether an individual directlycle property (for example, by failing tosuch as solar panels or windmills, and does notor indirectly owns any of the outstanding stock ofmeet emissions standards).include the battery used in the vehicle. a corporation, see Ownership of stock under 3) It becomes nonqualifying property, definedRelated Persons in Publication 538.Deduction limit. The maximum deduction earlier.
you can claim for clean-fuel vehicle refueling
How To Claimproperty placed in service at one location is Sales or other dispositions.If you sell or
$100,000. To figure your maximum deduction otherwise dispose of the vehicle within 3 yearsthe Deductions
for any tax year, subtract from $100,000 the total after the date you placed it in service and know
How you claim the deductions for clean-fuelyou (or any related person or predecessor) or have reason to know that it will be changed in
vehicle property and clean-fuel vehicle refuelingclaimed for clean-fuel vehicle refueling property any of the ways described above, you are sub-
property depends on the use of the property andplaced in service at that location for all earlier ject to the recapture rules. In other dispositions
the kind of income tax return you file.years. (including a disposition by reason of an accident
Chapter 12 Electric and Clean-Fuel VehiclesPage 49

Page 50 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
or other casualty), the recapture rules do not position by reason of an accident or other 4) It has never been used as a nonelectric
apply. casualty), the recapture rules do not apply. vehicle.
If the vehicle was subject to depreciation, theThe deduction (minus any recapture 5) It is not nonqualifying property, defineddeduction (minus any recapture) is consideredamount) is considered depreciation when figur-earlier.depreciation when figuring the part of any gaining the part of any gain from the disposition that
from the disposition that is ordinary income. Seeis ordinary income. See Publication 544 for
Publication 544 for more information on disposi-more information on dispositions of depreciableAmount of the Credit
tions of depreciable property. property.
The credit is generally 10% of the cost of eachRecapture amount. Figure your recapture qualified electric vehicle you place in serviceRecapture amount. Figure your recaptureamount by multiplying the deduction by the fol- during the year. If your vehicle is a depreciableamount by multiplying the deduction youlowing percentage. business asset, you must reduce the cost of theclaimed by the following fraction.
vehicle by any section 179 deduction before• 100% if the recapture date is within the
figuring the 10% credit. If you need informationfirst full year after the date the vehicle wasTotal Recovery on the section 179 deduction, see Publicationplaced in service. recovery years before_ 946.period for the the recapture• 662/3% if the recapture date is within the
property year Credit limits.The credit is limited to $4,000second full year after the date the vehicle
for each vehicle. The total credit is limited to thewas placed in service.
Total recovery period for the propertyexcess of your regular tax liability, reduced by• 331/3% if the recapture date is within the certain credits, over your tentative minimum tax.third full year after the date the vehicle To figure the credit limit, complete Form 8834How to report.How you report the recapturewas placed in service. and attach it to your tax return.amount for clean-fuel vehicle refueling property
depends on how you claimed the deduction forRecapture date.The recapture date is gen-that property. How Toerally the date of the event that causes the
Claim the Creditrecapture. However, the recapture date for anSole proprietors.Include the amount on
event described in item (3), earlier, is the firstthe Other income line of either Schedule CYou must complete and attach Form 8834 today of the recapture year in which the event(Form 1040) or Schedule F (Form 1040). your tax return to claim the electric vehicleoccurs. Partnerships and corporations (includingcredit. Enter your credit on your tax return as
S corporations).Include the amount on theHow to report.How you report the recapture discussed next.
Other income line of the form you file.amount for clean-fuel vehicle property as in- Individuals.Individuals claim the credit by en-come depends on how you claimed the deduc- tering the amount from line 20 of Form 8834 ontion for that property. Basis Adjustments line 53 of Form 1040. Check box “c” and specify
Deducted by individuals as Form 8834.You must reduce the basis of your clean-fuelnonbusiness-use property. Include the vehicle property or clean-fuel vehicle refuelingPartnerships. Partnerships enter the amountamount on line 21 of Form 1040. property by the deduction claimed. If, in a laterfrom line 20 of Form 8834 on line 13 of Schedule
Deducted by employees as business-use year, you must recapture part or all of the deduc-K (Form 1065). The partnership then allocates
property. Include the amount on line 21 oftion, increase the basis of the property by thethe credit to the partners on line 13 of Schedule
Form 1040. amount recaptured. If the property is deprecia-K–1 (Form 1065). See the instructions for Form
ble property, you can recover this additional1065.Deducted by sole proprietors as
basis over the property’s remaining recoverybusiness-use property.Include the amount S corporations. S corporations enter theperiod beginning with the tax year of recapture.on the Other income line of either Schedule C amount from line 20 of Form 8834 on line 13 of
(Form 1040) or Schedule F (Form 1040). If you were using the percentage tablesSchedule K (Form 1120S). The S corporation
to figure your depreciation on the prop-then allocates the credit to the shareholders onPartnerships and corporations (including
erty, you will not be able to continue toline 13 of Schedule K–1 (Form 1120S). See theS corporations).Include the amount on the
CAUTION
!
do so. See Publication 946 for information oninstructions for Form 1120S.Other income line of the form you file.
figuring your depreciation without the tables.C corporations. C corporations claim the
credit by entering the amount from line 20 ofClean-Fuel Vehicle Form 8834 in the total for line 6c of Schedule J
Refueling Property (Form 1120), checking the “Other” box and en-
tering “8834” in the space provided. See the
Electric Vehicle CreditYou must recapture the deduction for clean-fuel instructions for Form 1120.vehicle refueling property if the property ceases
You can choose to claim a tax credit for a quali-to qualify at any time before the end of its depre-
Recapture of the Creditfied electric vehicle you place in service duringciation recovery period. The property will cease
the year. You can make this choice regardless ofto qualify if it is changed in any of the following The electric vehicle credit is subject to recapturewhether the property is used in a trade or busi-ways. if, within 3 years after the date you place theness.
vehicle in service, it ceases to qualify for the1) It ceases to be a clean-fuel vehicle refuel-
electric vehicle credit. You recapture the crediting property (for example, by being con-Qualified Electric Vehicle by adding it, or part of it, to your income tax forverted to store and dispense gasoline).
the year in which the recapture event occurs.A vehicle is a qualified electric vehicle if it meets2) It is no longer used 50% or more in your The vehicle will cease to qualify if it isall the following requirements.trade or business. changed in either of the following ways.
3) It becomes nonqualifying property, defined1) It is a motor vehicle (defined earlier) pow-1) It is modified so that it is no longer prima-earlier. ered primarily by an electric motor drawingrily powered by electricity.current from rechargeable batteries, fuel
Sales or other dispositions.If you sell or cells, or other portable sources of electrical2) It becomes nonqualifying property, defined
otherwise dispose of the property before the endcurrent. earlier.
of its recovery period and know or have reason2) You were the first person to use it.to know that it will be changed in any of the ways Sales or other dispositions.If you sell or
described above, you are subject to the recap- 3) You acquired it for your own use and not otherwise dispose of the vehicle within 3 years
ture rules. In other dispositions (including a dis- for resale. after the date you placed it in service and know
Page 50 Chapter 12 Electric and Clean-Fuel Vehicles

Page 51 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
or have reason to know that it will be changed inIf you were using the percentage tables❏ 1542 Per Diem Rates
to figure your depreciation on the vehi-either of the ways described above, you are
cle, you will not be able to continue toForm (and Instructions)subject to the recapture rules. In other disposi-CAUTION
!
do so. See Publication 946 for information ontions (including a disposition by reason of an ❏ Sch A (Form 1040) Itemized Deductionsfiguring your depreciation without the tables.accident or other casualty), the recapture rules
do not apply. ❏ 1099–MISC Miscellaneous Income
If the vehicle was subject to depreciation, the ❏ 6069 Return of Excise Tax on Excesscredit (minus any recapture amount) is consid- Contributions to Black Lung Benefitered depreciation when figuring the part of any Trust Under Section 4953 andgain from the disposition that is ordinary income. Computation of Section 192See Publication 544 for more information on Deduction13.dispositions of depreciable property.
See chapter 14 for information about getting
Recapture amount. Figure your recapture forms and publications.
amount by multiplying the credit by the followingOther Expensespercentage.
• 100% if the recapture date is within the
Travel, Meals,first full year after the date the vehicle wasImportant Changesplaced in service. and Entertainmentfor 2002• 662/3% if the recapture date is within the
second full year after the date the vehicle To be deductible, expenses incurred for travel,
Standard mileage rate.The standard mile-was placed in service. meals, and entertainment must be ordinary and
age rate for the cost of operating your car, van,necessary expenses of carrying on your trade or• 331/3% if the recapture date is within thepickup, or panel truck in 2002 is 361/2 cents a business. Generally, you also must show thatthird full year after the date the vehiclemile for all business miles. See Car allowance, entertainment expenses (including meals) arewas placed in service. later. directly related to, or associated with, the con-
duct of your trade or business.Recapture date.The recapture date is gen-Meal expense deduction subject to “hours ofThe following discussion explains how youerally the date of the event that causes theservice” limits.In 2002, this deduction in-deduct any reimbursements or allowances yourecapture. However, the recapture date for ancreases to 65% of the reimbursed meals yourmake for these expenses incurred by your em-event described in item (2), earlier, is the firstemployees consume while they are subject toployees. If you are self-employed and incurday of the recapture year in which the eventthe Department of Transportation’s “hours ofthese expenses yourself, see Publication 463occurs. service” limits. For more information, see Meal for information on how you can deduct them.expenses when subject to “hours of service”
limits, later.How to report. Report the recapture amount Reimbursementsas follows.
How you deduct a reimbursement or allowanceIndividuals.Include the amount on line 61
arrangement (including per diem allowances,of Form 1040. Write “QEVCR” on the dotted lineIntroduction discussed later) for travel, meals, and entertain-next to line 61.
ment expenses incurred by your employees de-This chapter covers expenses you as a busi-Partnerships. Include on line 25 of Sched- pends on whether you have an accountable planness owner may have that are not explained inule K–1 (Form 1065) the information a partner or a nonaccountable plan. A reimbursement orearlier chapters of this publication.needs to figure the recapture of the credit. allowance arrangement is a system by which
you pay advances, reimbursements, andS corporations. Include on line 23 of Topics
charges for your employees’ business expensesSchedule K–1 (Form 1120S) the information aThis chapter discusses:
and they substantiate their expenses to you soshareholder needs to figure the recapture of the
you can substantiate your deduction of the ad-credit. • Travel, meals, and entertainment
vance, reimbursement, or charge. If you make aC corporations.Include the amount on line• Bribes and kickbacks single payment to your employees and it in-
10 of Schedule J (Form 1120), or line 7 of Part I cludes both wages and an expense reimburse-• Charitable contributions(Form 1120–A). Check the box for “Other” and ment, you must specify the amount of the
attach the required schedule. See the instruc-• Education expenses reimbursement.
tions for Form 1120. If you reimburse these expenses under an• Franchises, trademarks, and trade names
accountable plan, deduct them as travel, meal,
• Lobbying expensesBasis Adjustments and entertainment expenses. If you reimburse
these expenses under a nonaccountable plan,• Penalties and finesIf you claim a tax credit for a qualified electric you must report the reimbursements as wages
• Repayments (claim of right)vehicle you place in service during the year, you on Form W–2, Wage and Tax Statement, and
must reduce your basis in that vehicle by the deduct them as wages. See Table 13–1.
lesser of: Useful Items
You may want to see:1) $4,000, or Accountable Plans
2) 10% of the cost of the vehicle. Publication To be an accountable plan, your reimbursement
This basis reduction rule applies even if the or allowance arrangement must require your❏ 15–B Employer’s Tax Guide to Fringe
employees to meet all the following rules.credit allowed is less than that amount. Benefits
If you must recapture part or all of the credit, 1) They must have paid or incurred deducti-❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Carincrease the basis of your vehicle by the amount ble expenses while performing services asExpensesrecaptured. If the qualified electric vehicle is your employees.depreciable property, you can recover the addi-❏ 529 Miscellaneous Deductions
tional basis over the vehicle’s remaining recov- 2) They must adequately account to you for❏ 542 Corporationsery period beginning with the tax year of these expenses within a reasonable period
recapture. ❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property of time.
Chapter 13 Other Expenses Page 51

Page 52 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Per Diem and Car AllowancesTable 13–1.  Reporting Reimbursements
You may reimburse your employees under anIf the type of reimbursement (or other
accountable plan based on travel days, miles, orexpense allowance) arrangement is under: Then the employer reports on Form W-2:
some other fixed allowance. In these cases,An accountable plan with: your employee is considered to have accounted
to you for the amount of the expense that doesActual expense reimbursement: No amount.
not exceed the rates established by the federalAdequate accounting made and excess
government. Your employee must actually sub-returned
stantiate to you the other elements of the ex-
Actual expense reimbursement: The excess amount as wages in box 1. pense, such as time, place, and businessAdequate accounting and return of excess purpose.both required but excess not returned
Federal rate.The federal rate can be figuredPer diem or mileage allowance up to theNo amount.
using any one of the following methods.federal rate:
Adequate accounting made and excess
1) For per diem amounts:returned
a) The regular federal per diem rate.Per diem or mileage allowance up to theThe excess amount as wages in box 1. The
federal rate: amount up to the federal rate is reported onlyb) The standard meal allowance.Adequate accounting and return of excess in box 12—it is not reported in box 1.
both required but excess not returned c) The high-low rate.
Per diem or mileage allowance exceeds theThe excess amount as wages in box 1. The 2) For car expenses:federal rate: amount up to the federal rate is reported only
Adequate accounting made up to the federal in box 12—it is not reported in box 1. a) The standard mileage rate.rate only and excess not returned
b) A fixed and variable rate (FAVR).
A nonaccountable plan with:
Either adequate accounting or return of The entire amount as wages in box 1. Car allowance. Your employee is consideredexcess, or both, not required by plan to have accounted to you for car expenses that
No reimbursement plan The entire amount as wages in box 1. do not exceed the standard mileage rate. For
2002, the standard mileage rate is 361/2 cents
per mile for each business mile.
3) They must return any excess reimburse-Reasonable period of time. A reasonable You can choose to reimburse your employ-
ment or allowance within a reasonable pe-period of time depends on the facts and circum-ees using a fixed and variable rate (FAVR) al-
riod of time. stances. Generally, actions that take placelowance. This is an allowance that includes a
within the times specified in the following list willcombination of payments covering fixed and va-An arrangement under which you advancebe treated as taking place within a reasonableriable costs, such as a cents-per-mile rate tomoney to employees is treated as meeting (3)period of time. cover your employees’ variable operating costsabove only if the following requirements are also
(such as gas, oil, etc.) plus a flat amount to covermet. 1) You give an advance within 30 days of theyour employees’ fixed costs (such as deprecia-
• The advance is reasonably calculated not time the employee has the expense. tion, insurance, etc.). For information on using a
to exceed the amount of anticipated ex- FAVR allowance, see Revenue Procedure2) Your employees adequately account forpenses. 2001–54 in Internal Revenue Bulletin 2001–48.their expenses within 60 days after the ex-You can read Revenue Procedure 2001–54 at• You make the advance within a reasona- penses were paid or incurred. many public libraries.ble period of time. 3) Your employees return any excess reim-
bursement within 120 days after the ex-Per diem allowance. If your employee actu-If any expenses reimbursed under this ar- ally substantiates to you the other elements (dis-pense was paid or incurred.rangement are not substantiated, or are an ex- cussed earlier) of the expenses reimbursedcess reimbursement that is not returned within a4) You give a periodic statement (at leastusing the per diem allowance, how you reportreasonable period of time by an employee, youquarterly) to your employees that asksand deduct the allowance depends on whethercannot treat these expenses as reimbursed them to either return or adequately ac-the allowance is for lodging and meal expensesunder an accountable plan. Instead, treat thecount for outstanding advances and they or for meal expenses only and whether the al-reimbursed expenses as paid under a nonac- comply within 120 days of the statement.lowance is more than the federal rate.countable plan, discussed later.
Regular federal per diem rate.The regularAdequate accounting. Your employees must How to deduct. You can take a deduction forfederal per diem rate is the highest amount theadequately account to you for their expenses.travel, meals, and entertainment expenses iffederal government will pay to its employees forThey must give you documentary evidence ofyou reimburse your employees for these ex-lodging, meal, and incidental expenses (or mealtheir travel, mileage, and other employee busi-penses under an accountable plan. The amountand incidental expenses only) while they areness expenses. This evidence should includeyou deduct for meals and entertainment, how-traveling away from home in a particular area.items such as receipts, along with either a state-ever, may be subject to a 50% limit, discussedThe rates are different for different locations.ment of expenses, an account book, a diary, or alater. If you are a sole proprietor, deduct thePublication 1542 lists the rates in the continentalsimilar record in which the employee enteredreimbursement on line 24 of Schedule C (FormUnited States.each expense at or near the time the expense1040). If you file a corporation income tax return,was incurred. Internet access. Per diem rates are avail-include the reimbursement in the amount able on the Internet. If you have a computer andclaimed on the “Other deductions” line of FormExcess reimbursement or allowance. An a modem, you can access per diem rates at1120, U.S. Corporation Income Tax Return, orexcess reimbursement or allowance is any www.policyworks.gov/perdiem.Form 1120–A, U.S. Corporation Short-Form In-amount you pay to an employee that is more
come Tax Return. If you file any other incomethan the business-related expenses for which Standard meal allowance. The federal
tax return, such as a partnership or S corpora-the employee adequately accounted. The em- rate for meal and incidental expense (M & IE) is
tion return, deduct the reimbursement on theployee must return any excess reimbursement the standard meal allowance. You may pay an
appropriate line of the return as provided in theor other expense allowance to you within a rea- allowance for meal and incidental expenses only
instructions for that return.sonable period of time. if, for example, you reimburse actual lodging
Page 52 Chapter 13 Other Expenses

Page 53 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
expenses or do not reimburse lodging expensesRelated expenses. Taxes and tips relating additional information on de minimis fringe ben-
because there are none. to a meal or entertainment activity you reim- efits.
burse to your employee under an accountableHigh-low method. This is a simplified Company cafeteria or executive diningplan are included in the amount subject to themethod of computing the federal per diem rate room. You can deduct the cost of food and50% limit. Reimbursements you make for ex-for lodging and meal expenses for traveling beverages you provide primarily to your employ-penses, such as cover charges for admission towithin the continental United States. It elimi- ees on your business premises. This includesa nightclub, rent paid for a room to hold a dinnernates the need to keep a current list of the per the cost of maintaining the facilities for providingor cocktail party, or the amount you pay fordiem rate in effect for each city in the continental the food and beverages. These expenses areparking at a sports arena, are all subject to theUnited States. subject to the 50% limit unless they qualify as de50% limit. However, the cost of transportation toUnder the high-low method, the per diem minimis fringe benefits, discussed in Publicationand from an otherwise allowable business mealamount for travel during 2002 is $204 ($42 for M 15–B, or unless they are compensation to youror a business-related entertainment activity is& IE) for certain high-cost locations. All other employees and you treat them as providednot subject to the 50% limit.areas have a per diem amount of $125 ($34 for under a nonaccountable plan, as discussed
M & IE). The high-cost locations eligible for theAmount subject to 50% limit.If you providelater.
$204 per diem amount under the high-low your employees with a per diem allowance (dis-
Employee activities.You can deduct the ex-method are listed in Publication 1542 (Revisedcussed earlier) only for meal and incidental ex-
pense of providing recreational, social, or similarFebruary 2002). penses, the amount treated as an expense for
activities (including the use of a facility) for yourfood and beverages is the lesser of the follow-
employees. The benefit must be primarily forReporting per diem and car allowances. ing.
your employees who are not highly compen-The following paragraphs explain how to report• The per diem allowance. sated employees.per diem and car allowances. The manner in
For this purpose, a highly compensated em-which you report them depends on how the • The federal rate for M & IE.
ployee is an employee who meets either of theallowance compares to the federal rate.
following requirements.If you provide your employee with a per diemAllowance LESS than or EQUAL to the fed-
allowance that covers lodging, meals, and inci-eral rate.If your allowance for the employee is 1) Owned a 10% or more interest in the busi-dental expenses, you must treat an amountless than or equal to the appropriate federal rate, ness during the year or the precedingequal to the federal M & IE rate for the area ofthat allowance is not included as part of the year. An employee is treated as owningtravel as an expense for food and beverages. Ifemployee’s pay in box 1 of the employee’s Form any interest owned by his or her brother,the per diem allowance you provide is less thanW–2. Deduct the allowance as travel expenses sister, spouse, ancestors, and lineal de-the federal per diem rate for the area of travel,(including meals that may be subject to the 50% scendants.you can treat 40% of the per diem allowance aslimit, discussed later). See How to deduct under 2) Received more than $90,000 in pay for thethe amount for food and beverages.Accountable Plans, earlier. preceding year. You may choose to in-Drilling rigs.The 50% limit does not apply toAllowance MORE than the federal rate.If clude only employees who were also in thethe food or beverages an employer provides onyour employee’s allowance is more than the top 20% of employees when ranked byan oil or gas platform or drilling rig located off-appropriate federal rate, you must report the pay for the preceding year.shore or in Alaska. This exception also appliesallowance as two separate items. These expenses are not subject to the 50%to food and beverages provided by an employerYou include the allowance amount up to the limit. For example, the expenses for food, bever-at a support camp that is near and integral to anfederal rate in box 12 (code L) of the employee’s ages, and entertainment for a company-wideoil or gas platform or drilling rig located inForm W–2. Deduct it as travel expenses (as picnic are not subject to the 50% limit.Alaska.explained above). This part of the allowance is
treated as reimbursed under an accountableMeal expenses when subject to “hours of
plan. service” limits.You can deduct 65% of the Nonaccountable PlansYou include the amount that is more than thereimbursed meals your employees consume
federal rate in box 1 (and in boxes 3 and 5 if theywhile away from their tax home on businessA nonaccountable plan is an arrangement that
apply) of the employee’s Form W–2. Deduct itduring or incident to any period subject to thedoes not meet the requirements for an account-
as wages subject to income tax withholding,Department of Transportation’s hours of serviceable plan. All amounts paid, or treated as paid,
social security, Medicare, and federal unem-limits. under a nonaccountable plan are reported as
ployment taxes. This part of the allowance isIndividuals subject to the Department ofwages on Form W–2. The payments are subject
treated as reimbursed under a nonaccountableTransportation’s hours of service limits includeto income tax withholding, social security, Medi-
plan as explained later under Nonaccountable the following. care, and federal unemployment taxes. You can
Plans. deduct the reimbursement as compensation or• Certain air transportation workers (such aswages only to the extent it meets the deductibil-pilots, crew, dispatchers, mechanics, andity tests for employees’ pay in chapter 2. Deductcontrol tower operators) who are underMeals and Entertainment the allowable amount as compensation orFederal Aviation Administration regula-wages on the appropriate line of your income taxtions.Under an accountable plan, you can generally return, as provided in its instructions.deduct only 50% of any otherwise deductible• Interstate truck operators and bus driversbusiness-related meal and entertainment ex- who are under Department of Transporta-penses you reimburse your employees. The de-tion regulations. Other Reimbursed Expensesduction limit applies even if you reimburse them
• Certain railroad employees (such as engi-for 100% of the expenses. You may provide meals and entertainment to
neers, conductors, train crews, dispatch-individuals who are not your employees. TheseApplication of the 50% limit.The 50% de- ers, and control operations personnel)expenses may or may not be subject to the 50%duction limit applies to reimbursements you who are under Federal Railroad Adminis-limit, depending on the circumstances.make to your employees for expenses they incurtration regulations.
for meals while traveling away from home on Nonemployee. If you provide a person who is• Certain merchant mariners who are underbusiness and for entertaining business custom- not your employee with meals, goods, services,Coast Guard regulations.ers at your place of business, a restaurant, or or the use of a facility and the item you provide is
another location. It applies to expenses incurred considered entertainment, you can deduct the
at a business convention or reception, businessDe minimis (minimal) fringe benefit.The expense only to the extent it is included in the
meeting, or business luncheon at a club. The 50% limit does not apply to an expense for food gross income of the recipient as compensation
deduction limit may also apply to meals you or beverage that is excluded from the gross for services or as a prize or award. If you are
furnish on your premises to your employees income of an employee because it is a de required to include these expenses on an infor-
(discussed in chapter 2). minimis fringe benefit. See Publication 15–B for mation return (Form 1099–MISC), you cannot
Chapter 13 Other Expenses Page 53

Page 54 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
claim a deduction for them unless you file theForeign expenses. You cannot deduct the earns to car dealers who refer insurance cus-
necessary information return. For more informa- costs of advertising on foreign radio and televi-tomers to him. The car dealers are not licensed
tion about when to file Form 1099–MISC, see sion (including cable) where the advertising isto sell insurance. Mr. Green cannot deduct
the General Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098,primarily for a market in the United States. How-these payments if they are in violation of any
5498, and W–2G. These expenses are not sub- ever, this rule only applies to advertising ex-federal or state law as explained previously in
ject to the 50% limit. penses in countries that deny a deduction for (2) under Bribes and kickbacks.
advertising on a United States broadcast prima-Director, stockholder, or employee meet- rily for that country’s market. Example 2. The Yard Corporation is in theings. You can deduct entertainment expenses business of repairing ships. It returns 10% of thedirectly related to business meetings of yourAnticipated liabilities.Anticipated liabilitiesrepair bills as kickbacks to the captains and chiefemployees, partners, stockholders, agents, oror reserves for anticipated liabilities are not de-officers of vessels it repairs. It considers kick-directors. You can provide some minor socialductible. For example, assume you sold 1-yearbacks necessary to get business. The owners ofactivities, but the main purpose of the meetingTV service contracts this year totaling $50,000.the ships do not know of these payments.must be your company’s business. These ex-From experience, you know you will have ex-In the state where the corporation operates,penses are subject to the 50% limit. penses of about $15,000 in the coming year forit is unlawful to attempt to influence the actionsthese contracts. You cannot deduct any of theTrade association meetings.You can de- of any employee, private agent, or fiduciary in$15,000 this year by charging expenses to aduct expenses directly related to and necessary relation to the principal’s or employer’s affairs byreserve or liability account. You can deduct yourfor attending business meetings or conventions giving or offering anything of value without theexpenses only when you actually pay or accrueof certain exempt organizations. These organi- knowledge and consent of the principal or em-them, depending on your accounting method.zations include business leagues, chambers of ployer. The state generally enforces the law.
commerce, real estate boards, and trade and The kickbacks paid by the Yard Corporation areBlack lung benefit trust contributions.Ifprofessional associations. Meal and entertain- not deductible.you, as a coal mine operator, make a contribu-ment expenses are subject to the 50% limit.tion to a qualified black lung benefit trust, youMedicare or Medicaid.Kickbacks, bribes,
Sale of meals or entertainment.You can de- may be able to deduct your contribution. Toand rebates paid in Medicare or Medicaid pro-
duct the cost of providing meals, entertainment,deduct it, you must make your contribution dur-grams are not deductible.
goods and services, or use of facilities you sell toing the tax year or pay it to the trust by the due
Form 1099–MISC. If you pay kickbacksthe public. For example, if you run a nightclub,date for filing your federal income tax return
during your tax year, whether or not they areyour expense for the entertainment you furnish(including extensions). You must make the con-
deductible on your income tax return, you mayto your customers, such as a floor show, is atribution in cash or in property the trust is permit-
have to report them on an information return,business expense. These expenses are not ted to hold.
Form 1099–MISC. For more information aboutsubject to the 50% limit. Figure your allowable deduction for contribu-
when to file Form 1099–MISC, see the Generaltions to a black lung benefit trust on Schedule AAdvertising to promote goodwill.You can Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098, 5498, andof Form 6069.deduct the cost of providing meals, entertain- W–2G.ment, or recreational facilities to the generalBribes and kickbacks. You cannot deductpublic as a means of advertising or promotingbribes, kickbacks, or similar payments if they areCar and truck expenses.You can deduct thegoodwill in the community. For example, theeither of the following. costs of operating a car, truck, or other vehicle inexpense of sponsoring a television or radio your business. These costs include gas, oil, re-show is deductible. You can also deduct the1) Payments directly or indirectly to an officialpairs, license tags, insurance, and depreciation.expense of distributing free food and beveragesor employee of any government or an Only the expenses for business use are deducti-to the general public. These expenses are notagency or instrumentality of any govern-ble. Traveling between your home and yoursubject to the 50% limit. ment in violation of the law. If the govern-place of business is usually not business use.ment is a foreign government, theCharitable sports event.The 50% limit does Under certain conditions, you can use thepayments are not deductible if they arenot apply to the expenses covered by a package standard mileage rate instead of deducting theunlawful under the Foreign Corrupt Prac-deal that includes a ticket to a charitable sports actual expenses for your vehicle. The standardtices Act of 1977.event if the event meets certain conditions. See mileage rate for the cost of operating your car,
Entertainment tickets in chapter 2 of Publication2) Payments directly or indirectly to a personvan, pickup, or panel truck in 2002 is 361/2 cents
463 for a list of the conditions a charitable sportsin violation of any federal or state law (buta mile for all business miles. For more informa-
event must meet. only if that state law is generally enforced)tion on how to figure your deduction, see Publi-
that provides for a criminal penalty or forcation 463.
the loss of a license or privilege to engage
in a trade or business. Charitable contributions.Cash payments to
Miscellaneous charitable, religious, educational, scientific, or
Meaning of “generally enforced.”A state similar organizations may be deductible as busi-Expenses law is considered generally enforced unless it isness expenses if the payments are not charita-
never enforced or enforced only for infamousble contributions or gifts. If the payments areIn addition to travel, meal, and entertainmentpersons or persons whose violations are ex-charitable contributions or gifts, you cannot de-expenses, there are other expenses you cantraordinarily flagrant. For example, a state law isduct them as business expenses. However, cor-deduct. This section briefly covers some ofgenerally enforced unless proper reporting of aporations (other than S corporations) can deductthese expenses (listed in alphabetical order).violation of the law results in enforcement onlycharitable contributions on their income tax re-under unusual circumstances. turns. See Charitable Contributions in Publica-Advertising expenses. You generally can
tion 542 for more information. Sole proprietors,deduct reasonable advertising expenses if theyKickbacks. A kickback includes a payment
partners in a partnership, or shareholders in anrelate to your business activities. Generally, youfor referring a client, patient, or customer. The
S corporation may be able to deduct charitablecannot deduct the cost of advertising to influ-common kickback situation occurs when money
contributions made by their business on Sched-ence legislation. See Lobbying expenses, later. or property is given to someone as payment for
ule A (Form 1040).You can usually deduct as a business ex-influencing a third party to purchase from, use
pense the cost of institutional or “good will” ad-the services of, or otherwise deal with the per-
Example. You paid $15 to a local church forvertising to keep your name before the public if itson who pays the kickback. In many cases, the
a half-page ad in a program for a concert it isrelates to business you reasonably expect toperson whose business is being sought or en-
sponsoring. The purpose of the ad was to en-gain in the future. For example, the cost of ad-joyed by the person who pays the kickback does
courage readers to buy your products. Sincevertising that encourages people to contribute tonot know of the payment.
your payment is not a contribution, you cannotthe Red Cross, to buy U.S. Saving Bonds, or to
deduct it as such. However, you can deduct it asparticipate in similar causes is usually deducti-Example 1. Mr. Green, an insurance bro-
ble. ker, pays part of the insurance commissions he an advertising expense.
Page 54 Chapter 13 Other Expenses

Page 55 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Inventory. If you contribute inventory (prop-• Trade associations. You cannot deduct education expenses you
incur to meet the minimum requirements of yourerty you sell in the course of your business), the
present trade or business, or those that qualifyamount you can claim as a contribution deduc-Damages recovered. Special rules apply toyou for a new trade or business. This is truetion is the smaller of its fair market value on thecompensation you receive for damages sus-even if the education maintains or improvesday you contributed it or its basis. The basis oftained as a result of patent infringement, breachskills presently required in your business. Fordonated inventory is any cost incurred for theof contract or fiduciary duty, or antitrust viola-more information on education expenses, seeinventory in an earlier year that you would other-tions. You must include this compensation inPublication 508.wise include in your opening inventory for theyour income. However, you may be able to takeyear of the contribution. You must remove thea special deduction. The deduction applies Example 1. Dr. Carter, who is a psychiatrist,amount of your contribution deduction from youronly to amounts recovered for actual injury, notbegins a program of study at an accredited psy-opening inventory. It is not part of the cost ofany additional amount. The deduction is thechoanalytic institute to qualify as a psychoana-goods sold. smaller of the following. lyst. She can deduct the cost of the programIf the cost of donated property is not included
• The amount you received or accrued forbecause the study maintains or improves skillsin your opening inventory, the property’s basis is
damages in the tax year reduced by therequired in her profession and does not qualifyzero and you cannot claim a charitable contribu-
amount you paid or incurred in the year toher for a new one.tion deduction. Treat the property’s cost as you
recover that amount.would ordinarily treat it under your method of Example 2. Herb Jones owns a repair shopaccounting. For example, include the purchase• Your losses from the injury you have notfor electronic equipment. The bulk of the busi-price of inventory bought and donated in thededucted. ness is television repairs, but occasionally hesame year in the cost of goods sold for that year. fixes tape decks and disc players. To keep upA corporation (other than an S corporation)Demolition expenses or losses.You cannot with the latest technical changes, he takes acan deduct its basis in the property plus one-halfdeduct any amount paid or incurred to demolishspecial course to learn how to repair disc play-of the gain that would have been realized if thea structure or any loss for the undepreciateders. Since the course maintains and improvesproperty had been sold at its fair market value onbasis of a demolished structure. Add theseskills required in his trade, he can deduct itsthe date of contribution. But the deduction can-amounts to the basis of the land where thecost.not be more than twice the property’s basis. Fordemolished structure was located. Environmental cleanup costs.You can de-more information on the charitable contribution
duct certain costs to clean up land and to treatof property by a corporation, see sectionDepreciation.If property you buy to use ingroundwater you contaminated with hazardous170(e)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code. your business has a useful life substantially be-waste from your business operations. You canyond the year it is placed in service, you gener-deduct the costs you incur to restore your landExample 1. You own an auto repair shopally cannot deduct the entire cost as a businessand groundwater to the same physical conditionand in 2002 you donated auto parts to your localexpense in the year you buy it. You must spreadthat existed prior to contamination. You cannotschool for its auto repair class. The fair marketthe cost over more than one tax year and deductdeduct costs for the construction of groundwatervalue of the parts at the time of the contributionpart of it each year. This method of deductingtreatment facilities. You must capitalize thosewas $600 and you had included $400 for thethe cost of business property is called deprecia-costs and you can recover them through depre-parts in your opening inventory for 2002. Yourtion. ciation.charitable contribution is $400. You reduce yourHowever, you may be able to elect to deduct
opening inventory by the $400 for the donateda limited amount of the cost of certain deprecia-Franchise, trademark, trade name.If youproperty. ble property in the year you place it in service inbuy a franchise, trademark, or trade name, you
your business. This deduction is known as thecan deduct the amount you pay or incur as aExample 2. Assume the same facts as Ex-“section 179 deduction.” business expense only if your payments are partample 1, except you purchased the auto parts inFor information on depreciation and the sec-of a series of payments that are:2002 for $400 (not part of the opening inven-tion 179 deduction, see Publication 946.
tory). The $400 is included as part of the cost of 1) Contingent on productivity, use, or disposi-
goods sold for 2002 but not in figuring the basisDonations to business organizations.You tion of the item,
of the property. Your charitable contribution iscan deduct donations to business organizations2) Payable at least annually for the entire$0. as business expenses if all the following condi-term of the transfer agreement, andtions are met.
Club dues and membership fees.Generally, 3) Substantially equal in amount (or payable• The donation relates directly to your tradeyou cannot deduct amounts you pay or incur for under a fixed formula).or business.membership in any club organized for business,
When determining the term of the transferpleasure, recreation, or any other social pur-• You reasonably expect a financial return inagreement, include all renewal options and anypose. This includes country clubs, golf and ath-line with your donation. other period for which you and the transferorletic clubs, hotel clubs, sporting clubs, airline
• The donation is not a nondeductible lobby- reasonably expect the agreement to be re-clubs, and clubs operated to provide meals
ing expense as discussed later under Lob- newed.under circumstances generally considered to be
bying expenses. A franchise includes an agreement that givesconducive to business discussions.
one of the parties to the agreement the right to
Exception. None of the following organiza-For example, a donation you make to a com-distribute, sell, or provide goods, services, or
tions will be treated as a club organized formittee organized by the Chamber of Commercefacilities within a specified area.
business, pleasure, recreation, or other socialto bring a national convention to your city mayProperty acquired after August 10, 1993purpose unless one of the main purposes is tobe deductible. (or after July 25, 1991, if elected).Anyconduct entertainment activities for members or
amounts you pay or incur that are not describedtheir guests or to provide members or theirEducation expenses. You can deduct the or-in (1) through (3) must be charged to a capitalguests with access to entertainment facilities.dinary and necessary expenses you pay for theaccount. These are “section 197 intangibles”education and training of your employees. For• Boards of trade. and are amortized over 15 years. See chapter 9more information, see Education Expenses in for more information on amortization.• Business leagues. chapter 2. You can elect to apply this treatment to anyYou can also deduct your own education• Chambers of commerce. franchise, trademark, or trade name acquiredexpenses (including certain related travel) re-after July 25, 1991. This election is binding and• Civic or public service organizations.lated to your trade or business. You must becannot be revoked without approval of the IRS.able to show the education maintains or im-• Professional organizations such as bar as-proves skills required in your trade or business,Property acquired before August 11, 1993.sociations and medical associations. or it is required by your employer, or by law or For a transfer not treated as a sale or exchange
• Real estate boards. regulations, for keeping your pay, status, or job. of a capital asset, you can deduct a lump-sum
Chapter 13 Other Expenses Page 55

Page 56 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
payment of an agreed upon principal amount any attempt to influence the official actions• Your work clearly requires the expense foror positions of those officials.ratably over the shorter of the following. you to satisfactorily perform the work.
• Researching, preparing, planning, or coor-• 10 years. • The goods or services purchased are dinating any of the preceding activities.clearly not needed or used, other than in-• The period of the transfer agreement.
cidentally, in your personal activities.Your expenses for influencing legislation and
For a transfer not treated as a sale or ex-• Their treatment is not specifically provided communicating directly with a covered execu-
change of a capital asset, you can deduct, in thefor under other tax law provisions. tive branch official include a portion of your labor
year made, a payment that is one of a series of costs and general and administrative costs of
approximately equal payments payable over ei- your business. For information on making thisExample. You are blind. You must use ather of the following. allocation, see section 1.162–28 of the regula-reader to do your work, both at and away fromtions.• The period of the transfer agreement.your place of work. The reader’s services areYou cannot take a charitable deduction oronly for your work. You can deduct your ex-• A period of more than 10 years, regard- business expense for amounts paid to an organ-penses for the reader as a business expense.less of the period of the agreement. ization if both the following apply.
Interview expense allowances.Reimburse- • The organization conducts lobbying activi-ments you make to job candidates for transpor-The above business deductions do not ties on matters of direct financial interesttation or other expenses related to interviews forapply to transfers after October 2, to your business.possible employment are not wages. You can1989, and before August 11, 1993, ifCAUTION
!
• A principal purpose of your contribution isdeduct the reimbursements as a business ex-the principal sum is over $100,000. to avoid the rules discussed earlier thatpense. However, expenses for food, beverages,
Charge any payment not deductible because prohibit a business deduction for lobbyingand entertainment are subject to the 50% limit
of these rules to a capital account. However, you expenses.discussed earlier under Meals and Entertain-
can deduct the payments charged to a capitalment.
account over the life of the asset if you can If a tax-exempt organization, other than a sec-
Legal and professional fees.Legal and pro-determine the useful life of the asset. Otherwise, tion 501(c)(3) organization, provides you with a
fessional fees, such as fees charged by ac-you can choose to amortize the payment over a notice on the part of dues that is allocable to
countants, that are ordinary and necessary25-year period beginning with the tax year the nondeductible lobbying and political expenses,
expenses directly related to operating your busi-transfer occurs. you cannot deduct that part of the dues.
ness are deductible as business expenses.
Contracts entered into before October 3, Covered executive branch official.ForHowever, you usually cannot deduct legal fees
1989. For contracts to buy a franchise, trade- purposes of this discussion, a covered executiveyou pay to acquire business assets. Add them to
mark, or trade name entered into before October branch official is any of the following. the basis of the property.
3, 1989, you can deduct payments contingentIf the fees include payments for work of a1) The President.on productivity, use, or disposition. The rulespersonal nature (such as making a will), you
discussed earlier for annual and substantiallytake a business deduction only for the part of the2) The Vice President.
equal payments do not apply. fee related to your business. The personal por-3) Any officer or employee of the Whitetion of legal fees for producing or collecting taxa-Disposition of franchise, trademark, or House Office of the Executive Office of theble income, doing or keeping your job, or for taxtrade name. If you transfer, sell, or otherwise President and the two most senior leveladvice may be deductible on Schedule A (Formdispose of a franchise, trademark, or trade officers of each of the other agencies in1040) if you itemize deductions. See Publicationname, you must recapture as ordinary income the Executive Office.529.(up to any gain realized) the payments you de- 4) Any individual who:ducted as any of the following. Tax preparation fees.You can deduct as a
trade or business expense the cost of preparinga) Is serving in a position in Level I of the• A lump-sum or serial payment of a princi-that part of your tax return relating to your busi-Executive Schedule under section 5312pal amount not treated as a sale or ex-ness as a sole proprietor. The remaining cost of title 5, United States Code,change of a capital asset. may be deductible on Schedule A (Form 1040) if
b) Has been designated by the Presidentyou itemize deductions.• An amortized payment deducted over 25
as having Cabinet-level status, orYou can also take a business deduction foryears.
the amount you pay or incur in resolving as-c) Is an immediate deputy of an individual• The amortization claimed on section 197serted tax deficiencies for your business as a listed in item (a) or (b).intangibles. sole proprietor.
For more information about dispositions ofLicenses and regulatory fees.Licenses and Exceptions to denial of deduction.The
franchises, trademarks, and trade names, see regulatory fees for your trade or business paidgeneral denial of the deduction does not apply to
each year to state or local governments gener-chapter 2 in Publication 544. the following.
ally are deductible. Some licenses and fees may• Expenses of appearing before, or commu-have to be amortized. See chapter 9 for moreImpairment-related expenses.If you are dis- nicating with, any local council or similarinformation.abled, you can deduct expenses necessary for governing body concerning its legislationyou to be able to work (impairment-related ex- (local legislation) if the legislation is of di-Lobbying expenses. Generally, you cannotpenses) as a business expense, rather than as a rect interest to you or to you and an organ-deduct lobbying expenses. Lobbying expensesmedical expense. ization of which you are a member. Aninclude amounts paid or incurred for any of the
You are disabled if you have either of the Indian tribal government is treated as afollowing activities.
following. local council or similar governing body.• Influencing legislation.
• A physical or mental disability (for exam- • Any in-house expenses for influencing leg-• Participating in or intervening in any politi-ple, blindness or deafness) that function- islation and communicating directly with acal campaign for, or against, any candi-ally limits your being employed. covered executive branch official if thosedate for public office. expenses for the tax year do not exceed• A physical or mental impairment that sub-• Attempting to influence the general public, $2,000 (excluding overhead expenses).stantially limits one or more of your majoror segments of the public, about elections,life activities. • Expenses incurred by taxpayers engagedlegislative matters, or referendums. in the trade or business of lobbying (pro-
You can deduct the expense as a business • Communicating directly with covered ex- fessional lobbyists) on behalf of another
expense if all the following apply. ecutive branch officials (defined later) in person (but does apply to payments by the
Page 56 Chapter 13 Other Expenses

Page 57 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
other person to the lobbyist for lobbying• Court costs or stenographic and printingRepayments. If you had to repay an amount
activities). charges. you included in your income in an earlier year,
you may be able to deduct the amount repaid for• Compensatory damages paid to a govern-the year in which you repaid it. Or, if the amountMoving machinery. Generally, the cost of ment.
you repaid is more than $3,000, you may be ablemoving your machinery from one city to another
to take a credit against your tax for the year inis a deductible expense. So is the cost of movingNonconformance penalty. You can deduct
which you repaid it.machinery from one plant to another, or froma nonconformance penalty assessed by the En-
one part of your plant to another. You can de-vironmental Protection Agency for failing toType of deduction.The type of deductionduct the cost of installing the machinery in themeet certain emission standards. you are allowed in the year of repayment de-new location. However, you must capitalize the pends on the type of income you included in thePolitical contributions.You cannot deductcosts of installing or moving newly purchased earlier year. For instance, if you repay ancontributions or gifts to political parties or candi-machinery. amount you previously reported as a capitaldates as business expenses. In addition, you
gain, deduct the repayment as a capital loss onOutplacement services.You can deduct the cannot deduct expenses you pay or incur to take
Schedule D (Form 1040). If you reported it ascosts of outplacement services you provide topart in any political campaign of a candidate for
self-employment income, deduct it as a busi-your employees to help them find new employ-public office.
ness deduction on Schedule C or Schedulement, such as career counseling, resum´e assis- Indirect political contributions.You can-tance, skills assessment, etc. C-EZ (Form 1040).not deduct indirect political contributions andThe costs of outplacement services may If you reported the amount as wages, unem-costs of taking part in political activities as busi-cover more than one deduction category. For ployment compensation, or other nonbusinessness expenses. Examples of nondeductible ex-example, deduct as a utilities expense the cost ordinary income, enter it on line 22 of Schedulepenses include the following.of telephone calls made under this service and A (Form 1040). However, if the repayment is
deduct as rental expense the cost of renting• Advertising in a convention program of aover $3,000 and Method 1 (discussed later) ap-machinery and equipment for this service. political party, or in any other publication ifplies, deduct it on line 27 of Schedule A (FormFor information on whether the value of out-any of the proceeds from the publication1040).placement services is includable in your employ-are for, or intended for, the use of a politi-
Repayment—$3,000 or less. If theees’ income, see Publication 15–B. cal party or candidate.
amount you repaid was $3,000 or less, deduct it
• Admission to a dinner or program (includ-Penalties and fines.Penalties you pay for from your income in the year you repaid it.ing, but not limited to, galas, dances, filmlate performance or nonperformance of a con-
Repayment—over $3,000. If the amountpresentations, parties, and sportingtract are generally deductible. For instance, if
you repaid was more than $3,000, you can de-events) if any of the proceeds from theyou contracted to construct a building by a cer-
duct the repayment, as described earlier. How-function are for, or intended for, the use oftain date and had to pay an amount for each day
ever, you can instead choose to take a tax credita political party or candidate.the building was not finished after that date, you
for the year of repayment if you included thecan deduct the amounts paid or incurred. • Admission to an inaugural ball, gala,income under a claim of right. This means thatOn the other hand, you cannot deduct penal-parade, concert, or similar event if identi-at the time you included the income, it appearedties or fines you pay to any government agencyfied with a political party or candidate.or instrumentality because of a violation of any that you had an unrestricted right to it. If you
law. These fines or penalties include the follow- qualify for this choice, figure your tax under both
Removal costs. You can deduct the cost ofing amounts. methods and use the method that results in less
retiring and removing a depreciable asset intax.• Paid because of a conviction for a crime orconnection with the installation or production of
after a plea of guilty or no contest in a Method 1. Figure your tax for 2002 claiminga replacement asset. However, you must capi-
criminal proceeding. a deduction for the repaid amount.talize the cost of removing a component of a
depreciable asset if the replacement adds to the• Paid as a penalty imposed by federal, Method 2. Figure your tax for 2002 claimingvalue or usefulness of the asset or significantlystate, or local law in a civil action, includ- a credit for the prepaid amount. Follow theseincreases its useful life.ing certain additions to tax and additional steps.
amounts and assessable penalties im-
Repairs. The cost of repairing or improvingposed by the Internal Revenue Code. 1) Figure your tax for 2002 without deduct-property used in your trade or business is eithering the repaid amount.• Paid in settlement of actual or possiblea deductible or capital expense. You can deduct
liability for a fine or penalty, whether civilrepairs that keep your property in a normal effi-2) Refigure your tax from the earlier year
or criminal. cient operating condition, but that do not add to without including in income the amount
its value or usefulness or appreciably lengthenyou repaid in 2002.• Forfeited as collateral posted for a pro-
its life. If the repairs add to the value or useful-ceeding that could result in a fine or pen- 3) Subtract the tax in (2) from the tax shownness of your property or significantly increase itsalty. on your return for the earlier year. This islife, you must capitalize them. Although you can-
the credit.not deduct capital expenses as current ex-Examples of nondeductible penalties and
penses, you can usually deduct them over a4) Subtract the answer in (3) from the tax forfines include the following.
period of time as depreciation. 2002 figured without the deduction (step• Fines for violating city housing codes. The cost of repairs includes the costs of 1).
labor, supplies, and certain other items. You• Fines paid by truckers for violating state If Method 1 results in less tax, deduct thecannot deduct the value of your own labor.maximum highway weight laws and air amount repaid as discussed earlier under TypeExamples of repairs include the following.quality laws. of deduction.
• Civil penalties for violating federal laws re-• Patching and repairing floors. If Method 2 results in less tax, claim the
garding mining safety standards and dis- credit on line 68 of Form 1040, and write “I.R.C.• Repainting the inside and outside of acharges into navigable waters. 1341” next to line 68.building.
A fine or penalty does not include any of the• Repairing roofs and gutters. Example. For 2001 you filed a return and
following. reported your income on the cash method. In• Mending leaks.
2002 you repaid $5,000 included in your 2001• Legal fees and related expenses to defend
gross income under a claim of right. Your filingyourself in a prosecution or civil action for You cannot deduct the cost of repairs you
status in 2002 and 2001 is single. Your incomea violation of the law imposing the fine or added to the cost of goods sold as a separate
and tax for both years are as follows:civil penalty. business expense.
Chapter 13 Other Expenses Page 57

Page 58 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2001 2001 Utilities.Your business expenses for heat, • Download forms and publications or
With Income Without Income lights, power, and telephone service are deduct-search for forms and publications by topic
Taxable ible. However, any part due to personal use isor keyword.
Income $15,000 $10,000 not deductible. • Order IRS products on-line.
Tax $ 2,254 $ 1,504 Telephone. You cannot deduct the cost of• View forms that may be filled in electroni-basic local telephone service (including anycally, print the completed form, and then2002 2002 taxes) for the first telephone line you have insave the form for recordkeeping.Without Deduction With Deduction your home, even though you have an office inTaxable your home. However, charges for business • View Internal Revenue Bulletins publishedIncome $49,950 $44,950 long-distance phone calls on that line, as well asin the last few years.
Tax  $9,839  $ 8,489 the cost of a second line into your home used• Search regulations and the Internal Reve-exclusively for business, are deductible busi-Your tax under Method 1 is $8,489. Your tax nue Code.ness expenses.under Method 2 is $9,089, figured as follows: • Receive our electronic newsletters on hot
tax issues and news.Tax previously determined for 2001 $ 2,254
Less: Tax as refigured.......... − 1,504 • Learn about the benefits of filing electroni-Decrease in 2001 tax $ 750 cally (IRS e-file).Regular tax liability for 2002....... $9,839
• Get information on starting and operatingLess: Decrease in 2001 tax....... − 750
14. a small business.Refigured tax for 2002 $ 9,089
Because you pay less tax under Method 1, you You can also reach us with your computershould take a deduction for the repayment in using File Transfer Protocol at ftp.irs.gov.How To Get Tax2002.
Repayment does not apply. This discus- TaxFax Service. Using the phone at-
sion does not apply to the following. tached to your fax machine, you canHelp
receive forms and instructions by call-• Deductions for bad debts. ing 703–368–9694. Follow the directions fromYou can get help with unresolved tax issues,• Deductions from sales to customers, such the prompts. When you order forms, enter theorder free publications and forms, ask tax ques-as returns and allowances, and similar catalog number for the form you need. The itemstions, and get more information from the IRS initems. you request will be faxed to you.several ways. By selecting the method that is
For help with transmission problems, call thebest for you, you will have quick and easy ac-• Deductions for legal and other expenses
FedWorld Help Desk at 703–487–4608.cess to tax help.of contesting the repayment.
Contacting your Taxpayer Advocate.If you Phone. Many services are available byYear of deduction (or credit).If you use
have attempted to deal with an IRS problem phone.the cash method of accounting, you can take the
unsuccessfully, you should contact your Tax-deduction (or credit, if applicable) for the tax
payer Advocate.year in which you actually make the repayment. • Ordering forms, instructions, and publica-The Taxpayer Advocate represents your in-If you use any other accounting method, you can tions. Call 1–800–829–3676 to order cur-terests and concerns within the IRS by protect-deduct the repayment or claim a credit for it only rent and prior year forms, instructions, anding your rights and resolving problems that havefor the tax year in which it is a proper deduction publications.not been fixed through normal channels. Whileunder your accounting method. For example, if
Taxpayer Advocates cannot change the tax law• Asking tax questions. Call the IRS Taxyou use an accrual method, you are entitled to
or make a technical tax decision, they can clearHelp Line for Individuals with your taxthe deduction or credit in the tax year in which
up problems that resulted from previous con-questions at 1–800–829–1040.  Or, ifthe obligation for the repayment accrues.
tacts and ensure that your case is given a com-your question pertains to a partnership or
plete and impartial review.Subscriptions. You can deduct as a business corporate return, call the Business and
To contact your Taxpayer Advocate:expense subscriptions to professional, techni- Speciality Tax Help Line at
cal, and trade journals that deal with your busi- 1–800–829–4933.• Call the Taxpayer Advocate atness field. 1–877–777–4778. • Solving problems. Take advantage of Eve-
ryday Tax Solutions service by calling yourSupplies and materials.Unless you have de- • Call, write, or fax the Taxpayer Advocatelocal IRS office to set up an in-person ap-ducted the cost in any earlier year, you generallyoffice in your area. pointment at your convenience. Checkcan deduct the cost of materials and supplies• Call 1–800–829–4059 if you are a your local directory assistance oractually consumed and used during the tax year.TTY/TDD user. www.irs.gov for the numbers.If you keep incidental materials and supplies
on hand, you can deduct the cost of the inciden- • TTY/TDD equipment. If you have accessFor more information, see Publication 1546,tal materials and supplies you bought during the to TTY/TDD equipment, call 1–800–829–The Taxpayer Advocate Service of the IRS.tax year if all the following requirements are met. 4059 to ask tax questions or to order
forms and publications.Free tax services.To find out what services• You do not keep a record of when they are
are available, get Publication 910, Guide to Freeused. • TeleTax topics. Call 1–800–829–4477 toTax Services. It contains a list of free tax publi-listen to pre-recorded messages covering• You do not take an inventory of the cations and an index of tax topics. It also de-various tax topics.amount on hand at the beginning and endscribes other free tax information services,of the tax year. including tax education and assistance pro-
Evaluating the quality of our telephone serv-• This method does not distort your income. grams and a list of TeleTax topics.
ices. To ensure that IRS representatives givePersonal computer. With your per- accurate, courteous, and professional answers,You can also deduct the cost of books, profes-sonal computer and modem, you can we use several methods to evaluate the qualitysional instruments, equipment, etc., if you nor-access the IRS on the Internet at of our telephone services. One method is for amally use them up within a year. However, if thewww.irs.gov. While visiting our web site, yousecond IRS representative to sometimes listenusefulness of these items extends substantiallycan: in on or record telephone calls. Another is to askbeyond the year they are placed in service, you
some callers to complete a short survey at thegenerally must recover their costs through de-• See answers to frequently asked tax ques-
preciation. See Depreciation, earlier. tions or request help by e-mail. end of the call.
Page 58 Chapter 14 How To Get Tax Help

Page 59 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Walk-in. Many products and services your request is received. Find the address that The CD-ROM can be purchased from Na-
are available on a walk-in basis. applies to your part of the country. tional Technical Information Service (NTIS) by
calling 1–877–233–6767 or on the Internet at• Western part of U.S.: http://www.irs.gov/cdorders. The first release• Products. You can walk in to many post Western Area Distribution Center is available in early January and the final releaseoffices, libraries, and IRS offices to pick up Rancho Cordova, CA 95743–0001 is available in late February.certain forms, instructions, and publica-• Central part of U.S.:tions. Some IRS offices, libraries, groceryCentral Area Distribution Center CD-ROM for small businesses. IRSstores, copy centers, city and county gov-P.O. Box 8903 Publication 3207, Small Business Re-ernments, credit unions, and office supplyBloomington, IL 61702–8903 source Guide, is a must for every smallstores have an extensive collection of business owner or any taxpayer about to start a• Eastern part of U.S. and foreignproducts available to print from a CD-ROM business. This handy, interactive CD containsaddresses:or photocopy from reproducible proofs. all the business tax forms, instructions, and pub-Eastern Area Distribution CenterAlso, some IRS offices and libraries have lications needed to successfully manage a busi-P.O. Box 85074the Internal Revenue Code, regulations, ness. In addition, the CD provides anRichmond, VA 23261–5074Internal Revenue Bulletins, and Cumula- abundance of other helpful information, such astive Bulletins available for research pur- how to prepare a business plan, finding financ-poses. CD-ROM for tax products. You can ing for your business, and much more. The de-
order IRS Publication 1796, Federal• Services. You can walk in to your local sign of the CD makes finding information easy
Tax Products on CD-ROM, and obtain:IRS office to ask tax questions or get help and quick and incorporates file formats and
with a tax problem. Now you can set up an browsers that can be run on virtually any• Current tax forms, instructions, and publi-appointment by calling your local IRS of- desktop or laptop computer.cations.fice number and, at the prompt, leaving a  It is available in March. You can get a free
• Prior-year tax forms and instructions.message requesting Everyday Tax Solu- copy by calling 1-800-829-3676 or by visiting the
tions help. A representative will call you website at www.irs.gov/smallbiz.• Popular tax forms that may be filled inback within 2 business days to schedule electronically, printed out for submission,an in-person appointment at your conve- and saved for recordkeeping.nience.
• Internal Revenue Bulletins.
Mail. You can send your order for
forms, instructions, and publications to
the Distribution Center nearest to you
and receive a response within 10 workdays after
Chapter 14 How To Get Tax Help Page 59

Page 60 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Car and truck expenses . . . 4, 54 Health insurance, deductionAE
for self-employed....... 2 6Carrying charges......... 2 8Accountable plan......... 5 1 Economic interest........ 4 1
Heating equipment......... 3Charitable:Achievement awards....... 6 Economic performance...... 4
Help (See Tax help)Contributions.......... 5 4Advertising............. 5 4 Education expenses......7 ,  5 5
Hobby losses, not for profit . . . 5Amortization: Elderly, improvements for . . . 31Sports event.......... 5 4
Home, business use........ 3Anti-abuse rule......... 3 8 Election:Circulation costs, newspapers
Anti-churning rules...... 3 7 and periodicals......... 3 0 SIMPLE IRA period...... 1 1
Corporate organization Clean-fuel property . . 48, 49, 50 Electric vehicle credit...... 5 0 Icosts.............. 3 4 Cleanup costs, Employee benefit programs . . . 7 Impairment-related expenses,Dispositions of section 197 environmental....... 30, 55 Employees’ pay........... 6 medical expenses....... 5 6intangibles.......... 3 8 Club dues.............. 5 5 Employment taxes........ 2 4 Improvements:Experimental costs...... 4 0 Comments .............. 1 By lessee............ 1 7Entertainment tickets...... 5 4Going into business For disabled and elderly . . . 31Commitment fees ........ 2 1 Environmental cleanupcosts.............. 3 4 To business assets....... 3Compensation........... 1 0 costs ............. 30, 55How to amortize........ 3 5
Income taxes........... 2 4Computer software....... 3 7 Environmental remediation costsHow to deduct......... 3 3
Incorrect amount of(See Environmental cleanupConstant-yield method,Incorrect amount
amortization deducted.... 3 8costs)O I D ................ 2 0deducted ........... 3 8
Individual retirementExcise taxes............ 2 5Partnership organization Contested liability......... 4
arrangements (IRAs)..... 1 5costs.............. 3 4 Experimentation costs . . . 28, 40Contributions:
Pollution control facilities . . 40 Insurance:Exploration costs......... 2 9Charitable............ 5 4
Reforestation costs...... 3 9 Capitalized premiums.... 2 7Political.............. 5 7Related person........ 3 7 Deductible premiums.... 2 5Copyrights............. 3 6Research costs........ 4 0 F NondeductibleCost depletion........... 4 1Section 197 intangibles premiums ........... 2 6Fees:Cost of getting lease.... 17, 35defined ............ 3 6 Self-employedCommitment .......... 2 1
Cost of goods sold......... 2Start-up costs......... 3 4 individuals.......... 2 6Legal and professional . . . 56
Covenant not to compete . . . 36Anticipated liabilities....... 5 4 Loan origination........ 2 1 Intangible drilling costs..... 2 9
Credit, electric vehicle..... 5 0 Regulatory ........... 5 6Assessments, local....... 2 4 Intangibles, amortization.... 3 5
Tax return preparation.... 5 6Assistance (See Tax help) Interest:
Fines................. 5 7 Allocation of........... 1 8At-risk limits............. 4 D Below-market.......... 2 2Forgone interest......... 2 2Attorney fees........... 5 6 De minimis OID.......... 2 0 Business expense for.... 1 8Form:Awards: Debt-financed: Capitalized........... 2 11098 ............... 2 0Achievement ........... 6 Acquisition........... 1 9 Carrying charge........ 2 83115 ............... 2 4Length-of-service........ 7
Deductible............ 2 0Distributions.......... 1 9 4562 ............. 33, 35Safety achievement...... 7
Forgone ............. 2 2Definitions: 4952 ............... 1 9
Life insurance policies.... 2 15213 ................ 5Achievement award ...... 6
Not deductible......... 2 1B 5304–SIMPLE ......... 1 1Business bad debt...... 4 5 Refunds of ........... 2 25 3 0 5 – S ............. 1 1Bad debts (See Business bad Clean-burning fuel...... 4 8 When to deduct........ 2 25 3 0 5 – S A ............ 1 1debts) Clean-fuel vehicle Interview expenses....... 5 65 3 0 5 – S E P ............ 9Black lung payments...... 5 4 property............ 4 8 5305–SIMPLE ......... 1 1 I R A.................. 1 5Bonuses: Clean-fuel vehicle refueling 8582 ............... 1 9Employee ............. 7 property............ 4 9 8826 ............... 3 3Royalties............. 4 4 KMotor vehicle.......... 4 8 8834 ............... 5 0Bribes................ 5 4 Keogh plan (See QualifiedNecessary expense ...... 2 8885 ............... 2 5Brownfields (See Environmental retirement plan)8887 ............... 2 5Nonqualifying property.... 4 8cleanup costs) Key person............. 2 1T .................. 4 5Ordinary expense........ 2Business: Kickbacks.............. 5 4W – 2 ............... 1 2Qualified electric vehicle . . 50Assets ............... 3 Franchise............ 36, 55Section 197 intangibles . . . 36Books and records...... 3 6 Franchise taxes.......... 2 5 LDemolition expenses...... 5 5Meal expenses......... 5 3
Free tax services......... 5 8 Leases:Use of car...........4 ,  5 4 Depletion:
Fringe benefits........... 7 Canceling............ 1 6Use of home ........... 3 Mineral property........ 4 1
Cost of getting....... 17, 35Fuel taxes............. 2 5Business bad debts: Oil and gas wells....... 4 2 Improvements by lessee . . 17Defined.............. 4 5 Percentage table....... 4 4 Leveraged............ 1 6How to treat........... 4 7 Timber .............. 4 5 G Mineral.............. 4 4Recovery ............ 4 7 Who can claim......... 4 1 Oil and gas........... 4 4Gas wells.............. 4 4Types of............. 4 6
Depreciation............ 5 5 Sales distinguished...... 1 6Geothermal wells....... 29, 44When worthless........ 4 6
Development costs, Taxes on............. 1 7Where to deduct........ 4 8 Gifts, nominal value........ 7
miners .............. 3 0 Legal and professionalGoing into business......3 ,  3 4
Disabled, improvements fees ................ 5 6Goodwill............... 3 6C f o r ................. 3 1 Licenses ............ 36, 56
Campaign contribution..... 5 7 Drilling and development Line of credit............ 1 9
costs ............... 2 9Capital expenses.......... 3 H Loans:
Driveways .............. 3Capitalization of interest.... 2 1 Health insurance credit for Below-market interest
Dues, membership........ 5 5 eligible recipients....... 2 5Car allowance........... 5 2 rate............... 2 2
Page 60 Chapter 14 How To Get Tax Help

Page 61 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Discounted ........... 2 2 Ordinary expense......... 2 Recovery of amount SIMPLE plans ...... 10, 11, 12
Origination fees........ 2 1 deducted.............. 4Organization costs: Standard meal allowance . . . 52
To employees .......... 8 Corporate............ 3 4 Reforestation costs....... 3 9 Standard mileage rate..... 5 2
Lobbying expenses....... 5 6 Partnership........... 3 4 Regulatory fees.......... 5 6 Standby charges......... 2 1
Lodging and meals........ 7 Original issue discount..... 2 0 Reimbursements: Start-up costs........... 3 4
Long-term care insurance . . . 26 Outplacement services..... 5 7 Accountable plan....... 5 1 Subscriptions......... 55, 58
Mileage.............. 5 2Losses: Suggestions............. 1
Nonaccountable plan.... 5 3At-risk limits............ 4 P Supplies and materials..... 5 8Per diem............. 5 2Limits................ 4 Passive activities.......... 4 Qualifying requirements . . . 51Net operating........... 4 Payments in kind.......... 4 TNot-for-profit rules........ 5 Related persons:Penalties: Tax help............... 5 8Passive activities........ 4 Anti-churning rules...... 3 7Deductible............ 5 7 Tax preparation fees...... 5 6Clean-fuel vehicleNondeductible......... 5 7 deduction........... 4 9 Taxes:M Prepayment ........... 2 0 Coal or iron ore........ 4 4 Carrying charge........ 2 8Machinery parts........... 3 Per diem and car allowances: Payments to .........5 ,  2 2 Employment .......... 2 4Materials and supplies..... 5 8 High-low rate.......... 5 2 Refiners............. 4 2 Excise .............. 2 5
Meals and entertainment.... 5 3 Regular rate.......... 5 2 Unreasonable rent...... 1 6 Franchise............ 2 5
Reporting allowance..... 5 2Meals and lodging......... 7 Fuel ................ 2 5Removal:Standard mealMedical expenses........ 5 6 Income .............. 2 4Barrier.............. 3 1allowance........... 5 2Mining: Leased property........ 1 7Costs ............... 5 7Standard mileage rate.... 5 2Depletion............ 4 4 Personal property....... 2 5Retired asset.......... 3 1
Percentage depletion...... 4 1Development costs...... 3 0 Real estate........... 2 3Rent expense, capitalizing . . . 17
Personal expenses........ 3Exploration costs....... 2 9 Sales ............... 2 5Repairs ............... 5 7
Personal property tax...... 2 5 Unemployment fund ..... 2 5Money purchase pension Repayments (claim of
plan ................ 1 2 Points................ 2 1 Taxpayer Advocate....... 5 8right)............... 5 7
More information (See Tax help) Political contributions...... 5 7 Telephone ............. 5 8Replacements............ 3
Mortgage: Pollution control facilities .... 4 0 Timber.............. 39, 45Research costs........ 28, 40
Cost of acquiring....... 2 0 Prepaid expense: Tools .................. 3Retirement plans:Interest.............. 2 0 Extends useful life...... 2 8 Trademark, tradeDefined benefit......... 1 2
Moving expenses, General rule ........... 4 name ............. 36, 55Defined contribution..... 1 2
machinery............ 5 7 Interest.............. 2 2 Travel................ 5 1I R A ................ 1 5
Rent ................ 1 6 Money purchase........ 1 2 TTY/TDD information...... 5 8
Prepayment penalty....... 2 0 Profit-sharing.......... 1 2N
Profit-sharing plans....... 1 2 Qualified............. 1 2Natural gas............. 4 4 USalary reductionPublications (See Tax help)Necessary expense........ 2 Unemployment fund taxes . . . 25arrangement.......... 9Net operating loss......... 4 Unpaid expenses, relatedS E P................. 9QNonaccountable plan...... 5 3 person .............5 ,  2 2SIMPLE ............. 1 0Qualified retirement plan.... 1 2Nonqualifying intangibles . . . 36 Utilities............... 5 8Roads ................. 3
Not-for-profit activities....... 5
Notification requirement: R VSSIMPLE IRA .......... 1 1 Rate Worksheet for Vacation pay............. 8Salaries and wages........ 6Self-Employed......... 1 4 Sales taxes............ 2 5Real estate taxes......... 2 3O WSelf-employed healthRecapture:Office in home............ 3 insurance deduction..... 2 6 Wages and salaries........ 6Clean-fuel deductions.... 4 9Oil and gas wells: Self-employment tax...... 2 5 Welfare benefit funds....... 7Electric vehicle credit.... 5 0Depletion............ 4 2 Self-insurance, reserve for . . 26Exploration expenses.... 2 9Drilling costs.......... 2 9 ■SEP plans .............. 9Timber property........ 3 9Partnerships.......... 4 3
Sick pay................ 8S corporations......... 4 3
Chapter 14 How To Get Tax Help Page 61

Page 62 of 62 of Publication 535 11:03 - 18-MAR-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tax Publications for Business Taxpayers
General Guides
Commonly Used Tax Forms
Spanish Language Publications
Your Rights as a Taxpayer
Your Federal Income Tax (For
Individuals)
Farmer’s Tax Guide
Tax Guide for Small Business (For
Individuals Who Use Schedule C or
C-EZ)
Tax Calendars for 2003
Highlights of 2002 Tax Changes
Guide to Free Tax Services
Circular E, Employer’s Tax Guide
Employer’s Supplemental Tax Guide
Circular A, Agricultural Employer’s Tax
Guide
Circular SS, Federal Tax Guide For
Employers in the U.S. Virgin Islands,
Guam, American Samoa, and the
Commonwealth of the Northern
Mariana Islands
Household Employer’s Tax Guide
Circular PR Guía Contributiva Federal
Para Patronos Puertorriqueños
Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Expenses
Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax
Excise Taxes for 2003
Withholding of Tax on Nonresident
Aliens and Foreign Entities
Social Security and Other Information
for Members of the Clergy and
Religious Workers
Residential Rental Property
Self-Employment Tax
Depreciating Property Placed in
Service Before 1987
Business Expenses
Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
Installment Sales
Accounting Periods and Methods
Corporations
Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets
Basis of Assets
Examination of Returns, Appeal Rights,
and Claims for Refund
Retirement Plans for Small Business
(SEP, SIMPLE, and Qualified Plans)
Determining the Value of Donated
Property
Starting a Business and Keeping
Records
The IRS Collection Process
Information on the United States-
Canada Income Tax Treaty
Bankruptcy Tax Guide
Direct Sellers
Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
How To Depreciate Property
Reporting Cash Payments of Over
$10,000
The Taxpayer Advocate Service of the
IRS
Derechos del Contribuyente
Cómo Preparar la Declaración de
Impuesto Federal
English-Spanish Glossary of Words
and Phrases Used in Publications
Issued by the Internal Revenue
Service
Tax on Unrelated Business Income of
Exempt Organizations
Wage and Tax Statement
Itemized Deductions & Interest and
Ordinary Dividends*
Profit or Loss From Business*
Net Profit From Business*
Capital Gains and Losses*
Supplemental Income and Loss*
Profit or Loss From Farming*
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled*
Estimated Tax for Individuals*
Self-Employment Tax*
Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return*
Capital Gains and Losses
Partner’s Share of Income,
Credits, Deductions, etc.
U.S. Corporation Income Tax Return
U.S. Income Tax Return for an S Corporation
Employee Business Expenses*
Unreimbursed Employee Business Expenses*
Power of Attorney and Declaration of
Representative*
Child and Dependent Care Expenses*
General Business Credit
Application for Automatic Extension of Time To File
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return*
Moving Expenses*
Additional Taxes on Qualified Plans (Including
IRAs) and Other Tax-Favored Accounts
Installment Sale Income*
Noncash Charitable Contributions*
Change of Address*
Expenses for Business Use of Your Home*
Tax Highlights for Commercial
Fishermen
910
595
553
509
334
225
17
1
Nondeductible IRAs*
Passive Activity Loss Limitations*
15
15-A
51
80
179
926
378
463
505
510
515
517
527
533
534
535
536
537
541
538
542
Partnerships
544
551
556
560
561
583
594
597
598
901
911
925
946
947
908
1544
1546
1SP
850
579SP
Comprendiendo el Proceso de Cobro594SP
10134
Sch A & B
Sch C
Sch C-EZ
Sch D
Sch E
Sch F
Sch H Household Employment Taxes*
Sch R
Sch SE
1040-ES
1040X
Sch D
Sch K-1
1120
1120S
1065 U.S. Return of Partnership Income
2106
2106-EZ
2441
2848
3800
4868
3903
5329
6252
8283
8582
8606
8822
8829
Specialized Publications
Fuel Tax Credits and Refunds
Employee’s Withholding Allowance Certificate*W-4
Employer’s Annual Federal Unemployment
(FUTA) Tax Return*
940
940-EZ
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return*1040
Employer’s Annual Federal Unemployment
(FUTA) Tax Return*
Business Use of Your Home (Including
Use by Day-Care Providers)
587
U.S. Tax Treaties
Practice Before the IRS and Power of
Attorney
Tax Incentives for Empowerment
Zones and Other Distressed
Communities
Employer’s Guides
Certification for Reduced Tax Rates in
Tax Treaty Countries
686
954
Capital Gains and Losses and Built-In Gains
Shareholder’s Share of Income, Credits,
Deductions, etc.
Sch D
Sch K-1
Underpayment of Estimated Tax by Individuals,
Estates, and Trusts*
2210
Report of Cash Payments Over $10,000 Received
in a Trade or Business*
8300
Depreciation and Amortization*4562
Sales of Business Property*4797
Informe de Pagos en Efectivo en
Exceso de $10,000 (Recibidos en
una Ocupación o Negocio)
1544SP
U.S. Corporation Short-Form Income
Tax Return
1120-A
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get publications, including by
computer, phone, and mail.
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get forms, including by computer, fax, phone,
and mail. Items with an asterisk are available by fax. For these orders only, use the catalog number
when ordering.
Form Number and Title
Catalog
Number
W-2
10220
11234
10983
17001
11320
11330
11334
14374
11338
11344
11346
12187
11358
11340
11360
Employer’s Quarterly Federal Tax Return941
11359
Sch J Farm Income Averaging* 25513
11510
Catalog
Number
20604
11744
11862
11980
12392
12490
12906
13086
13141
13329
13601
62299
63966
12081
13232
63704
6213311390
11393
11394
11450
11456
11700
11520
11516
Form Number and Title
Continuation Sheet for Schedule DSch D-1 10424
Employer’s Tax Guide to Fringe
Benefits
15-B
Page 62 Chapter 14 How To Get Tax Help