Userid: ________ Leading adjust: 0% ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: P334.SGM (22-Dec-2004) (Init. & date)
Filename: D:\USERS\LRBurk00\documents\epicfiles\04p334_04.sgm
Page 1 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 334
Catalog Number 11063pTax Guide for
Department Small Business For use in
of the
preparingTreasury
(For Individuals Who UseInternal 2004Revenue
Service Schedule C or C-EZ) Returns
Get forms and other information faster and easier by:
Internet • www.irs.gov
FAX • 703–368–9694 (from your fax machine)
www.irs.gov/efile

Page 2 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.

Page 3 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Exception. If you and your spouse wholly own an unin-
corporated business as community property under theContents
community property laws of a state, foreign country, or
Introduction.............................. 3 U.S. possession, you can treat the business either as a
sole proprietorship or a partnership. The only states withWhat’s New for 2004........................ 4 community property laws are Arizona, California, Idaho,
Louisiana, Nevada, New Mexico, Texas, Washington, andWhat’s New for 2005........................ 4
Wisconsin. A change in your reporting position will be
Reminders ................................ 4 treated as a conversion of the entity.
This publication does not cover the topics listed inPhotographs of Missing Children............. 4
the following table.1. Filing and Paying Business Taxes......... 6
2. Accounting Periods and Methods.......... 13 IF you need information THEN you should see:
about:3. Dispositions of Business Property......... 17
4. General Business Credit................. 19 Commercial fishing........ Publication 595
Corporations............. Publication 5425. Business Income....................... 21 Direct selling............. Publication 911
Farming ................ Publication 2256. How To Figure Cost of Goods Sold......... 26
Partnerships............. Publication 5417. Figuring Gross Profit.................... 28 Passive activities......... Publication 925
Recordkeeping........... Publication 5838. Business Expenses..................... 30
S corporations........... Instructions for Form
9. Figuring Net Profit or Loss............... 39 1120S
10. Sample Returns........................ 40
What you need to know.Table A (shown later) provides11. Your Rights as a Taxpayer............... 57 a list of questions you need to answer to help you meet
your federal tax obligations. After each question is the12. How To Get More Information............. 58 location in this publication where you will find the related
Index .................................... 62 discussion.
IRS mission.Provide America’s taxpayers top quality
service by helping them understand and meet their tax
Introduction responsibilities and by applying the tax law with integrity
and fairness to all.The purpose of this publication is to provide general infor-
mation about the federal tax laws that apply to smallComments and suggestions. We welcome your com-
business owners who are sole proprietors and to statutoryments about this publication and your suggestions for
employees. future editions.
A sole proprietor is someone who owns an unincorpor- You can email us at *taxforms@irs.gov. (The asterisk
ated business by himself or herself. However, if you are themust be included in the address.) Please put “Publications
sole member of a domestic limited liability company (LLC),Comment” on the subject line. Although we cannot re-
you are not a sole proprietor if you elect to treat the LLC asspond individually to each email, we do appreciate your
a corporation. A statutory employee has a checkmark in feedback and will consider your comments as we revise
box 13 of his or her Form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement.our tax products.
Statutory employees have to use Schedule C or C-EZ toYou can write us at the following address:
report their wages and expenses.
To use this publication, you will generally need theInternal Revenue Service
following forms. Business Forms and Publications Branch
SE:W:CAR:MP:T:B
• Form 1040 and its instructions. 1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6406
• Schedule C or C-EZ and its instructions. Washington, DC 20224
See chapter 12 for information about getting these forms.We respond to many letters by telephone. Therefore, it
would be helpful if you would include your daytime phoneHusband and wife business.If you and your spouse number, including the area code, in your correspondence.jointly own and operate an unincorporated business and
share in the profits and losses, you are partners in a
partnership, whether or not you have a formal partnership
agreement. Do not use Schedule C or C-EZ. Instead, file
Form 1065. For more information, see Publication 541.
Page 3

Page 4 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
What’s New for 2004 What’s New for 2005
The following are some of the tax changes for 2004. For The following are some of the tax changes for 2005. For
information on other changes, see Publication 553, High- information on other changes, see Publication 553, High-
lights of 2004 Tax Changes. lights of 2004 Tax Changes.
Standard mileage rate.The standard mileage rate for theSelf-employment tax.The maximum net self-employ-
cost of operating your car, van, pickup, or panel truck in ment earnings subject to the social security part of the
2004 is 37.5 cents a mile for all business miles. For more self-employment tax increases to $90,000 for 2005.
information, see Car and Truck Expenses in chapter 8. Standard mileage rate.The standard mileage rate for the
Standard mileage rate available for small fleets.Begin- cost of operating your car, van, pickup, or panel truck in
ning in 2004, the business standard mileage rate can be 2005 is 40.5 cents a mile for all business miles. For more
used for as many as four vehicles that you own or lease information, see Car and Truck Expenses in chapter 8.
and use simultaneously.
Self-employment tax.The maximum net self-employ- Remindersment earnings subject to the social security part (12.4%) of
the self-employment tax is $87,900 for 2004. For more
Accounting Methods. Certain small business taxpayersinformation, see Self-Employment Tax in chapter 1.
may be eligible to adopt or change to the cash method of
Increased section 179 deduction dollar limit.The max- accounting and may not be required to account for invento-
imum section 179 deduction you can elect for property youries. For more information, see Inventories in chapter 2.
purchased and placed in service beginning in 2004 has
Reportable transactions.You must file Form 8886, Re-increased from $100,000 to $102,000. This amount will be
portable Transaction Disclosure Statement, to report cer-adjusted for inflation for 2005. For more information, see
tain transactions. You may have to pay a penalty if you arePublication 946.
required to file Form 8886 but do not do so. Reportable
Schedule C-EZ expense limit increased to $5,000.You transactions include (1) transactions the same as or sub-
may use Schedule C-EZ instead of Schedule C if yourstantially similar to tax avoidance transactions identified by
expenses are $5,000 or less and you meet the otherthe IRS, (2) transactions offered to you under conditions of
requirements shown in Part I of Schedule C-EZ. confidentiality for which you paid an advisor a minimum
fee, (3) transactions for which you have, or a related party
has, contractual protection against disallowance of the tax
benefits, (4) transactions that result in losses of at least $2
million in any single tax year or $4 million in any combina-
tion of tax years, (5) transactions resulting in book-tax
differences of more than $10 million on a gross basis, and
(6) transactions with asset holding periods of 45 days or
less and that result in a tax credit of more than $250,000.
For more information, see the Instructions for Form 8886.
Photographs of Missing
Children
The Internal Revenue Service is a proud partner with the
National Center for Missing and Exploited Children. Photo-
graphs of missing children selected by the Center may
appear in this publication on pages that would otherwise
be blank. You can help bring these children home by
looking at the photographs and calling 1-800-THE-LOST
(1-800-843-5678) if you recognize a child.
Page 4

Page 5 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table A. What You Need To Know About Federal Taxes
(Note. The following is a list of questions you may need to answer so you can fill out your federal income tax
return. Chapters are given to help you find the related discussion in this publication.)
 What must I know  Where to find the answer
What kinds of federal taxes do I have to pay? How do I pay them? See chapter 1.
What forms must I file? See chapter 1.
What must I do if I have employees? See Employment Taxes in chapter 1.
Do I have to start my tax year in January? Or can I start it in any other See Accounting Periods in chapter 2.
month?
What method can I use to account for my income and expenses? See Accounting Methods in chapter 2.
What kinds of business income do I have to report on my tax return? See chapter 5.
What kinds of business expenses can I deduct on my tax return? See chapter 8.
What kinds of expenses are not deductible as business expenses? See Expenses You Cannot Deduct in
chapter 8.
What happens if I have a business loss? Can I deduct it? See chapter 9.
What must I do if I disposed of business property during the year? See chapter 3.
What are my rights as a taxpayer? See chapter 11.
Where do I go if I need help with federal tax matters? See chapter 12.
Page 5

Page 6 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Individual taxpayer identification number (ITIN).The
IRS will issue an ITIN if you are a nonresident or resident
1. alien and you do not have and are not eligible to get an
SSN. In general, if you need to obtain an ITIN, you must
attach Form W-7, Application for IRS Individual Taxpayer
Filing and Paying Identification Number, with your signed, original, com-
pleted tax return and mail both to the Philadelphia Service
Business Taxes Center. The exceptions are covered in detail in the instruc-
tions for Form W-7 (Rev. 12-17-2003). If you must include
another person’s SSN on your return and that person does
not have and cannot get an SSN, enter that person’s ITIN.
Introduction
The application is also available in Spanish. The form is
This chapter explains the business taxes you may have toavailable from the IRS website at www.irs.gov or you can
pay and the forms you may have to file. It also discussescall 1-800-829-3676 to order the form.
taxpayer identification numbers.
An ITIN is for tax use only. It does not entitle theTable 1-1 lists the benefits of filing electronically. holder to social security benefits or change theTable 1-2 lists the federal taxes you may have to pay, holder’s employment or immigration status.CAUTION
!
their due dates, and the forms you use to report them.
Table 1-3 provides checklists that highlight the typical
Employer identification number (EIN).You must alsoforms and schedules you may need to file if you ever go out
have an EIN to use as a taxpayer identification number ifof business.
you do either of the following.You may want to get Publication 509, Tax Calen-
dars for 2005. It has tax calendars that tell you• Pay wages to one or more employees.
when to file returns and make tax payments.
TIP
• File pension or excise tax returns.
If you must have an EIN, include it along with your SSNUseful Items
on your Schedule C or C-EZ.You may want to see:
You can apply for an EIN:
Publication • Online by clicking on the EIN link at www.irs.gov/
❏ 505 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax businesses/small. The EIN is issued immediately
once the application information is validated.
Form (and Instructions) • By telephone at 1-800-829-4933 from 7:00 a.m. to
❏ 1040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Return 10:00 p.m. in your local time zone.
❏ 1040-ES Estimated Tax for Individuals • By mailing or faxing Form SS-4, Application for Em-
ployer Identification Number.❏ Sch C (Form 1040)Profit or Loss From Business
❏ Sch C-EZ (Form 1040)Net Profit From Business New EIN. You may need to get a new EIN if either the
form or the ownership of your business changes. For more❏ Sch SE (Form 1040)Self-Employment Tax information, see Publication 1635, Understanding Your
See chapter 12 for information about getting publica-EIN.
tions and forms.
When you need identification numbers of other per-
sons. In operating your business, you will probably make
certain payments you must report on information returns.Identification Numbers
These payments are discussed under Information Re-
turns, later in this chapter. You must give the recipient ofThis section explains three types of taxpayer identification
these payments (the payee) a statement showing the totalnumbers, who needs them, when to use them, and how to
amount paid during the year. You must include the payee’sget them.
identification number and your identification number on the
returns and statements.Social security number (SSN).Generally, use your SSN
as your taxpayer identification number. You must put thisEmployee. If you have employees, you must get an
number on each of your individual income tax forms, suchSSN from each of them. Record the name and SSN of
as Form 1040 and its schedules. each employee exactly as they are shown on the
To apply for an SSN, use Form SS-5, Application for a employee’s social security card. If the employee’s name is
Social Security Card. This form is available at Social Se- not correct as shown on the card, the employee should
curity Administration (SSA) offices or by callingrequest a new card from the SSA. This may occur if the
1-800-772-1213. It is also available from the SSA website employee’s name was changed due to marriage or di-
at www.socialsecurity.gov. vorce.
Page 6 Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes

Page 7 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If your employee does not have an SSN, he or she Using e-file does not affect your chances of an IRS
should file Form SS-5 with the SSA. examination of your return.
You can file most commonly used business forms usingOther payee.If you make payments to someone who isIRS e-file. For more information, visit the IRS website atnot your employee and you must report the payments onwww.irs.gov.an information return, get that person’s SSN. If you must
report payments to an organization, such as a corporationElectronic signatures.Paperless filing is easier than you
or partnership, you must get its EIN. think and it’s available to most taxpayers who file electroni-
cally—including those first-time filers who were 16 or olderTo get the payee’s SSN or EIN, use Form W-9, Request
at the end of 2004. If you file electronically using taxfor Taxpayer Identification Number and Certification. 
preparation software or a tax professional, you may beA payee who does not provide you with an identification
able to participate in the Self-Select PIN (personal identifi-number may be subject to backup withholding. For infor-
cation number) program. If you are married filing jointly,mation on backup withholding, see the Form W-9 instruc-
you and your spouse will each need to create a PIN andtions and the General Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098,
enter these PINs as your electronic signatures.5498, and W-2G.
 To create a PIN, you must know your adjusted gross
income (AGI) from your originally filed 2003 income tax
return (not from an amended return, Form 1040X, or anyIncome Tax math error notice from the IRS). You will also need to
provide your date of birth (DOB). Make sure your DOB isThis part explains whether you have to file an income taxaccurate and matches the information on record with thereturn and when you file it. It also explains how you pay theSocial Security Administration before you e-file. To do this,tax. check your annual Social Security Statement.
If you use a Self-Select PIN, there is nothing to sign and
Do I Have To File nothing to mail—not even your Forms W-2. For more
details on the Self-Select PIN program, visit the IRS web-
an Income Tax Return?
site at www.irs.gov.
You have to file an income tax return for 2004 if your netForms 8453 and 8453-OL. Your return is not completeearnings from self-employment were $400 or more. If yourwithout your signature. If you are not eligible or choose notnet earnings from self-employment were less than $400,to sign your return electronically, you must complete, sign,you still have to file an income tax return if you meet anyand file Form 8453, U.S. Individual Income Tax Declara-other filing requirement listed in the Form 1040 instruc-tion for an IRS e-file Return, or Form 8453-OL, U.S. Indi-tions. vidual Income Tax Declaration for an IRS e-file Online
Return, whichever applies.
How Do I File? State returns.In most states, you can file an electronic
state return simultaneously with your federal return. ForFile your income tax return on Form 1040  and attach
more information, check with your local IRS office, stateSchedule C  or Schedule C-EZ.  Enter the net profit or
tax agency, tax professional, or the IRS website atloss from Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ on page 1 of Form
www.irs.gov.1040. Use Schedule C to figure your net profit or loss from
your business. If you operated more than one business asRefunds. You can have your refund check mailed to you,a sole proprietorship, you must attach a separate Scheduleor you can have your refund deposited directly to yourC for each business. You can use the simpler Schedulechecking or savings account.C-EZ if you operated only one business as a sole proprie-With e-file, your refund will be issued in half the time astorship, you did not have a net loss, and you meet the otherwhen filing on paper. Most refunds are issued within 3requirements listed in Part I of the schedule. (Part I ofweeks. If you choose Direct Deposit, you can receive yourSchedule C-EZ is printed in chapter 10.) refund in as few as 10 days.
Offset against debts.As with a paper return, you mayIRS e-file (Electronic Filing) not get all of your refund if you owe certain past-due
amounts, such as federal tax, state tax, a student loan, or
child support. You will be notified if the refund you claimed
has been offset against your debts.
Refund inquiries.You can check the status of your re-You may be able to file your tax returns electronicallyfund if it has been at least 3 weeks from the date you filedusing an IRS e-file option. Table 1-1 lists the benefits ofyour return. Be sure to have a copy of your tax returnIRS e-file. IRS e-file uses automation to replace most ofavailable because you will need to know the filing status,the manual steps needed to process paper returns. As athe first social security number shown on the return, andresult, the processing of e-file returns is faster and morethe exact whole-dollar amount of the refund. To check onaccurate than the processing of paper returns. As with ayour refund, do one of the following.paper return, you are responsible for making sure your
return contains accurate information and is filed on time.• Go to www.irs.gov, and click on Where’s My Refund.
Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes Page 7

Page 8 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Call 1-800-829-4477 for automated refund informa-Free Internet filing options.More taxpayers can now
tion, and follow the recorded instructions. prepare and e-file their individual income tax returns free
using commercial tax preparation software accessible• Call 1-800-829-1954 during the hours shown in yourthrough www.irs.gov or www.firstgov.gov. The IRS isform instructions. partnering with the tax software industry to offer free prep-
aration and filing services to a significant number of tax-
Balance due.If you owe tax, you must pay it by April 15,payers. Security and privacy certificate programs will
2005, to avoid late-payment penalties and interest. Youassure tax data is safe and secure. To see if you qualify for
can make your payment electronically by scheduling anthese services, visit the Free Internet Filing Homepage at
electronic funds withdrawal from your checking or savingswww.irs.gov.
account or by credit card. If you cannot use the free services, you can buy tax
preparation software at various electronics stores or com-
puter and office supply stores. You can also download
Using an Authorized IRS e-file Provider
software from the Internet or prepare and file your return
completely online by using a tax preparation softwareMany tax professionals can electronically file paperless
package available on the Internet.returns for their clients. You have two options.
1. You can prepare your return, take it to an authorizedThrough Employers and FinancialIRS e-file provider, and have the provider transmit itInstitutionselectronically to the IRS.
Some businesses offer free e-file to their employees,2. You can have an authorized IRS e-file provider pre-
members, or customers. Others offer it for a fee. Ask yourpare your return and transmit it for you electronically.
employer or financial institution if they offer IRS e-file as anYou will be asked to complete Form 8879 to authorizeemployee, member, or customer benefit.the provider to enter your self-selected PIN on your return.
Depending on the provider and the specific servicesFree Help With Your Returnrequested, a fee may be charged. To find an authorized
IRS e-file provider near you, go to www.irs.gov or look forFree help in preparing your return is available nationwidean “Authorized IRS e-file Provider” sign. from IRS-trained volunteers. The Volunteer Income Tax
Assistance (VITA) program is designed to help low-income
taxpayers and the Tax Counseling for the Elderly (TCE)
Using Your Personal Computer program is designed to assist taxpayers age 60 or older
with their tax returns. Some locations offer free electronicA computer with a modem or Internet access is all you
filing.need to file your tax return using IRS e-file. Best of all,
when you use your personal computer, you can e-file your
return from the comfort of your home any time of the day or
When Is My Tax Return Due?
night. Sign your return electronically using a self-selected
PIN to complete the process. There is no signature form to Form 1040 for calendar year 2004 is due by April 15, 2005.
submit or Forms W-2 to send in. If you use a fiscal year (explained in chapter 2), your return
Table 1-1. Benefits of IRS e-file
Accuracy • Your chance of getting an error notice from the IRS is significantly reduced.
Security • Your privacy and security are assured.
Electronic signatures • Create your own personal identification number (PIN) and file a completely
paperless return through your tax preparation software or tax professional. There is
nothing to mail!
Proof of acceptance
• You receive an electronic acknowledgement within 48 hours that the IRS has
accepted your return for processing.
Fast refunds • You get your refund in half the time, even faster with Direct Deposit—in as few as
10 days.
Free Internet filing options• Use the IRS website www.irs.gov to access commercial tax preparation and e-file
services available at no cost to eligible taxpayers.
Electronic payment • Convenient, safe and secure electronic payment options are available. E-file and
options pay your taxes in a single step. Schedule an electronic funds withdrawal from your
checking or savings account (up to and including April 15, 2005) or pay by credit
card.
Federal/State filing
• Prepare and file your federal and state tax returns together and double the benefits
you get from e-file.
Page 8 Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes

Page 9 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
is due by the 15th day of the 4th month after the end of your penalty and to figure the penalty amount. For more infor-
fiscal year. If you file late, you may have to pay penalties mation, see Publication 505. 
and interest. If you cannot file your return on time, use
Form 4868, Application for Automatic Extension of Time
To File U.S. Individual Income Tax Return, to request anSelf-Employment Taxautomatic 4-month extension. 
Self-employment tax (SE tax) is a social security and
Medicare tax primarily for individuals who work for them-How Do I Pay Income Tax?
selves. It is similar to the social security and Medicare
Federal income tax is a pay-as-you-go tax. You must pay ittaxes withheld from the pay of most wage earners.
as you earn or receive income during the year. An em- If you earned income as a statutory employee,ployee usually has income tax withheld from his or her pay.you do not pay SE tax on that income.If you do not pay your tax through withholding, or do not
CAUTION
!
pay enough tax that way, you might have to pay estimated
tax. You generally have to make estimated tax payments if
you expect to owe taxes, including self-employment tax
Social security coverage.Social security benefits are(discussed later), of $1,000 or more when you file your
available to self-employed persons just as they are toreturn. Use Form 1040-ES to figure and pay the tax. If you
wage earners. Your payments of SE tax contribute to yourdo not have to make estimated tax payments, you can pay
coverage under the social security system. Social securityany tax due when you file your return. For more information
coverage provides you with retirement benefits, disabilityon estimated tax, see Publication 505. 
benefits, survivor benefits, and hospital insurance (Medi-
care) benefits.What are my payment options?You can pay your esti-
mated tax electronically using various options. If you payBy not reporting all of your self-employment in-electronically, there is no need to mail in Form 1040-ES come, you could cause your social security bene-payment vouchers. These options include: fits to be lower when you retire.
CAUTION
!
1. Paying electronically through the Electronic FederalHow to become insured under social security.YouTax Payment System (EFTPS). must be insured under the social security system before
2. Paying by authorizing an electronic funds withdrawalyou begin receiving social security benefits. You are in-
when you file Form 1040 electronically. sured if you have the required number of credits (also
called quarters of coverage), discussed next.3. Paying by credit card over the phone or by Internet.
Earning credits in 2004 and 2005.For 2004, you re-Other options include crediting an overpayment from yourceived one credit, up to a maximum of four credits, for each2004 return to your 2005 estimated tax, and mailing a$900 ($920 for 2005) of income subject to social securitycheck or money order with a Form 1040-ES payment taxes. Therefore, for 2004, if you had income (self-employ-voucher. ment and wages) of $3,600 that was subject to social
security taxes, you received four credits ($3,600 ÷ $900).EFTPS For an explanation of the number of credits you must
have to be insured and the benefits available to you and1. To enroll in EFTPS, go to www.eftps.gov or call your family under the social security program, consult your1-800-555-4477. nearest Social Security Administration (SSA) office.
2. Effective in January 2004, when you request a new Making false statements to get or to increaseEIN and you will have a tax obligation, you are auto-social security benefits may subject you to penal-matically enrolled in EFTPS. ties.CAUTION
!
3. Benefits of EFTPS:
The Social Security Administration (SSA) time limit fora. The chance of an error in making your payments
posting self-employment income.Generally, the SSAis reduced.
will give you credit only for self-employment income re-
b. You receive immediate confirmation of everyported on a tax return filed within 3 years, 3 months, and 15
transaction. days after the tax year you earned the income. If you file
your tax return or report a change in your self-employment
income after this time limit, the SSA may change its rec-
Penalty for underpayment of tax.If you did not pay ords, but only to remove or reduce the amount. The SSA
enough income tax and self-employment tax for 2004 bywill not change its records to increase your self-employ-
withholding or by making estimated tax payments, youment income.
may have to pay a penalty on the amount not paid. The IRS
will figure the penalty for you and send you a bill. Or youWho must pay self-employment tax.You must pay SE
can use Form 2210, Underpayment of Estimated Tax by tax and file Schedule SE (Form 1040) if either of the
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts, to see if you have to pay a following applies. 
Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes Page 9

Page 10 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 1-2. Which Forms Must I File?
IF you are liable for: THEN use Form: DUE by: 1
Income tax 1040 and Schedule C or C-EZ 2 15th day of 4th month after end of
tax year.
Self-employment tax Schedule SE File with Form 1040.
Estimated tax 1040-ES 15th day of 4th, 6th, and 9th months
of tax year, and 15th day of 1st
month after the end of tax year.
Social security and Medicare taxes 941 April 30, July 31, October 31, and
and income tax withholding January 31
4.
8109 (to make deposits)3 See Publication 15.
Providing information on social W-2 (to employee) January 31 4.
security and Medicare taxes and
income tax withholding W-2 and W-3 (to the Social Security Last day of February (March 31 if
Administration) filing electronically)
4.
Federal unemployment (FUTA) tax 940 or 940-EZ January 31 4.
8109 (to make deposits)3 April 30, July 31, October 31, and
January 31, but only if the liability for
unpaid tax is more than $500.
Filing information returns for See  Information Returns Forms 1099–to the recipient by
payments to nonemployees and January 31 and to the IRS by
transactions with other persons February 28 (March 31 if filing
electronically).
Other forms—See the General
Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098,
5498, and W-2G.
Excise tax See Excise Taxes See the instructions to the forms.
1 If a due date falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the due date is the next business day. For more information, see
Publication 509, Tax Calendars for 2005.
2 File a separate schedule for each business.
3 Do not use if you deposit taxes electronically.
4 See the form instructions if you go out of business, change the form of your business, or stop paying wages.
Why use the optional methods?You may want to use
1. Your net earnings from self-employment (excludingthe optional methods when you have a loss or a small net
church employee income) were $400 or more. profit and any one of the following applies.
2. You had church employee income of $108.28 or • You want to receive credit for social security benefit
more. coverage.
• You incurred child or dependent care expenses forThe SE tax rules apply no matter how old you arewhich you could claim a credit. (An optional methodand even if you are already receiving social se-may increase your earned income, which could in-curity or Medicare benefits.CAUTION
!
crease your credit.)
• You are entitled to the earned income credit. (An
Methods for figuring net earnings.There are three optional method may increase your earned income,
ways to figure net earnings from self-employment. which could increase your credit.)
• You are entitled to the additional child tax credit. (An1. The regular method. optional method may increase your earned income,
2. The nonfarm optional method. which could increase your credit.)
3. The farm optional method. • You are entitled to the self-employed health insur-
ance deduction.You must use the regular method unless you are eligible
to use one or both of the optional methods. Multiply your
total earnings subject to SE tax by 92.35% (.9235) to getSE tax rate.The SE tax rate on net earnings is 15.3%
your net earnings under the regular method. (12.4% social security tax plus 2.9% Medicare tax).
Page 10 Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes

Page 11 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Maximum earnings subject to SE tax.Only the first • Use various kinds of equipment, facilities, or prod-
$87,900 of your combined wages, tips, and net earnings in ucts.
2004 is subject to any combination of the 12.4% social
• Receive payment for certain services.security part of SE tax, social security tax, or railroad
For more information on excise taxes, see Publication 510,retirement (tier 1) tax.
Excise Taxes for 2005.All your combined wages, tips, and net earnings in 2004
are subject to any combination of the 2.9% Medicare part
Form 720. The federal excise taxes reported on Formof SE tax, social security tax, or railroad retirement (tier 1)
720, Quarterly Federal Excise Tax Return, consist of sev-tax.
eral broad categories of taxes, including the following.If your wages and tips are subject to either social secur-
ity or railroad retirement (tier 1) tax, or both, and total at• Environmental taxes on the sale or use of ozone-de-
least $87,900, do not pay the 12.4% social security part ofpleting chemicals and imported products containing
the SE tax on any of your net earnings. However, you mustor manufactured with these chemicals.
pay the 2.9% Medicare part of the SE tax on all your net• Communications and air transportation taxes.earnings.
• Fuel taxes.Deduct one-half of your SE tax as an adjustment
to income on line 30 of Form 1040. • Tax on the first retail sale of heavy trucks, trailers,
and tractors.
TIP
• Manufacturers taxes on the sale or use of a variety
of different articles.More information.For more information on the SE tax,
see Publication 533, Self-Employment Tax.
Form 2290. There is a federal excise tax on the use of
certain trucks, truck tractors, and buses on public high-
ways. The tax applies to vehicles having a taxable grossEmployment Taxes weight of 55,000 pounds or more. Report the tax on Form
2290, Heavy Highway Vehicle Use Tax Return. For moreIf you have employees, you will need to file forms to report
information, see the instructions for Form 2290.employment taxes. Employment taxes include the follow-
ing items. Depositing excise taxes.If you have to file a quarterly
excise tax return on Form 720, you may have to deposit
• Social security and Medicare taxes.
your excise taxes before the return is due. For details on• Federal income tax withholding. depositing excise taxes, see the instructions for Form 720.
• Federal unemployment (FUTA) tax.
For more information, see Publication 15 (Circular E),
Information ReturnsEmployer’s Tax Guide. That publication explains your tax
responsibilities as an employer.
If you make or receive payments in your business, youTo help you determine whether the people working formay have to report them to the IRS on information returns.you are your employees, see Publication 15-A, Employer’sThe IRS compares the payments shown on the informationSupplemental Tax Guide. That publication has informationreturns with each person’s income tax return to see if theto help you determine whether an individual is an indepen-payments were included in income. You must give a copydent contractor or an employee. of each information return you are required to file to the
recipient or payer. In addition to the forms described be-If you incorrectly classify an employee as an
low, you may have to use other returns to report certainindependent contractor, you may be held liable
kinds of payments or transactions. For more details onfor employment taxes for that worker plus a pen-CAUTION
!
information returns and when you have to file them, seealty.
the General Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098, 5498, andAn independent contractor is someone who is self-em-W-2G.ployed. You do not generally have to withhold or pay any
taxes on payments to an independent contractor. Form 1099-MISC. Use Form 1099-MISC, Miscellaneous
Income, to report certain payments you make in your
business. These payments include the following items.
Excise Taxes • Payments of $600 or more for services performed
for your business by people not treated as your em-This section explains the excise taxes you may have to pay
ployees, such as fees to subcontractors, attorneys,and the forms you have to file if you do any of the following.
accountants, or directors.
• Manufacture or sell certain products. • Rent payments of $600 or more, other than rents
• Operate certain kinds of businesses. paid to real estate agents.
Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes Page 11

Page 12 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 1-3. Going Out of Business Checklists
(Note. The following checklists highlight the typical final forms and schedules you may need to file if you
ever go out of business. For more information, see the instructions for the listed forms.)
IF you are liable for: THEN you may need to:
Income tax ❏ File Schedule C or C-EZ with your Form 1040 for the year in which you go
out of business.
❏ File Form 4797 with your Form 1040 for each year in which you sell or
exchange property used in your business or in which the business use of
certain section 179 or listed property drops to 50% or less.
❏ File Form 8594 with your Form 1040 if you sold your business.
Self-employment tax ❏ File Schedule SE with your Form 1040 for the year in which you go out of
business.
Employment taxes ❏ File Form 941 for the calendar quarter in which you make final wage
payments. Note. Do not forget to check the final return box on line A and
enter the date final wages were paid above line 1.
❏ File Form 940 or 940-EZ for the calendar year in which final wages were
paid. Note. Do not forget to check the box, If you will not have to file returns
in the future..., under Question C.
Information returns ❏ Provide Forms W-2 to your employees for the calendar year in which you
make final wage payments. Note. These forms are generally due by the due
date of your final Form 941.
❏ File Form W-3 to file Forms W-2. Note. Note. These forms are generally due
within 1 month after the due date of your final Form 941.
❏ Provide Forms 1099-MISC to each person to whom you have paid at least
$600 for services (including parts and materials) during the calendar year in
which you go out of business.
❏  File Form 1096 to file Forms 1099-MISC.
• Prizes and awards of $600 or more that are not for• Failure to furnish correct payee statements. This
services, such as winnings on TV or radio shows. penalty applies if you do not furnish a required state-
ment to a payee by the required date, do not include• Royalty payments of $10 or more. all required information, or report incorrect informa-
• Payments to certain crew members by operators of tion. 
fishing boats.
Waiver of penalties.These penalties will not apply ifYou also use Form 1099-MISC to report your sales ofyou can show that the failure was due to reasonable cause$5,000 or more of consumer goods to a person for resaleand not willful neglect.anywhere other than in a permanent retail establishment.In addition, there is no penalty for failure to include all
required information, or for including incorrect information,Form W-2. You must file Form W-2, Wage and Tax State-on a de minimis (small) number of information returns ifment, to report payments to your employees, such asyou correct the errors by August 1 of the year the returnswages, tips, and other compensation, withheld income,are due. (A de minimis number of returns is the greater ofsocial security, and Medicare taxes, and advance earned10 or 1/2 of 1% of the total number of returns you areincome credit payments. For more information on what torequired to file for the year.)report on Form W-2, see the Instructions for Forms W-2
and W-3. Form 8300. You must file Form 8300, Report of Cash
Payments Over $10,000 Received in a Trade or Business,Penalties.The law provides for the following penalties ifif you receive more than $10,000 in cash in one transac-you do not file Form 1099-MISC or Form W-2 or do nottion, or two or more related business transactions. Cashcorrectly report the information. For more information, seeincludes U.S. and foreign coin and currency. It also in-the General Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098, 5498, andcludes certain monetary instruments such as cashier’s andW-2G. traveler’s checks and money orders. Cash does not in-
• Failure to file information returns. This penalty ap- clude a check drawn on an individual’s personal account
plies if you do not file information returns by the due (personal check). For more information, see Publication
date, do not include all required information, or re- 1544, Reporting Cash Payments of Over $10,000 (Re-
port incorrect information. ceived in a Trade or Business).
Page 12 Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes

Page 13 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Penalties.There are civil and criminal penalties, includ-• Your use of the calendar tax year is required under
ing up to 5 years in prison, for not filing Form 8300, filing (or the Internal Revenue Code or the Income Tax Regu-
causing the filing of) a false or fraudulent Form 8300, or lations.
structuring a transaction to evade reporting requirements.
If you filed your first income tax return using the calendar
tax year and you later begin business as a sole proprietor,
you must continue to use the calendar tax year unless you
get IRS approval to change it or are otherwise allowed to
change it without IRS approval. For more information, see
2. Change in tax year, later.
If you adopt the calendar tax year, you must maintain
your books and records and report your income and ex-
penses for the period from January 1 through December
Accounting Periods
31 of each year.
and Methods
Fiscal tax year.A fiscal tax year is 12 consecutive
months ending on the last day of any month except De-
cember. A 52-53-week tax year is a fiscal tax year thatIntroduction varies from 52 to 53 weeks but does not have to end on the
last day of a month.You must figure your taxable income and file an income tax
If you adopt a fiscal tax year, you must maintain yourreturn for an annual accounting period called a tax year.
books and records and report your income and expensesAlso, you must consistently use an accounting method that
using the same tax year.clearly shows your income and expenses for the tax year.
For more information on a fiscal tax year, including a
52-53-week tax year, see Publication 538.
Useful Items
You may want to see: Change in tax year.Generally, you must file Form 1128,
Application To Adopt, Change, or Retain a Tax Year, to
Publication request IRS approval to change your tax year. See the
instructions for Form 1128 for exceptions. If you qualify for❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methods an automatic approval request, a use fee is not required. If
See chapter 12 for information about getting publica-you do not qualify for automatic approval, a ruling must be
tions and forms. requested. See the instructions for Form 1128 for informa-
tion about user fees if you are requesting a ruling. 
Accounting Periods Accounting Methods
When preparing a statement of income and expenses
An accounting method is a set of rules used to determine(generally your income tax return), you must use your
when and how income and expenses are reported. Yourbooks and records for a specific interval of time called an
accounting method includes not only the overall method ofaccounting period. The annual accounting period for your
accounting you use, but also the accounting treatment youincome tax return is called a tax year. You can use one of
use for any material item.the following tax years.
You choose an accounting method for your business
• A calendar tax year. when you file your first income tax return that includes a
Schedule C for the business. After that, if you want to• A fiscal tax year. change your accounting method, you must generally get
Unless you have a required tax year, you adopt a tax yearIRS approval. See Change in Accounting Method, later.
by filing your first income tax return using that tax year. A
Kinds of methods.Generally, you can use any of therequired tax year is a tax year required under the Internal
following accounting methods.Revenue Code or the Income Tax Regulations.
• Cash method.Calendar tax year.A calendar tax year is 12 consecutive
• An accrual method.months beginning January 1 and ending December 31.
You must adopt the calendar tax year if any of the• Special methods of accounting for certain items of
following apply. income and expenses.
• You keep no books. • Combination method using elements of two or more
of the above.• You have no annual accounting period.
• Your present tax year does not qualify as a fiscal You must use the same accounting method to figure
year. your taxable income and to keep your books. Also, you
Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods Page 13

Page 14 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
must use an accounting method that clearly shows yourChecks. Receipt of a valid check by the end of the tax
year is constructive receipt of income in that year, even ifincome.
you cannot cash or deposit the check until the following
year.Business and personal items.You can account for busi-
ness and personal items under different accounting meth-
Example. Dr. Redd received a check for $500 on De-ods. For example, you can figure your business income
cember 31, 2004, from a patient. She could not deposit theunder an accrual method, even if you use the cash method
check in her business account until January 2, 2005. Sheto figure personal items.
must include this fee in her income for 2004.
Two or more businesses.If you have two or more sepa-Debts paid by another person or canceled.If yourrate and distinct businesses, you can use a different ac-debts are paid by another person or are canceled by yourcounting method for each if the method clearly reflects thecreditors, you may have to report part or all of this debtincome of each business. They are separate and distinctrelief as income. If you receive income in this way, you
only if you maintain complete and separate books andconstructively receive the income when the debt is can-
records for each business. celed or paid. For more information, see Canceled Debt
under Kinds of Income in chapter 5.
Cash Method Repayment of income. If you include an amount in in-
come and in a later year you have to repay all or part of it,Most individuals and many sole proprietors with no inven-you can usually deduct the repayment in the year in whichtory use the cash method because they find it easier toyou make it. If the amount you repay is over $3,000, akeep cash method records. However, if an inventory isspecial rule applies. For details about the special rule, seenecessary to account for your income, you must generallyPublication 535, Business Expenses, chapter 13, Repay-use an accrual method of accounting for sales andments.purchases. For more information, see Inventories, later.
ExpensesIncome
Under the cash method, you generally deduct expenses inUnder the cash method, include in your gross income allthe tax year in which you actually pay them. This includesitems of income you actually or constructively receivebusiness expenses for which you contest liability. How-during your tax year. If you receive property or services,ever, you may not be able to deduct an expense paid inyou must include their fair market value in income.advance or you may be required to capitalize certain costs,
as explained later under Uniform Capitalization Rules.Example. On December 30, 2003, Mrs. Sycamore sent
you a check for interior decorating services you provided toExpenses paid in advance.You can deduct an expense
her. You received the check on January 2, 2004. You mustyou pay in advance only in the year to which it applies.
include the amount of the check in income for 2004.
Example. You are a calendar year taxpayer and you
Constructive receipt.You have constructive receipt ofpay $1,000 in 2004 for a business insurance policy effec-
income when an amount is credited to your account ortive for one year, beginning July 1. You can deduct $500 in
made available to you without restriction. You do not need2004 and $500 in 2005.
to have possession of it. If you authorize someone to be
your agent and receive income for you, you are treated asAccrual Methodhaving received it when your agent received it.
Under an accrual method of accounting, you generally
Example. Interest is credited to your bank account inreport income in the year earned and deduct or capitalize
December 2004. You do not withdraw it or enter it into yourexpenses in the year incurred. The purpose of an accrual
passbook until 2005. You must include it in your grossmethod of accounting is to match income and expenses in
income for 2004. the correct year.
Delaying receipt of income.You cannot hold checks
or postpone taking possession of similar property from oneIncome—General Ruletax year to another to avoid paying tax on the income. You
must report the income in the year the property is receivedUnder an accrual method, you generally include an
or made available to you without restriction. amount in your gross income for the tax year in which all
events that fix your right to receive the income have oc-
Example. Frances Jones, a service contractor, was en-curred and you can determine the amount with reasonable
titled to receive a $10,000 payment on a contract in De-accuracy.
cember 2004. She was told in December that her payment
was available. At her request, she was not paid untilExample. You are a calendar year, accrual method
January 2005. She must include this payment in her 2004taxpayer. You sold a computer on December 28, 2004.
income because it was constructively received in 2004.You billed the customer in the first week of January 2005,
Page 14 Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods

Page 15 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
but you did not receive payment until February 2005. You
1. The all-events test has been met. The test has beenmust include the amount received for the computer in your
met when:2004 income.
a. All events have occurred that fix the fact of liabil-
ity, andIncome—Special Rules
b. The liability can be determined with reasonableThe following are special rules that apply to advance pay-accuracy.ments, estimating income, and changing a payment
schedule for services. 2. Economic performance has occurred.
Estimated income.If you include a reasonably estimated
Economic performance. You generally cannot deduct oramount in gross income, and later determine the exact
capitalize a business expense until economic performanceamount is different, take the difference into account in the
occurs. If your expense is for property or services providedtax year in which you make the determination.
to you, or for your use of property, economic performance
Change in payment schedule for services.If you per- occurs as the property or services are provided or as the
form services for a basic rate specified in a contract, youproperty is used. If your expense is for property or services
must accrue the income at the basic rate, even if you agreeyou provide to others, economic performance occurs as
to receive payments at a lower rate until you complete theyou provide the property or services. An exception allows
services and then receive the difference. certain recurring items to be treated as incurred during a
tax year even though economic performance has not oc-Advance payments for services.Generally, you reportcurred. For more information on economic performance,an advance payment for services to be performed in a latersee Economic Performance under Accrual Method in Pub-tax year as income in the year you receive the payment.lication 538.However, if you receive an advance payment for services
you agree to perform by the end of the next tax year, youExample. You are a calendar year taxpayer and use ancan elect to postpone including the advance payment inaccrual method of accounting. You buy office supplies inincome until the next tax year. However, you cannot post-December 2004. You receive the supplies and the bill inpone including any payment beyond that tax year. December, but you pay the bill in January 2005. You canFor more information, see Advance Payment for Serv- deduct the expense in 2004 because all events that fix theices under Accrual Method in Publication 538. That publi-fact of liability have occurred, the amount of the liabilitycation also explains special rules for reporting the followingcould be reasonably determined, and economic perform-types of income. ance occurred in that year.
Your office supplies may qualify as a recurring expense.• Advance payments for service agreements.
In that case, you can deduct them in 2004 even if the• Advance payments under guarantee or warranty supplies are not delivered until 2005 (when economiccontracts. performance occurs).
• Prepaid interest.
Keeping inventories.When the production, purchase, or
• Prepaid rent. sale of merchandise is an income-producing factor in your
business, you must generally take inventories into account
at the beginning and the end of your tax year. If you mustAdvance payments for sales.Special rules apply to in-
account for an inventory, you must generally use an ac-cluding income from advance payments on agreements for
crual method of accounting for your purchases and sales.future sales or other dispositions of goods you hold prima-
For more information, see Inventories, later.rily for sale to your customers in the ordinary course of your
business. If the advance payments are for contracts involv-Special rule for related persons.You cannot deducting both the sale and service of goods, it may be necessarybusiness expenses and interest owed to a related personto treat them as two agreements. An agreement includes awho uses the cash method of accounting until you makegift certificate that can be redeemed for goods. Treatthe payment and the corresponding amount is includible inamounts that are due and payable as amounts you re-the related person’s gross income. Determine the relation-ceived. ship, for this rule, as of the end of the tax year for which theYou generally include an advance payment in incomeexpense or interest would otherwise be deductible. If afor the tax year in which you receive it. However, you candeduction is not allowed under this rule, the rule will con-use an alternative method. For information about the alter-tinue to apply even if your relationship with the personnative method, see Publication 538. ends before the expense or interest is includible in the
gross income of that person.
Related persons include members of your immediate
Expenses
family, including only brothers and sisters (either whole or
Under an accrual method of accounting, you generally half), your spouse, ancestors, and lineal descendants. For
deduct or capitalize a business expense when both the a list of other related persons, see Related Persons under
following apply. Accrual Method in Publication 538.
Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods Page 15

Page 16 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
and the 2 preceding tax years and dividing the totalCombination Method by 3.)
You can generally use any combination of cash, accrual,• You are not prohibited from using the cash methodand special methods of accounting if the combination under section 448 of the Internal Revenue Code.clearly shows your income and expenses and you use it
• Your principle business activity is an eligible busi-consistently. However, the following restrictions apply.
ness (described in Publication 538 and Revenue
• If an inventory is necessary to account for your in-Procedure 2002-28).
come, you must generally use an accrual method for
purchases and sales. (See, however, Inventories, Business not owned or not in existence for 3 years.Iflater.) You can use the cash method for all otheryou did not own your business for all of the 3-tax-yearitems of income and expenses. period used in figuring your average annual gross receipts,
• If you use the cash method for figuring your income,include the period of any predecessor. If your business has
you must use the cash method for reporting yournot been in existence for the 3-tax-year period, base your
expenses. average on the period it has existed including any short tax
years, annualizing the short tax year’s gross receipts.• If you use an accrual method for reporting your ex-
penses, you must use an accrual method for figuringMaterials and supplies that are not incidental.If you
your income. account for inventoriable items as materials and supplies
that are not incidental, you will deduct the cost of the items
• If you use a combination method that includes the
you would otherwise include in inventory in the year youcash method, treat that combination method as the
sell the items, or the year you pay for them, whichever iscash method.
later. If you are a producer, you can use any reasonable
method to estimate the raw material in your work in pro-
cess and finished goods on hand at the end of the year to
Inventories determine the raw material used to produce finished goods
that were sold during the year.Generally, if you produce, purchase or sell merchandise in
your business, you must keep an inventory and use theChanging methods. If you are a qualifying taxpayer or
accrual method for purchases and sales of merchandise.small business taxpayer and want to change to the cash
However, the following taxpayers can use the cash methodmethod or to account for inventoriable items as non-inci-
of accounting even if they produce, purchase, or sell mer-dental materials and supplies, you must file Form 3115,
chandise. These taxpayers can also account for inventori-Application for Change in Accounting Method.
able items as materials and supplies that are not incidentalMore information. For more information about the quali-(discussed later). fying taxpayer exception, see Revenue Procedure
2001-10 in Internal Revenue Bulletin 2001-2. For more1. A qualifying taxpayer under Revenue Procedure
information about the qualifying small business taxpayer2001-10 in Internal Revenue Bulletin 2001-2.
exception, see Revenue Procedure 2002-28 in Internal
2. A qualifying small business taxpayer under RevenueRevenue Bulletin 2002-18.
Procedure 2002-28 in Internal Revenue Bulletin
Items included in inventory.If you are required to ac-2002-18.
count for inventories, include the following items when
accounting for your inventory.Qualifying taxpayer.You are a qualifying taxpayer if:
• Merchandise or stock in trade.
• Your average annual gross receipts for each prior• Raw materials.tax year ending on or after December 17, 1998, is $1
million or less. (Your average annual gross receipts• Work in process.
for a tax year is figured by adding the gross receipts• Finished products.for that tax year and the 2 preceding tax years and
dividing by 3.) • Supplies that physically become a part of the item
intended for sale.
• Your business is not a tax shelter, as defined under
section 448(d)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code.
Valuing inventory.You must value your inventory at the
beginning and end of each tax year to determine your costQualifying small business taxpayer.You are a qualify-of goods sold (Schedule C, line 42). To determine theing small business taxpayer if: value of your inventory, you need a method for identifying
• Your average annual gross receipts for each priorthe items in your inventory and a method for valuing these
tax year ending on or after December 31, 2000, isitems.
more than $1 million but not more than $10 million.Inventory valuation rules cannot be the same for all
(Your average annual gross receipts for a tax year iskinds of businesses. The method you use to value your
figured by adding the gross receipts for that tax yearinventory must conform to generally accepted accounting
Page 16 Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods

Page 17 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
principles for similar businesses and must clearly reflectChange inincome. Your inventory practices must be consistent fromAccounting Methodyear to year.
Once you have set up your accounting method, you mustMore information.For more information about invento-generally get IRS approval before you can change tories, see Publication 538. another method. A change in your accounting method
includes a change in:
Uniform Capitalization Rules
1. Your overall method, such as from cash to an ac-
Under the uniform capitalization rules, you must capitalizecrual method, and
the direct costs and part of the indirect costs for production2. Your treatment of any material item.or resale activities. Include these costs in the basis of
property you produce or acquire for resale, rather than To get approval, you must file Form 3115, Application for
claiming them as a current deduction. You recover the Change in Accounting Method. You can get IRS approval
costs through depreciation, amortization, or cost of goods to change an accounting method under either the auto-
sold when you use, sell, or otherwise dispose of the prop- matic change procedures or the advance consent request
erty. procedures. You may have to pay a user fee. For more
information, see the form instructions. 
Activities subject to the rules.You may be subject to
Automatic change procedures.Certain taxpayers canthe uniform capitalization rules if you do any of the follow-
presume to have IRS approval to change their method ofing, unless the property is produced for your use other than
accounting. The approval is granted for the tax year forin a business or an activity carried on for profit.
which the taxpayer requests a change (year of change), if
• Produce real or tangible personal property. For thisthe taxpayer complies with the provisions of the automatic
purpose, tangible personal property includes a film,change procedures. No user fee is required for an applica-
sound recording, video tape, book, or similar prop-tion filed under an automatic change procedure generally
erty. covered in Revenue Procedure 2002-9.
Generally, you must use Form 3115 to request an auto-• Acquire property for resale.
matic change. For more information, see the form instruc-
tions.Exceptions.These rules do not apply to the following
property.
1. Personal property you acquire for resale if your aver-
age annual gross receipts are $10 million or less.
3.2. Property you produce if you meet either of the follow-
ing conditions.
Dispositions ofa. Your indirect costs of producing the property are
$200,000 or less.
Business Property
b. You use the cash method of accounting and do
not account for inventories. For more information,
see Inventories, earlier.
Introduction
If you dispose of business property, you may have a gain
or loss that you report on Form 1040. However, in someSpecial Methods cases you may have a gain that is not taxable or a loss that
is not deductible. This chapter discusses whether you haveThere are special methods of accounting for certain items
a disposition, how to figure the gain or loss, and where toof income or expense. These include the following.
report the gain or loss.
• Amortization, discussed in chapter 9 of Publication
535, Business Expenses. Useful Items
You may want to see:• Bad debts, discussed in chapter 11 of Publication
535.
Publication
• Depletion, discussed in chapter 10 of Publication
❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets535.
• Depreciation, discussed in Publication 946, How ToForm (and Instructions)Depreciate Property.
❏ 4797 Sales of Business Property• Installment sales, discussed in Publication 537, In-
❏ Sch D (Form 1040)Capital Gains and Lossesstallment Sales.
Chapter 3 Dispositions of Business PropertyPage 17

Page 18 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
See chapter 12 for information about getting publica-Sale of a business.The sale of a business usually is not
tions and forms. a sale of one asset. Instead, all the assets of the business
are sold. Generally, when this occurs, each asset is treated
as being sold separately for determining the treatment of
gain or loss.
What Is a Disposition Both the buyer and seller involved in the sale of a
business must report to the IRS the allocation of the salesof Property?
price among the business assets. Use Form 8594, Asset
Acquisition Statement Under Section 1060, to provide thisA disposition of property includes the following transac-
information. The buyer and seller should each attach Formtions.
8594 to their federal income tax return for the year in which
• You sell property for cash or other property. the sale occurred. 
For more information about the sale of a business, see• You exchange property for other property.
chapter 2 of Publication 544.
• You receive money as a tenant for the cancellation
of a lease.
• You receive money for granting the exclusive use ofHow Do I Figure
a copyright throughout its life in a particular medium.
a Gain or Loss?• You transfer property to satisfy a debt.
• You abandon property.
Table 3-1. How To Figure a Gain or Loss• Your bank or other financial institution forecloses on
your mortgage or repossesses your property. IF your... THEN you have a...
• Your property is damaged, destroyed, or stolen, andAdjusted basis is more than theyou receive property or money in payment. amount realized Loss.
• Your property is condemned, or disposed of underAmount realized is more thanthe threat of condemnation, and you receive prop-the adjusted basis Gain.
erty or money in payment.
Basis, adjusted basis, amount realized, fair marketFor details about damaged, destroyed, or stolen property,
value, and amount recognized are defined next. You needsee Publication 547, Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts. For
to know these definitions to figure your gain or loss.details about other dispositions, see chapter 1 in Publica-
tion 544. Basis.The cost or purchase price of property is usually its
basis for figuring the gain or loss from its sale or otherNontaxable exchanges.Certain exchanges of propertydisposition. However, if you acquired the property by gift,are not taxable. This means any gain from the exchange isinheritance, or in some way other than buying it, you mustnot recognized and you cannot deduct any loss. Your gainuse a basis other than its cost. For more information aboutor loss will not be recognized until you sell or otherwisebasis, see Publication 551, Basis of Assets.dispose of the property you receive.
Adjusted basis.The adjusted basis of property is yourLike-kind exchanges.A like-kind exchange is the ex-original cost or other basis plus certain additions, andchange of property for the same kind of property. It is theminus certain deductions such as depreciation and casu-most common type of nontaxable exchange. To be a alty losses. In determining gain or loss, the costs of trans-like-kind exchange, the property traded and the propertyferring property to a new owner, such as selling expenses,received must be both of the following. are added to the adjusted basis of the property.
• Business or investment property. Amount realized.The amount you realize from a disposi-
tion is the total of all money you receive plus the fair market• Like property.
value of all property or services you receive. The amount
you realize also includes any of your liabilities that wereReport the exchange of like-kind property on Form
assumed by the buyer and any liabilities to which the8824, Like-Kind Exchanges. For more information about
property you transferred is subject, such as real estatelike-kind exchanges, see chapter 1 in Publication 544. 
taxes or a mortgage.
Installment sales.An installment sale is a sale of prop-Fair market value.Fair market value is the price at whicherty where you receive at least one payment after the taxthe property would change hands between a buyer and ayear of the sale. If you finance the buyer’s purchase of yourseller, neither having to buy or sell, and both having rea-property, instead of having the buyer get a loan or mort-sonable knowledge of all necessary facts.gage from a third party, you probably have an installment
sale. Amount recognized. Your gain or loss realized from a
For more information about installment sales, see Publi- disposition of property is usually a recognized gain or loss
cation 537, Installment Sales. for tax purposes. Recognized gains must be included in
Page 18 Chapter 3 Dispositions of Business Property

Page 19 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
gross income. Recognized losses are deductible fromInstallment sales.Use Form 6252, Installment Sale In-
gross income. However, a gain or loss realized from cer- come. You may also have to use Form 4797 and Schedule
tain exchanges of property is not recognized. See Nontax- D (Form 1040). 
able exchanges, earlier. Also, you cannot deduct a loss
Casualties and thefts.Use Form 4684, Casualties andfrom the disposition of property held for personal use.
Thefts. You may also have to use Form 4797. 
Is My Gain or Loss Condemned property. Use Form 4797 . You may also
Ordinary or Capital? have to use Schedule D (Form 1040).
You must classify your gains and losses as either ordinary
or capital gains or losses. You must do this to figure your
net capital gain or loss. Generally, you will have a capital
gain or loss if you dispose of a capital asset. For the most
4.part, everything you own and use for personal purposes or
investment is a capital asset.
Certain property you use in your business is not aGeneral Businesscapital asset. A gain or loss from a disposition of this
property is an ordinary gain or loss. However, if you held
Creditthe property longer than 1 year, you may be able to treat
the gain or loss as a capital gain or loss. These gains and
losses are called section 1231 gains and losses.
IntroductionFor more information about ordinary and capital gains
Your general business credit for the year consists of yourand losses, see chapters 2 and 3 in Publication 544.
carryforward of business credits from prior years plus the
total of your current year business credits. In addition, yourIs My Capital Gain or Loss general business credit for the current year may be in-Short Term or Long Term? creased later by the carryback of business credits from
later years. You subtract this credit directly from your tax.If you have a capital gain or loss, you must determine
whether it is long term or short term. Whether a gain or loss
Useful Itemsis long or short term depends on how long you own the
You may want to see:property before you dispose of it. The time you own prop-
erty before disposing of it is called the holding period.
Publication
Table 3-2. Do I Have a Short-Term or ❏ 954 Tax Incentives for Distressed Communities
Long-Term Gain or Loss?
Form (and Instructions)
IF you hold the ❏ 3800 General Business Creditproperty... THEN you have a...
❏ 6251 Alternative Minimum Tax—Individuals1 year or less Short-term capital gain or loss.
See chapter 12 for information about getting publica-More than 1 year Long-term capital gain or loss.tions and forms.
For more information about short-term and long-term
capital gains and losses, see chapter 4 of Publication 544.
Business Credits
All of the following credits are part of the general businessWhere Do I Report credit. The form you use to figure each credit is shown in
parentheses. Be sure you also read How To Claim theGains and Losses?
Credit, later, because you may also have to fill out Form
3800 in certain situations.Report gains and losses from the following dispositions on
the forms indicated. The instructions for the forms explain
Biodiesel fuels credit (Form 8864)This credit applies tohow to fill them out.
fuel produced, sold or used after December 31, 2004, in
taxable years ending after such date. For more informa-Dispositions of business property and depreciable
tion, see Form 8864.property.Use Form 4797. If you have taxable gain, you
may also have to use Schedule D (Form 1040). 
Credit for alcohol used as a fuel (Form 6478).This
Like-kind exchanges.Use Form 8824 , Like-Kind Ex- credit applies to alcohol you sold or used as fuel. Alcohol,
changes. You may also have to use Form 4797 and for purposes of this credit, includes ethanol and methanol.
Schedule D (Form 1040). It does not include alcohol produced from petroleum, natu-
Chapter 4 General Business Credit Page 19

Page 20 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ral gas, coal, or peat. For more information, see FormEnhanced oil recovery credit (Form 8830).This credit
6478. applies to your qualified enhanced oil recovery costs for
the tax year. For more information, see Form 8830.
Credit for contributions to selected community devel-
Indian employment credit (Form 8845).This credit ap-opment corporations (Form 8847).This credit applies to
plies to the part of the qualified wages and health insur-certain contributions made to a selected community devel-
ance costs (up to $20,000 per employee) you paid oropment corporation before June 30, 1999. For more infor-
incurred during a tax year that is more than the sum of themation, see Form 8847.
comparable costs you (or your predecessor) paid or in-
Credit for employee social security and medicare curred during calendar year 1993. The employee must be
taxes paid on certain employee tips (Form 8846).The an enrolled member, or the spouse of an enrolled member,
credit is generally equal to your (employer’s) portion ofof an Indian tribe. The employee must perform substan-
social security and Medicare taxes paid on tips received bytially all of his or her services within an Indian reservation
employees of your food and beverage establishmentwhile living on or near the reservation. For more informa-
where tipping is customary. The credit applies regardlesstion, see Form 8845 and Publication 954.
of whether the food is consumed on or off your businessInvestment credit (Form 3468).The investment credit ispremises. However, you cannot get credit for your part ofthe total of the following three credits.social security and Medicare taxes on those tips that are
used to meet the federal minimum wage rate that appliesEnergy credit.This credit applies to certain expenses
to the employee under the Fair Labor Standards Act. Forfor solar or geothermal energy property you placed in
more information, see Form 8846. service during the tax year. For more information, see the
instructions for Form 3468.Credit for employer-provided childcare facilities and
Reforestation credit.The reforestation credit appliesservices (Form 8882).This credit applies to the qualified
to part of the expenses you incur each year to forest orexpenses you paid for employee childcare and qualified
reforest property you hold for growing trees for sale or useexpenses you paid for childcare resource and referral
in the commercial production of timber products. Thisservices. The credit is 25% of qualified expenses you paid
credit has been repealed for expenses paid or incurredfor employee childcare and 10% of qualified expenses you
after October 22, 2004. For information about these ex-paid for childcare resource and referral services. This
penses, see chapter 9 in Publication 535, Business Ex-credit is limited to $150,000 each year. For more informa-
penses.tion, see Form 8882.
Rehabilitation credit.This credit applies to expensesCredit for increasing research activities (Form 6765).you incur to rehabilitate certain buildings. For more infor-The research credit is designed to encourage businessesmation, see the instructions for Form 3468.to increase the amounts they spend on research and
experimental activities. The credit is generally 20% of theLow sulfur diesel fuel production credit (Form 8896).
amount by which your research expenses for the year areThis credit applies to expenses paid or incurred after De-
more than your base amount. For more information, seecember 31, 2002, in taxable years ending after such date.
Form 6765. For more information, see Form 8896.
Credit for small employer pension startup costs (FormLow-income housing credit (Form 8586).This credit
8881).This credit applies to pension plan startup costs. Ifgenerally applies to qualified low-income housing buildings
you begin a new qualified defined benefit or defined contri-placed in service after 1986. For more information, see
bution plan (including a 401(k) plan), SIMPLE plan, orForm 8586.
simplified employee pension, you can receive a tax creditNew York Liberty Zone business employee creditof 50% of the first $1,000 of qualified startup costs. For(Form 8884).This credit provides businesses with anmore information, see Publication 560, Retirement Plansincentive to hire individuals from a new targeted group offor Small Business (SEP, Simple, and Qualified Plans).employees in the Liberty Zone. This credit expired for
wages paid or incurred for work performed after DecemberDisabled access credit (Form 8826).The disabled ac-
31, 2003. For more information, see Form 8884.cess credit is a nonrefundable tax credit for an eligible
small business that pays or incurs expenses to provideOrphan drug credit (Form 8820).The orphan drug creditaccess to persons who have disabilities. You must pay orapplies to qualified expenses incurred in testing certainincur the expenses to enable your business to comply withdrugs, known as “orphan drugs for rare diseases andthe Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990. For moreconditions.” For more information, see Form 8820.information, see Form 8826.
Renewable electricity and refined coal productionEmpowerment zone and renewal community employ- credit (Form 8835).For more information on the renewa-ment credit (Form 8844).You may qualify for this credit ifble electricity and refined coal production credit, see Formyou have employees and are engaged in a business in an8835.empowerment zone or renewal community for which the
credit is available. For more information, see Form 8844Welfare-to-work credit (Form 8861). The
and Publication 954. welfare-to-work credit provides businesses with an incen-
Page 20 Chapter 4 General Business Credit

Page 21 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
tive to hire long-term family assistance recipients. For
more information, see Form 8861 and Publication 954.
5.
Work opportunity credit (Form 5884).The work oppor-
tunity credit provides businesses with an incentive to hire
individuals from targeted groups that have a particularlyBusiness Income
high unemployment rate or other special employment
needs. For more information, see Form 5884 and Publica-
tion 954.
Introduction
This chapter primarily explains business income and how
to account for it on your tax return. It also explains what
How To Claim the Credit items are not considered income.
If there is a connection between any income you receiveTo claim a general business credit, you will first have to getand your business, the income is business income. Athe forms you need to claim your current year businessconnection exists if it is clear that the payment of incomecredits. would not have been made if you did not have the busi-In addition to the credit form, you may also need to fileness.Form 3800. See the next discussion to decide whether youYou can have business income even if you are notneed to file Form 3800. involved in the activity on a regular full-time basis. Income
from work you do on the side in addition to your regular jobWho must file Form 3800?
can be business income.You must file Form 3800 if any of the following apply.
You report most business income, such as income from• You have more than one of the credits listed abovethe sale of your products or services, on Schedule C or(other than the empowerment zone and renewal C-EZ. But you report the income from the sale of businesscommunity employment credit (Form 8844), New assets, such as land and office buildings, on other formsYork Liberty Zone business employee credit (Forminstead of Schedule C or C-EZ. For information on selling8884), or renewable electricity and refined coal pro-business assets, see chapter 3.duction credit (Form 8835, Section B)).
Nonemployee compensation. Business income• You have a carryback or carryforward of any of includes amounts you received in your businessthese credits (other than from Form 8844, Form that were properly shown on Forms 1099-MISC.
TIP
8884, or Section B of Form 8835). This includes amounts reported as nonemployee compen-
• Any of these credits (other than the amount fromsation in box 7 of the form. You can find more information
Form 8586, Form 8844, Form 8884, or Section B ofin the instructions on the back of the Form 1099-MISC you
Form 8835) is from a passive activity. For informa-received. 
tion about passive activity credits, see Form
8582-CR.
Kinds of Income
Claiming the empowerment zone and renewal commu-
nity employment credit.The empowerment zone and You must report on your tax return all income you receive
renewal community employment credit is subject to differ-from your business unless it is excluded by law. In most
ent rules. The credit is figured separately on Form 8844cases, your business income will be in the form of cash,
and is not carried to Form 3800. For more information, seechecks, and credit card charges. But business income can
the instructions for Form 8844. be in other forms, such as property or services. These and
other types of income are explained next.Claiming the New York Liberty Zone business em-
If you are a U.S. citizen who has business incomeployee credit.The New York Liberty Zone business em-
from sources outside the United States (foreignployee credit is subject to different rules. The credit is
income), you must report that income on your taxfigured separately on Form 8884 and is not carried to FormCAUTION
!
return unless it is exempt from tax under U.S. law. If you3800. For more information, see the instructions for Form
live outside the United States, you may be able to exclude8884.
part or all of your foreign-source business income. For
Claiming the renewable electricity and refined coaldetails, see Publication 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens
production credit.The part of the credit figured in Sec-and Resident Aliens Abroad.
tion B of Form 8835 is subject to different rules. The
amount figured in Section B is not carried to Form 3800.
Bartering for Property or ServicesFor more information, see Form 8835.
Alternative minimum tax (AMT).Although you may not Bartering is an exchange of property or services. You must
owe AMT, you must still figure your tentative minimum tax include in your gross receipts, at the time received, the fair
on Form 6251 if you claim a general business credit. After market value of property or services you receive in bar-
you fill in Form 6251, attach it to your tax return. tering. If you exchange services with another person and
Chapter 5 Business Income Page 21

Page 22 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you both have agreed ahead of time on the value of the when you receive them even if you have not provided any
services, that value will be accepted as the fair marketservices to club members.
value unless the value can be shown to be otherwise.
Information returns.If you are involved in a bartering
transaction, you may have to file either of the followingExample 1. You are a self-employed lawyer. You per-
forms.form legal services for a client, a small corporation. In
payment for your services, you receive shares of stock in• Form 1099-B, Proceeds From Broker and Barter Ex-the corporation. You must include the fair market value ofchange Transactions. the shares in income.
• Form 1099-MISC, Miscellaneous Income. 
Example 2.You are an artist and create a work of art toFor information about these forms, see the General In-compensate your landlord for the rent-free use of yourstructions for Forms 1099, 1098, 5498, and W-2G.apartment. You must include the fair rental value of the
apartment in your gross receipts. Your landlord must in-
clude the fair market value of the work of art in his or her
Real Estate Rentsrental income.
If you are a real estate dealer who receives income from
Example 3. You are a self-employed accountant. Bothrenting real property or an owner of a hotel, motel, etc.,
you and a house painter are members of a barter club, anwho provides services (maid services, etc.) for guests,
organization that each year gives its members a directoryreport the rental income and expenses on Schedule C or
of members and the services each member provides.C-EZ. If you are not a real estate dealer or the kind of
Members get in touch with other members directly andowner described in the preceding sentence, report the
bargain for the value of the services to be performed.rental income and expenses on Schedule E, instead of on
In return for accounting services you provided for theSchedule C or C-EZ.
house painter’s business, the house painter painted your
Prepaid rent.Advance payments received under a leasehome. You must include in gross receipts the fair market
that does not put any restriction on their use or enjoymentvalue of the services you received from the house painter.
are income in the year you receive them. This is true noThe house painter must include the fair market value of
matter what accounting method or period you use.your accounting services in his or her gross receipts.
Lease bonus. A bonus you receive from a lessee forExample 4. You are a member of a barter club that
granting a lease is an addition to the rent. Include it in youruses credit units to credit or debit members’ accounts for
gross receipts in the year it is received.goods or services provided or received. As soon as units
are credited to your account, you can use them to buyLease cancellation payments.Report payments you re-goods or services or sell or transfer the units to otherceive from your lessee for canceling a lease in your grossmembers. receipts in the year received.You must include the value of credit units you received
in your gross receipts for the tax year in which the units arePayments to third parties.If your lessee makes pay-credited to your account. ments to someone else under an agreement to pay your
The dollar value of units received for services by andebts or obligations, include the payments in your gross
employee of the club, who can use the units in the samereceipts when the lessee makes the payments. A common
manner as other members, must be included in the example of this kind of income is a lessee’s payment of
employee’s gross income for the tax year in which re-your property taxes on leased real property.
ceived. It is wages subject to social security and Medicare
taxes (FICA), federal unemployment taxes (FUTA), andSettlement payments.Payments you receive in settle-
income tax withholding. See Publication 15 (Circular E),ment of a lessee’s obligation to restore the leased property
Employer’s Tax Guide. to its original condition are income in the amount that the
payments exceed the adjusted basis of the leasehold im-
Example 5. You operate a plumbing business and useprovements destroyed, damaged, removed, or discon-
the cash method of accounting. You join a barter club andnected by the lessee.
agree to provide plumbing services to any member for a
specified number of hours. Each member has access to aPersonal Property Rentsdirectory that lists the members of the club and the serv-
ices available. If you are in the business of renting personal property
Members contact each other directly and request serv-(equipment, vehicles, formal wear, etc.), include the rental
ices to be performed. You are not required to provideamount you receive in your gross receipts on Schedule C
services unless requested by another member, but youor C-EZ. Prepaid rent and other payments described in the
can use as many of the offered services as you wishpreceding Real Estate Rents discussion can also be re-
without paying a fee. ceived for renting personal property. If you receive any of
those payments, include them in your gross receipts asYou must include the fair market value of any services
explained in that discussion.you receive from club members in your gross receipts
Page 22 Chapter 5 Business Income

Page 23 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Deductible debt.You do not realize income from a can-Interest and Dividend Income celed debt to the extent the payment of the debt would
have led to a deduction.Interest and dividends may be considered business in-
come.
Example. You get accounting services for your busi-
Interest.Interest received on notes receivable that youness on credit. Later, you have trouble paying your busi-
have accepted in the ordinary course of business is busi-ness debts, but you are not bankrupt or insolvent. Your
ness income. Interest received on loans is business in-accountant forgives part of the amount you owe for the
come if you are in the business of lending money.accounting services. How you treat the canceled debt
depends on your method of accounting.Uncollectible loans.If a loan payable to you becomes
uncollectible during the tax year and you use an accrual• Cash method – You do not include the canceled
method of accounting, you must include in gross incomedebt in income because payment of the debt would
interest accrued up to the time the loan became uncollecti-have been deductible as a business expense.
ble. If the accrued interest later becomes uncollectible, you• Accrual method – You include the canceled debt inmay be able to take a bad debt deduction. See Bad Debts income because the expense was deductible whenin chapter 8. you incurred the debt.
Unstated interest.If little or no interest is charged on
an installment sale, you may have to treat a part of eachFor information on the cash and accrual methods of
payment as unstated interest. See Unstated Interest andaccounting, see chapter 2.
Original Issue Discount in Publication 537, Installment
Sales.
Exclusions
Dividends.Generally, dividends are business income to
Do not include canceled debt in income in the followingdealers in securities. For most sole proprietors and statu-
situations. However, you may be required to file Form 982,tory employees, however, dividends are nonbusiness in-
Reduction of Tax Attributes Due to Discharge of Indebted-come. If you hold stock as a personal investment
ness. For more information, see Form 982.  separately from your business activity, the dividends from
the stock are nonbusiness income. 1. The cancellation takes place in a bankruptcy caseIf you receive dividends from business insurance premi-under title 11 of the U.S. Code (relating to bank-ums you deducted in an earlier year, you must report all orruptcy). See Publication 908, Bankruptcy Tax Guide.part of the dividend as business income on your return. To
2. The cancellation takes place when you are insolvent.find out how much you have to report, see Recovery of
You can exclude the canceled debt to the extent youitems previously deducted under Other Income, later.
are insolvent. See Publication 908.
Canceled Debt 3. The canceled debt is a qualified farm debt owed to a
qualified person. See chapter 3 in Publication 225,
The following explains the general rule for including can-Farmer’s Tax Guide.
celed debt in income and the exceptions to the general
4. The canceled debt is a qualified real property busi-rule.
ness debt. This situation is explained later.
If a canceled debt is excluded from income because itGeneral Rule takes place in a bankruptcy case, the exclusions in situa-
tions (2), (3), and (4) do not apply. If it takes place whenGenerally, if your debt is canceled or forgiven, other than
you are insolvent, the exclusions in situations (3) and (4)as a gift or bequest to you, you must include the canceled
do not apply to the extent you are insolvent.amount in your gross income for tax purposes. Report the
canceled amount on line 6 of Schedule C if you incurredDebt. For purposes of this discussion, debt includes any
the debt in your business. If the debt is a nonbusiness debt,debt for which you are liable or which attaches to property
report the canceled amount on line 21 of Form 1040.you hold.
Qualified real property business debt.You can choose
Exceptions to exclude (up to certain limits) the cancellation of qualified
real property business debt. If you make the choice, youThe following discussion covers some exceptions to themust reduce the basis of your depreciable real property bygeneral rule for canceled debt. the amount excluded. Make this reduction at the beginning
of your tax year following the tax year in which the cancel-Price reduced after purchase.If you owe a debt to thelation occurs. However, if you dispose of the propertyseller for property you bought and the seller reduces thebefore that time, you must reduce its basis immediatelyamount you owe, you generally do not have income frombefore the disposition.the reduction. Unless you are bankrupt or insolvent, treat
the amount of the reduction as a purchase price adjust-Cancellation of qualified real property business
ment and reduce your basis in the property. debt.Qualified real property business debt is debt (other
Chapter 5 Business Income Page 23

Page 24 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
than qualified farm debt) that meets all the following condi- is included in your income on Schedule C or C-EZ when
tions. the restriction is lifted. However, you can choose to be
taxed in the year you receive the property. For more
1. It was incurred or assumed in connection with realinformation on including restricted property in income, see
property used in a trade or business. Publication 525, Taxable and Nontaxable Income.
2. It was secured by such real property. Gains and losses.Do not report on Schedule C or C-EZ
3. It was incurred or assumed at either of the followinga gain or loss from the disposition of property that is neither
times. stock in trade nor held primarily for sale to customers.
Instead, you must report these gains and losses on othera. Before January 1, 1993. forms. For more information, see chapter 3.
b. After December 31, 1992, if incurred or assumedPromissory notes.Report promissory notes and otherto acquire, construct, or substantially improve theevidences of debt issued to you in a sale or exchange ofreal property. property that is stock in trade or held primarily for sale to
customers on Schedule C or C-EZ. In general, you report4. It is debt to which you choose to apply these rules.them at their stated principal amount (minus any unstated
Qualified real property business debt includes refinanc-interest) when you receive them.
ing of debt described in (3) above, but only to the extent it
does not exceed the debt being refinanced. Lost income payments.If you reduce or stop your busi-
ness activities, report on Schedule C or C-EZ any paymentYou cannot exclude more than either of the following
you receive for the lost income of your business fromamounts.
insurance or other sources. Report it on Schedule C or
1. The excess (if any) of: C-EZ even if your business is inactive when you receive
the payment.a. The outstanding principal of qualified real property
business debt (immediately before the cancella-Damages. You must include in gross income compensa-
tion), over tion you receive during the tax year as a result of any of the
following injuries connected with your business.b. The fair market value (immediately before the
cancellation) of the business real property that is• Patent infringement.
security for the debt, reduced by the outstanding
• Breach of contract or fiduciary duty.principal amount of any other qualified real prop-
erty business debt secured by this property imme-• Antitrust injury.
diately before the cancellation.
Economic injury.You may be entitled to a deduction
2. The total adjusted bases of depreciable real propertyagainst the income if it compensates you for actual eco-
held by you immediately before the cancellation.nomic injury. Your deduction is the smaller of the following
These adjusted bases are determined after any basisamounts.
reduction due to a cancellation in bankruptcy, insol-
• The amount you receive or accrue for damages invency, or of qualified farm debt. Do not take into
the tax year reduced by the amount you pay or incuraccount depreciable real property acquired in con-
in the tax year to recover that amount.templation of the cancellation.
• Your loss from the injury that you have not yet de-Choice. To make this choice, complete Form 982 and ducted.attach it to your income tax return for the tax year in which
the cancellation occurs. You must file your return by thePunitive damages. You must also include punitivedue date (including extensions). If you timely filed yourdamages in income.return for the year without making the choice, you can still
make the choice by filing an amended return within 6Kickbacks. If you receive any kickbacks, include them in
months of the due date of the return (excluding exten-your income on Schedule C or C-EZ. However, do not
sions). For more information, see When to file in the form include them if you properly treat them as a reduction of a
instructions. related expense item, a capital expenditure, or cost of
goods sold.
Other Income Recovery of items previously deducted.If you recover
a bad debt or any other item deducted in a previous year,The following discussion explains how to treat other types
include the recovery in income on Schedule C or C-EZ.of business income you may receive.
However, if all or part of the deduction in earlier years did
Restricted property.Restricted property is property that not reduce your tax, you can exclude the part that did not
has certain restrictions that affect its value. If you receive reduce your tax. If you exclude part of the recovery from
restricted stock or other property for services performed, income, you must include with your return a computation
the fair market value of the property in excess of your cost showing how you figured the exclusion.
Page 24 Chapter 5 Business Income

Page 25 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. Joe Smith, a sole proprietor, had gross in-Leasehold improvements.If a tenant erects buildings or
come of $8,000, a bad debt deduction of $300, and other makes improvements to your property, the increase in the
allowable deductions of $7,700. He also had 2 personal value of the property due to the improvements is not
exemptions for a total of $6,200. He would not pay income income to you. However, if the facts indicate that the
tax even if he did not deduct the bad debt. Therefore, he improvements are a payment of rent to you, then the
will not report as income any part of the $300 he may increase in value would be income.
recover in any future year.
Exchange of like-kind property.If you exchange yourException for depreciation.This rule does not applybusiness property or property you hold for investmentto depreciation. You recover depreciation using the rulessolely for property of a like kind to be used in your businessexplained next. or to be held for investment, no gain or loss is recognized.
This means that the gain is not taxable and the loss is notRecapture of depreciation.In the following situations,deductible. A common type of nontaxable exchange is theyou have to recapture the depreciation deduction. Thistrade-in of a business automobile for another businessmeans you include in income part or all of the depreciationautomobile. See Nontaxable exchanges in chapter 3.you deducted in previous years.
Listed property.If your business use of listed propertyConsignments. Consignments of merchandise to others
(explained in chapter 8 under Depreciation) falls to 50% orto sell for you are not sales. The title of merchandise
less in a tax year after the tax year you placed the propertyremains with you, the consignor, even after the consignee
in service, you may have to recapture part of the deprecia-possesses the merchandise. Therefore, if you ship goods
tion deduction. You do this by including in income onon consignment, you have no profit or loss until the con-
Schedule C part of the depreciation you deducted in previ-signee sells the merchandise. Merchandise you have
ous years. Use Part IV of Form 4797, Sales of Businessshipped out on consignment is included in your inventory
Property, to figure the amount to include on Schedule C.until it is sold.
For more information, see What is the Business-Use Re- Do not include merchandise you receive on consign-
quirement in chapter 5 of Publication 946, How To Depre-ment in your inventory. Include your profit or commission
ciate Property. That chapter explains how to determineon merchandise consigned to you in your income when
whether property is used more than 50% in your business.you sell the merchandise or when you receive your profit or
commission, depending upon the method of accountingSection 179 property.If you take a section 179 deduc-
you use.tion (explained in chapter 8 under Depreciation) for an
asset and before the end of the asset’s recovery period the
Construction allowances.If you enter into a lease afterpercentage of business use drops to 50% or less, you must
August 5, 1997, you can exclude from income the con-recapture part of the section 179 deduction. You do this by
struction allowance you receive (in cash or as a rentincluding in income on Schedule C part of the deduction
reduction) from your landlord if you receive it under bothyou took. Use Part IV of Form 4797 to figure the amount to
the following conditions.include on Schedule C. See chapter 2 in Publication 946 to
find out when you recapture the deduction.
• Under a short-term lease of retail space.
Sale or exchange of depreciable property.If you sell • For the purpose of constructing or improving quali-or exchange depreciable property at a gain, you may havefied long-term real property for use in your businessto treat all or part of the gain due to depreciation asat that retail space.ordinary income. You figure the income due to deprecia-
tion recapture in Part III of Form 4797. For more informa-Amount you can exclude.You can exclude the con-tion, see chapter 4 in Publication 544, Sales and Otherstruction allowance to the extent it does not exceed theDispositions of Assets. amount you spent for construction or improvements.
Short-term lease.A short-term lease is a lease (or
other agreement for occupancy or use) of retail space forItems That Are Not Income 15 years or less. The following rules apply in determining
whether the lease is for 15 years or less.In some cases the property or money you receive is not
income.
• Take into account options to renew when figuring
whether the lease is for 15 years or less. But do not
Loans. Money borrowed through a bona fide loan is nottake into account any option to renew at fair market
income. value determined at the time of renewal.
• Two or more successive leases that are part of theSales tax.State and local sales taxes imposed on the
same transaction (or a series of related transactions)buyer, which you were required to collect and pay over to
for the same or substantially similar retail space arestate or local governments, are not income.
treated as one lease.
Appreciation.Increases in value of your property are not
income until you realize the increases through a sale orRetail space.Retail space is real property leased, oc-
other taxable disposition. cupied, or otherwise used by you as a tenant in your
Chapter 5 Business Income Page 25

Page 26 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
business of selling tangible personal property or services terms of the contract and the escrow agreement, you will
to the general public. have taxable income, even if you do not accept the money
until the next year.Qualified long-term real property.Qualified long-term
real property is nonresidential real property that is part of,Sales returns and allowances.Credits you allow cus-
or otherwise present at, your retail space and that revertstomers for returned merchandise and any other al-
to the landlord when the lease ends. lowances you make on sales are deductions from gross
sales in figuring net sales.
Advance payments. Special rules dealing with an ac-Accounting for Your Income crual method of accounting for payments received in ad-
vance are discussed in chapter 2 under Accrual Method.Accounting for your income for income tax purposes differs
at times from accounting for financial purposes. This sec-Insurance proceeds.If you receive insurance or anothertion discusses some of the more common differences thattype of reimbursement for a casualty or theft loss, you mustmay affect business transactions. subtract it from the loss when you figure your deduction.Figure your business income on the basis of a tax yearYou cannot deduct the reimbursed part of a casualty orand according to your regular method of accounting (seetheft loss.chapter 2). If the sale of a product is an income-producingFor information on casualty or theft losses, see Publica-factor in your business, you usually have to use inventoriestion 547, Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts.to clearly show your income. Dealers in real estate are not
allowed to use inventories. For more information on inven-
tories, see chapter 2.
Income paid to a third party.All income you earn is
taxable to you. You cannot avoid tax by having the income6.
paid to a third party.
Example. You rent out your property and the rentalHow To Figure
agreement directs the lessee to pay the rent to your son.
Cost of Goods SoldThe amount paid to your son is gross income to you.
Cash discounts.These are amounts the seller permits
you to deduct from the invoice price for prompt payment.IntroductionFor income tax purposes you can use either of the follow-
ing two methods to account for cash discounts. If you make or buy goods to sell, you can deduct the cost of
goods sold from your gross receipts on Schedule C. How-1. Deduct the cash discount from purchases (see Line ever, to determine these costs, you must value your inven-36, Purchases Less Cost of Items Withdrawn fortory at the beginning and end of each tax year.Personal Use in chapter 6). This chapter applies to you if you are a manufacturer,
wholesaler, or retailer or if you are engaged in any busi-2. Credit the cash discount to a discount income ac-
ness that makes, buys, or sells goods to produce income.count.
This chapter does not apply to a personal service busi-You must use the chosen method every year for all yourness, such as the business of a doctor, lawyer, carpenter,purchase discounts. or painter. However, if you work in a personal serviceIf you use the second method, the credit balance in thebusiness and also sell or charge for the materials andaccount at the end of your tax year is business income.supplies normally used in your business, this chapter ap-Under this method, you do not reduce the cost of goodsplies to you.sold by the cash discounts you received. When valuing
If you must account for an inventory in your busi-your closing inventory, you cannot reduce the invoice price
ness, you must generally use an accrual methodof merchandise on hand at the close of the tax year by the
of accounting for your purchases and sales. Foraverage or estimated discounts received on the merchan-
CAUTION
!
more information, see chapter 2.dise.
Trade discounts.These are reductions from list or cata-
log prices and usually are not written into the invoice or
Figuring Cost of Goods Soldcharged to the customer. Do not enter these discounts on
your books of account. Instead, use only the net amount as
on Schedule C Lines 35the cost of the merchandise purchased. For more informa-
tion, see Trade discounts in chapter 6.
Through 42
Payment placed in escrow.If the buyer of your property
places part or all of the purchase price in escrow, you do Figure your cost of goods sold by filling out lines 35 through
not include any part of it in gross sales until you actually or 42 of Schedule C. These lines are reproduced below and
constructively receive it. However, upon completion of the are explained in the discussion that follows.
Page 26 Chapter 6 How To Figure Cost of Goods Sold

Page 27 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
35 Inventory at beginning of year. If different from last Example 2. If, in Example 1, you acquired the contrib-
year’s closing inventory, attach explanation........ uted property in 2004 at a cost of $400, you would include
36 Purchases less cost of items withdrawn for personal the $400 cost of the property in figuring the cost of goodsu s e ................................... sold for 2004 and deduct the $50 of administrative and
37 Cost of labor. Do not include any amounts paid to other expenses attributable to the property for that year.yourself................................ You would not be allowed any charitable contribution de-
38 Materials and supplies...................... duction for the contributed property.
39 Other costs..............................
40 Add lines 35 through 39..................... Line 36
41 Inventory at end of year..................... Purchases Less Cost of Items
42 Cost of goods sold. Subtract line 41 from line 40. Withdrawn for Personal UseEnter the result here and on page 1, line 4.........
If you are a merchant, use the cost of all merchandise you
bought for sale. If you are a manufacturer or producer, thisLine 35
includes the cost of all raw materials or parts purchased forInventory at Beginning of Year manufacture into a finished product.
If you are a merchant, beginning inventory is the cost ofTrade discounts.The differences between the statedmerchandise on hand at the beginning of the year that youprices of articles and the actual prices you pay for them arewill sell to customers. If you are a manufacturer or pro-called trade discounts. You must use the prices you payducer, it includes the total cost of raw materials, work in(not the stated prices) in figuring your cost of purchases.process, finished goods, and materials and supplies usedDo not show the discount amount separately as an item inin manufacturing the goods (see Inventories in chapter 2).gross income.Opening inventory usually will be identical to the closingAn automobile dealer must record the cost of a car ininventory of the year before. You must explain any differ-inventory reduced by a manufacturer’s rebate that repre-ence in a schedule attached to your return. sents a trade discount.
Donation of inventory.If you contribute inventory (prop-Cash discounts.Cash discounts are amounts your sup-erty that you sell in the course of your business), thepliers let you deduct from your purchase invoices foramount you can claim as a contribution deduction is theprompt payments. There are two methods of accountingsmaller of its fair market value on the day you contributed itfor cash discounts. You can either credit them to a sepa-or its basis. The basis of donated inventory is any costrate discount account or deduct them from total purchasesincurred for the inventory in an earlier year that you wouldfor the year. Whichever method you use, you must beotherwise include in your opening inventory for the year ofconsistent. If you want to change your method of figuringthe contribution. You must remove the amount of yourinventory cost, you must file Form 3115, Application forcontribution deduction from your opening inventory. It isChange in Accounting Method. For more information, seenot part of the cost of goods sold. Change in Accounting Method in chapter 2.If the cost of donated inventory is not included in yourIf you credit cash discounts to a separate account, youopening inventory, the inventory’s basis is zero and youmust include this credit balance in your business income atcannot claim a charitable contribution deduction. Treat thethe end of the tax year. If you use this method, do notinventory’s cost as you would ordinarily treat it under yourreduce your cost of goods sold by the cash discounts.method of accounting. For example, include the purchase
price of inventory bought and donated in the same year inPurchase returns and allowances.You must deduct all
the cost of goods sold for that year. returns and allowances from your total purchases during
the year.Example 1.You are a calendar year taxpayer who uses
an accrual method of accounting. In 2004 you contributedMerchandise withdrawn from sale.If you withdraw mer-
property from inventory to a church. It had a fair market chandise for your personal or family use, you must exclude
value of $600. The closing inventory at the end of 2003 this cost from the total amount of merchandise you bought
properly included $400 of costs due to the acquisition of for sale. Do this by crediting the purchases or sales ac-
the property, and in 2003, you properly deducted $50 of count with the cost of merchandise you withdraw for per-
administrative and other expenses attributable to the prop- sonal use. You should charge the amount to your drawing
erty as business expenses. The charitable contribution account. 
allowed for 2004 is $400 ($600 − $200). The $200 is the A drawing account is a separate account you should
amount that would be ordinary income if you had sold the keep to record the business income you withdraw to pay
contributed inventory at fair market value on the date of the for personal and family expenses. As stated above, you
gift. The cost of goods sold you use in determining gross also use it to record withdrawals of merchandise for per-
income for 2004 must not include the $400. You remove sonal or family use. This account is also known as a
that amount from opening inventory for 2004. “withdrawals account” or “personal account.”
Chapter 6 How To Figure Cost of Goods Sold Page 27

Page 28 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
overhead expenses you have as direct and necessaryLine 37
expenses of the manufacturing operation are included inCost of Labor your cost of goods sold.
Labor costs are usually an element of cost of goods sold
Line 40only in a manufacturing or mining business. Small mer-
chandisers (wholesalers, retailers, etc.) usually do notAdd Lines 35 through 39have labor costs that can properly be charged to cost of
goods sold. In a manufacturing business, labor costs prop-The total of lines 35 through 39 equals the cost of the
erly allocable to the cost of goods sold include both thegoods available for sale during the year.
direct and indirect labor used in fabricating the raw material
into a finished, saleable product.
Line 41
Direct labor.Direct labor costs are the wages you pay toInventory at End of Year
those employees who spend all their time working directly
on the product being manufactured. They also include aSubtract the value of your closing inventory (including, as
part of the wages you pay to employees who work directlyappropriate, the allocable parts of the cost of raw materials
on the product part time if you can determine that part ofand supplies, direct labor, and overhead expenses) from
their wages. line 40. Inventory at the end of the year is also known as
closing or ending inventory. Your ending inventory willIndirect labor.Indirect labor costs are the wages you payusually become the beginning inventory of your next taxto employees who perform a general factory function thatyear.does not have any immediate or direct connection with
making the saleable product, but that is a necessary part of
Line 42the manufacturing process.
Cost of Goods SoldOther labor.Other labor costs not properly chargeable to
the cost of goods sold can be deducted as selling orWhen you subtract your closing inventory (inventory at theadministrative expenses. Generally, the only kinds of laborend of the year) from the cost of goods available for sale,costs properly chargeable to your cost of goods sold arethe remainder is your cost of goods sold during the taxthe direct or indirect labor costs and certain other costsyear.treated as overhead expenses properly charged to the
manufacturing process, as discussed later under Line 39
Other Costs.
Line 38 7.Materials and Supplies
Materials and supplies, such as hardware and chemicals,
Figuring Gross Profitused in manufacturing goods are charged to cost of goods
sold. Those that are not used in the manufacturing process
are treated as deferred charges. You deduct them as a
business expense when you use them. Business ex-
Introduction
penses are discussed in chapter 8. After you have figured the gross receipts from your busi-
ness (chapter 5) and the cost of goods sold (chapter 6),
Line 39 you are ready to figure your gross profit. You must deter-
mine gross profit before you can deduct any business
Other Costs
expenses. These expenses are discussed in chapter 8.
Examples of other costs incurred in a manufacturing orIf you are filing Schedule C-EZ, your gross profit is yourmining process that you charge to your cost of goods soldgross receipts plus certain other amounts, explained laterare as follows. under Additions to Gross Profit.
Containers.Containers and packages that are an integral
Businesses that sell products.If you are filing Schedulepart of the product manufactured are a part of your cost of
C, figure your gross profit by first figuring your net receipts.goods sold. If they are not an integral part of the manufac-
Figure net receipts on Schedule C by subtracting anytured product, their costs are shipping or selling expenses.
returns and allowances (line 2) from gross receipts (line 1).Freight-in.Freight-in, express-in, and cartage-in on rawReturns and allowances include cash or credit refunds youmaterials, supplies you use in production, and merchan-make to customers, rebates, and other allowances off thedise you purchase for sale are all part of cost of goods sold.actual sales price.
Next, subtract the cost of goods sold (line 4) from netOverhead expenses. Overhead expenses include ex-
receipts (line 3). The result is the gross profit from yourpenses such as rent, heat, light, power, insurance, depre-
business.ciation, taxes, maintenance, labor, and supervision. The
Page 28 Chapter 7 Figuring Gross Profit

Page 29 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Businesses that sell services.You do not have to figureInventory at end of year.Check to make sure your pro-
the cost of goods sold if the sale of merchandise is not an cedures for taking inventory are adequate. These proce-
income-producing factor for your business. Your gross dures should ensure all items have been included in
profit is the same as your net receipts (gross receipts inventory and proper pricing techniques have been used.
minus any refunds, rebates, or other allowances). Most Use inventory forms and adding machine tapes as the
professions and businesses that sell services rather than only evidence for your inventory. Inventory forms are avail-
products can figure gross profit directly from net receipts in able at office supply stores. These forms have columns for
this way. recording the description, quantity, unit price, and value of
each inventory item. Each page has space to record who
Illustration.This illustration of the gross profit section ofmade the physical count, who priced the items, who made
the income statement of a retail business shows how grossthe extensions, and who proofread the calculations. These
profit is figured. forms will help satisfy you that the total inventory is accu-
rate. They will also provide you with a permanent record toIncome Statement support its validity.Year Ended December 31, 2004 Inventories are discussed in chapter 2.
Gross receipts............................... $400,000
Minus: Returns and allowances................... 14,940
Net receipts................................ $385,060 Testing GrossMinus: Cost of goods sold....................... 288,140
Gross profit................................ $96,920
Profit AccuracyThe cost of goods sold for this business is figured as
follows:
If you are in a retail or wholesale business, you can check
Inventory at beginning of year................... $37,845 the accuracy of your gross profit figure. First, divide gross
Plus: Purchases.................... $285,900 profit by net receipts. The resulting percentage measuresMinus: Items withdrawn for personal use.... 2,650 283,250
the average spread between the merchandise cost ofGoods available for sale....................... $321,095
Minus: Inventory at end of year.................. 32,955 goods sold and the selling price.
Cost of goods sold.......................... $288,140 Next, compare this percentage to your markup policy.
Little or no difference between these two percentages
shows that your gross profit figure is accurate. A large
difference between these percentages may show that you
Items To Check did not accurately figure sales, purchases, inventory, or
other items of cost. You should determine the reason forConsider the following items before figuring your grossthe difference.profit.
Example. Joe Able operates a retail business. On the
average, he marks up his merchandise so that he willGross receipts.At the end of each business day, make
realize a gross profit of 33
1/3% on its sales. The net receiptssure your records balance with your actual cash and credit
(gross receipts minus returns and allowances) shown onreceipts for the day. You may find it helpful to use cash
his income statement is $300,000. His cost of goods sold isregisters to keep track of receipts. You should also use a
$200,000. This results in a gross profit of $100,000proper invoicing system and keep a separate bank account
($300,000 − $200,000). To test the accuracy of this year’sfor your business.
results, Joe divides gross profit ($100,000) by net receipts
Sales tax collected.Check to make sure your records($300,000). The resulting 331/3% confirms his markup per-
show the correct sales tax collected. centage of 331/3%.
If you collect state and local sales taxes imposed on you
as the seller of goods or services from the buyer, you must
include the amount collected in gross receipts. Additions to Gross Profit
If you are required to collect state and local taxes im-
posed on the buyer and turn them over to state or localIf your business has income from a source other than its
governments, you generally do not include these amountsregular business operations, enter the income on line 6 of
in income. Schedule C and add it to gross profit. The result is gross
business income. If you use Schedule C-EZ, include the
Inventory at beginning of year.Compare this figure withincome on line 1 of the schedule. Some examples include
last year’s ending inventory. The two amounts shouldincome from an interest-bearing checking account, income
usually be the same. from scrap sales, and amounts recovered from bad debts.
Purchases. If you take any inventory items for your per-
sonal use (use them yourself, provide them to your family,
or give them as personal gifts, etc.) be sure to remove
them from the cost of goods sold. For details on how to
adjust cost of goods sold, see Merchandise withdrawn
from sale in chapter 6.
Chapter 7 Figuring Gross Profit Page 29

Page 30 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you are unable to collect any part of these accounts or
notes receivable, the uncollectible part is a business bad
8. debt.
You can take a bad debt deduction for these
accounts and notes receivable only if the amount
Business Expenses
owed you was included in your gross incomeCAUTION
!
either for the year the deduction is claimed or for a prior
year.
Introduction
Accrual method.If you use an accrual method of ac-You can deduct the costs of running your business. These
counting, you normally report income as you earn it. Youcosts are known as business expenses. These are costs
can take a bad debt deduction for an uncollectible receiva-you do not have to capitalize or include in the cost of goods
ble if you have included the uncollectible amount in in-sold.
come.To be deductible, a business expense must be both
ordinary and necessary. An ordinary expense is one that isCash method. If you use the cash method of account-common and accepted in your field of business. A neces-ing, you normally report income when you receive pay-sary expense is one that is helpful and appropriate for yourment. You cannot take a bad debt deduction for amountsbusiness. An expense does not have to be indispensableowed to you that you have not received and cannot collectto be considered necessary. if you never included those amounts in income.For more information about the general rules for deduct-
More information.For more information about businessing business expenses, see chapter 1 in Publication 535,
bad debts, see chapter 11 in Publication 535.Business Expenses.
If you have an expense that is partly for businessNonbusiness bad debts. All other bad debts are non-
and partly personal, separate the personal partbusiness bad debts and are deductible as short-term capi-
from the business part. tal losses on Schedule D (Form 1040). For moreCAUTION
!
information on nonbusiness bad debts, see Publication
550, Investment Income and Expenses.Useful Items
You may want to see:
Car and Truck ExpensesPublication
❏ 535 Business Expenses If you use your car or truck in your business, you may be
able to deduct the costs of operating and maintaining yourSee chapter 12 for information about getting publica-vehicle. You also may be able to deduct other costs of localtions and forms. transportation and traveling away from home overnight on
business.
You may be entitled to a tax credit for an electricBad Debts
vehicle or a deduction from gross income for a
part of the cost of a clean-fuel vehicle you placeIf someone owes you money you cannot collect, you have
TIP
in service during the year. The vehicle must meet certaina bad debt. There are two kinds of bad debts, business bad
requirements and you do not have to use it in your busi-debts and nonbusiness bad debts.
ness to qualify for the credit or the deduction. For moreA business bad debt is generally one that comes from
information, see chapter 12 in Publication 535.    operating your trade or business. You may be able to
deduct business bad debts as an expense on your busi-Local transportation expenses.Local transportation ex-ness tax return. penses include the ordinary and necessary costs of all the
following.Business bad debt.A business bad debt is a loss from
the worthlessness of a debt that was either of the following.• Getting from one workplace to another in the course
of your business or profession when you are travel-1. Created or acquired in your business. ing within the city or general area that is your tax
2. Closely related to your business when it became home. Tax home is defined later.
partly or totally worthless.
• Visiting clients or customers.
A debt is closely related to your business if your primary• Going to a business meeting away from your regularmotive for incurring the debt is a business reason. workplace.Business bad debts are mainly the result of credit sales
to customers. They can also be the result of loans to• Getting from your home to a temporary workplace
suppliers, clients, employees, or distributors. Goods and when you have one or more regular places of work.
services customers have not paid for are shown in your These temporary workplaces can be either within the
books as either accounts receivable or notes receivable. If area of your tax home or outside that area.
Page 30 Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 31 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Local business transportation does not include expenses available for use in your business. In later years, you can
you have while traveling away from home overnight. Those choose to use either the standard mileage rate or actual
expenses are deductible as travel expenses and are dis- expenses.
cussed later under Travel, Meals, and Entertainment. If you use the standard mileage rate for a car you lease,
However, if you use your car while traveling away fromyou must choose to use it for the entire lease period
home overnight, use the rules in this section to figure your(including renewals).
car expense deduction. Standard mileage rate not allowed.You cannot use
Generally, your tax home is your regular place of busi-the standard mileage rate if you:
ness, regardless of where you maintain your family home.
1. Use the car for hire (such as a taxi),It includes the entire city or general area in which your
business or work is located. 2. Operate five or more cars at the same time,
3. Claimed a depreciation deduction using any methodExample. You operate a printing business out of rented
other than straight line, for example, ACRS oroffice space. You use your van to deliver completed jobs to
MACRS,your customers. You can deduct the cost of round-trip
transportation between your customers and your print4. Claimed a section 179 deduction on the car,shop.
5. Claimed the special depreciation allowance on theYou cannot deduct the costs of driving your car orcar,truck between your home and your main or regu-
6. Claimed actual car expenses for a car you leased, orlar workplace. These costs are personal commut-
CAUTION
!
ing expenses. 7. Are a rural mail carrier who received a qualified reim-
bursement.Office in the home.Your workplace can be your home
if you have an office in your home that qualifies as your
Parking fees and tolls.In addition to using the stan-principal place of business. For more information, see
dard mileage rate, you can deduct any business-relatedBusiness Use of Your Home, later.
parking fees and tolls. (Parking fees you pay to park your
car at your place of work are nondeductible commutingExample. You are a graphics designer. You operate
expenses.)your business out of your home. Your home qualifies as
your principal place of business. You occasionally have to
Actual expenses.If you do not choose to use the stan-drive to your clients to deliver your completed work. You
dard mileage rate, you may be able to deduct your actualcan deduct the cost of the round-trip transportation be-
car or truck expenses.tween your home and your clients.
If you qualify to use both methods, figure your
deduction both ways to see which gives you aMethods for Deducting
larger deduction.
TIP
Car and Truck Expenses
Actual car expenses include the costs of the following
For local transportation or overnight travel by car or truck,items.
you generally can use one of the following methods to
Depreciation Lease payments Registrationfigure your expenses.
Garage rent Licenses Repairs
Gas Oil Tires• Standard mileage rate.
Insurance Parking fees Tolls
• Actual expenses.
If you use your vehicle for both business and personal
purposes, you must divide your expenses between busi-
Standard mileage rate.You may be able to use the ness and personal use. You can divide your expenses
standard mileage rate to figure the deductible costs ofbased on the miles driven for each purpose.
operating your car, van, pickup, or panel truck for business
purposes. For 2004, the standard mileage rate is 37.5Example. You are the sole proprietor of a flower shop.
cents a mile for all business miles. You drove your van 20,000 miles during the year. 16,000
miles were for delivering flowers to customers and 4,000If you choose to use the standard mileage rate for
miles were for personal use. You can claim only 80%a year, you cannot deduct your actual expenses
(16,000 ÷ 20,000) of the cost of operating your van as afor that year except for business-related parkingCAUTION
!
business expense.fees and tolls.
Choosing the standard mileage rate.If you want to More information.For more information about the rules
use the standard mileage rate for a car or truck you own, for claiming car and truck expenses, see Publication 463,
you must choose to use it in the first year the car is Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car Expenses.
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 31

Page 32 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Section 179 deduction.You can elect to deduct a limitedReimbursing Your Employees
amount of the cost of certain depreciable property in thefor Expenses year you place the property in service. This deduction is
known as the “section 179 deduction.” The maximumYou generally can deduct the amount you reimburse youramount you can elect to deduct during 2004 is $102,000.employees for car and truck expenses. The reimburse-
This limit is reduced by the amount by which the cost of thement you deduct and the manner in which you deduct it
property placed in service during the tax year exceedsdepend in part on whether you reimburse the expenses
$410,000. The total amount of depreciation (including theunder an accountable plan or a nonaccountable plan. For
section 179 deduction and the special depreciation allow-details, see chapter 13 in Publication 535. That chapter
ance) you can take for a passenger automobile you use inexplains accountable and nonaccountable plans and tells
your business and first place in service in 2004 is $10,610.you whether to report the reimbursement on your
Special rules apply to electric vehicles and trucks andemployee’s Form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement.
vans. For more information, see Publication 946. It ex-
plains what property qualifies for the deduction, what limits
apply to the deduction, and when and how to recapture the
Depreciation deduction.
Your section 179 election for the cost of any sportIf property you acquire to use in your business is expected
utility vehicle (SUV) and certain other vehiclesto last more than one year, you generally cannot deduct
placed in service after October 22, 2004, is lim-the entire cost as a business expense in the year youCAUTION
!
ited to $25,000. For more information, see the Instructionsacquire it. You must spread the cost over more than one
for Form 4562 or Publication 946.tax year and deduct part of it each year on Schedule C.
This method of deducting the cost of business property is
called depreciation. Special depreciation allowance.You may be able to
The discussion here is brief. You will find more informa-claim an additional 50% (30%, if applicable) special depre-
tion about depreciation in Publication 946, How To Depre-ciation allowance. The special depreciation allowance is
ciate Property. an additional deduction you can take before you figure
MACRS depreciation for the year you place the property in
What property can be depreciated?You can depreciate service. For more information, see the instructions for
property if it meets all the following requirements.Form 4562 or Publication 946.
• It must be property you own.
Listed property.Listed property is any of the following.• It must be used in business or held to produce in-
come. You never can depreciate inventory (ex- • Most passenger automobiles.
plained in chapter 2) because it is not held for use in• Most other property used for transportation.your business.
• Any property of a type generally used for entertain-• It must have a useful life that extends substantiallyment, recreation, or amusement.beyond the year it is placed in service.
• Certain computers and related peripheral equipment.• It must have a determinable useful life, which means
that it must be something that wears out, decays,• Any cellular telephone (or similar telecommunica-
gets used up, becomes obsolete, or loses its valuetions equipment).
from natural causes. You never can depreciate the
cost of land because land does not wear out, be- You must follow special rules and recordkeeping re-
come obsolete, or get used up. quirements when depreciating listed property. For more
information about listed property, see Publication 946.• It must not be excepted property. This includes prop-
erty placed in service and disposed of in the same
year. Form 4562. Use Form 4562, Depreciation and Amortiza-
tion, if you are claiming any of the following.
Repairs. You cannot depreciate repairs and replace-
• Depreciation on property placed in service during thements that do not increase the value of your property,current tax year.make it more useful, or lengthen its useful life. You can
• A section 179 deduction.deduct these amounts on line 21 of Schedule C or line 2 of
Schedule C-EZ. • Depreciation on any listed property (regardless of
when it was placed in service).
Depreciation method.The method for depreciating most
business and investment property placed in service after
If you have to use Form 4562, you must file1986 is called the Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery
Schedule C. You cannot use Schedule C-EZ.System (MACRS). MACRS is discussed in detail in Publi-
CAUTION
!
cation 946.
Page 32 Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 33 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Accident and health plans.
Employees’ Pay • Adoption assistance.
You can generally deduct on Schedule C the pay you give• Cafeteria plans.your employees for the services they perform for your
• Dependent care assistance.business. The pay may be in cash, property, or services.
To be deductible, your employees’ pay must be an • Educational assistance.
ordinary and necessary expense and you must pay or
• Group-term life insurance coverage.incur it in the tax year. In addition, the pay must meet both
the following tests. • Welfare benefit funds.
• The pay must be reasonable. You can generally deduct the cost of fringe benefits you
• The pay must be for services performed. provide on your Schedule C in whatever category the cost
falls. For example, if you allow an employee to use a car orChapter 2 in Publication 535 explains and defines these
other property you lease, deduct the cost of the lease as arequirements.
rent or lease expense. If you own the property, includeYou cannot deduct your own salary or any personalyour deduction for its cost or other basis as a section 179withdrawals you make from your business. As a sole pro-deduction or a depreciation deduction.prietor, you are not an employee of the business.
You may be able to exclude all or part of the fringeIf you had employees during the year, you must benefits you provide from your employees’use Schedule C. You cannot use Schedule C-EZ. wages. For more information about fringe bene-
TIP
CAUTION
!
fits and the exclusion of benefits, see Publication 15-B,
Employer’s Tax Guide to Fringe Benefits.
Kinds of pay.Some of the ways you may provide pay to
your employees are listed below. For an explanation ofInsuranceeach of these items, see chapter 2 in Publication 535.
You can generally deduct premiums you pay for the follow-• Awards.
ing kinds of insurance related to your business. • Bonuses.
1. Fire, theft, flood, or similar insurance.• Education expenses.
2. Credit insurance that covers losses from business• Fringe benefits (discussed later).
bad debts.• Loans or advances you do not expect the employee
3. Group hospitalization and medical insurance for em-to repay if they are for personal services actually
performed. ployees, including long-term care insurance.
• Property you transfer to an employee as payment for4. Liability insurance.
services. 5. Malpractice insurance that covers your personal lia-
• Reimbursements for employee business expenses. bility for professional negligence resulting in injury or
damage to patients or clients.• Sick pay.
6. Workers’ compensation insurance set by state law• Vacation pay. that covers any claims for bodily injuries or job-re-
lated diseases suffered by employees in your busi-Fringe benefits.A fringe benefit is a form of pay for the
ness, regardless of fault.performance of services. The following are examples of
fringe benefits. 7. Contributions to a state unemployment insurance
fund are deductible as taxes if they are considered• Benefits under qualified employee benefit programs.
taxes under state law.
• Meals and lodging.
8. Overhead insurance that pays for business overhead
• The use of a car. expenses you have during long periods of disability
caused by your injury or sickness.• Flights on airplanes.
9. Car and other vehicle insurance that covers vehicles• Discounts on property or services.
used in your business for liability, damages, and• Memberships in country clubs or other social clubs.other losses. If you operate a vehicle partly for per-
sonal use, deduct only the part of the insurance pre-• Tickets to entertainment or sporting events.
mium that applies to the business use of the vehicle.
If you use the standard mileage rate to figure yourEmployee benefit programs include the following.
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 33

Page 34 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
car expenses, you cannot deduct any car insurance deduction. However, if any of the following apply, you must
premiums. use the worksheet in chapter 7 of Publication 535.
10. Life insurance covering your employees if you are• You have more than one source of income subject to
not directly or indirectly the beneficiary under theself-employment tax.
contract. • You file Form 2555 or Form 2555-EZ (relating to
11. Business interruption insurance that pays for lostforeign earned income).
profits if your business is shut down due to a fire or• You are using amounts paid for qualified long-termother cause. care insurance to figure the deduction.
Nondeductible premiums.You cannot deduct premiums
Prepayment. You cannot deduct expenses in advance,on the following kinds of insurance.
even if you pay them in advance. This rule applies to any
1. Self-insurance reserve funds. You cannot deductexpense paid far enough in advance to, in effect, create an
amounts credited to a reserve set up for self-insur-asset with a useful life extending substantially beyond the
ance. This applies even if you cannot get businessend of the current tax year.
insurance coverage for certain business risks. How-
ever, your actual losses may be deductible. For moreExample. In 2004, you signed a 3-year insurance con-
information, see Publication 547, Casualties, Disas-tract. Even though you paid the premiums for 2004, 2005,
ters, and Thefts. and 2006 when you signed the contract, you can only
deduct the premium for 2004 on your 2004 tax return. You2. Loss of earnings. You cannot deduct premiums for a
can deduct in 2005 and 2006 the premium allocable topolicy that pays for your lost earnings due to sick-
those years.ness or disability. However, see item (8) in the previ-
ous list.
More information.For more information about deducting
3. Certain life insurance and annuities. insurance, see chapter 7 in Publication 535.
a. For contracts issued before June 9, 1997, you
cannot deduct the premiums on a life insurance
Interestpolicy covering you, an employee, or any person
with a financial interest in your business if you are
You can generally deduct as a business expense all inter-directly or indirectly a beneficiary of the policy.
est you pay or accrue during the tax year on debts relatedYou are included among possible beneficiaries of
to your business. Interest relates to your business if youthe policy if the policy owner is obligated to repay
use the proceeds of the loan for a business expense. Ita loan from you using the proceeds of the policy.
does not matter what type of property secures the loan.A person has a financial interest in your business
You can deduct interest on a debt only if you meet all of theif the person is an owner or part owner of the
following requirements.business or has lent money to the business.
b. For contracts issued after June 8, 1997, you gen-• You are legally liable for that debt.
erally cannot deduct the premiums on any life• Both you and the lender intend that the debt beinsurance policy, endowment contract, or annuityrepaid.contract if you are directly or indirectly a benefi-
ciary. The disallowance applies without regard to• You and the lender have a true debtor-creditor rela-
whom the policy covers. tionship.
4. Insurance to secure a loan. If you take out a policy You cannot deduct on Schedule C or C-EZ the interest
on your life or on the life of another person with a you paid on personal loans. If a loan is part business and
financial interest in your business to get or protect a part personal, you must divide the interest between the
business loan, you cannot deduct the premiums as a personal part and the business part.
business expense. Nor can you deduct the premiums
Example. In 2004, you paid $600 interest on a car loan.as interest on business loans or as an expense of
During 2004, you used the car 60% for business and 40%financing loans. In the event of death, the proceeds
for personal purposes. You are claiming actual expensesof the policy are not taxed as income even if they are
on the car. You can only deduct $360 (60% × $600) forused to liquidate the debt.
2004 on Schedule C or C-EZ. The remaining interest of
$240 is a nondeductible personal expense.Self-employed health insurance deduction.You may
be able to deduct the amount you paid for medical and
More information.For more information about deductingdental insurance and qualified long-term care insurance
interest, see chapter 5 in Publication 535. That chapterfor you and your family.
explains the following items.How to figure the deduction.Generally, you can use
the worksheet in the Form 1040 instructions to figure your
• Interest you can deduct.
Page 34 Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 35 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Interest you cannot deduct. (including a 401(k) plan), SIMPLE plan, or simplified em-
ployee pension.• How to allocate interest between personal and busi-Under certain plans, employees can have you contrib-ness use. ute limited amounts of their before-tax pay to a plan. These
• When to deduct interest. amounts (and earnings on them) are generally tax free
until your employees receive distributions from the plan.• The rules for a below-market interest rate loan. (ThisFor more information on retirement plans for small busi-is generally a loan on which no interest is charged orness, see Publication 560, Retirement Plans for Smallon which interest is charged at a rate below theBusiness (SEP, SIMPLE, and Qualified Plans).applicable federal rate.)
Publication 590, Individual Retirement Arrange-
ments (IRAs), discusses other tax favored ways
to save for retirement.
TIP
Legal and Professional Fees
Legal and professional fees, such as fees charged by
accountants, that are ordinary and necessary expenses
Rent Expense
directly related to operating your business are deductible
Rent is any amount you pay for the use of property you doon Schedule C or C-EZ. However, you usually cannot
not own. In general, you can deduct rent as a businessdeduct legal fees you pay to acquire business assets. Add
expense only if the rent is for property you use in yourthem to the basis of the property.
business. If you have or will receive equity in or title to theIf the fees include payments for work of a personal
property, you cannot deduct the rent.nature (such as making a will), you can take a business
deduction only for the part of the fee related to yourUnreasonable rent.You cannot take a rental deductionbusiness. The personal part of legal fees for producing orfor unreasonable rents. Ordinarily, the issue of reasona-collecting taxable income, doing or keeping your job, or forbleness arises only if you and the lessor are related. Renttax advice may be deductible on Schedule A (Form 1040) ifpaid to a related person is reasonable if it is the sameyou itemize deductions. For more information, see Publi-amount you would pay to a stranger for use of the samecation 529, Miscellaneous Deductions. property. Rent is not unreasonable just because it is fig-
Tax preparation fees.You can deduct on Schedule Cured as a percentage of gross receipts.
or C-EZ the cost of preparing that part of your tax returnRelated persons include members of your immediate
relating to your business as a sole proprietor or statutoryfamily, including only brothers and sisters (either whole or
employee. You can deduct the remaining cost on Schedulehalf), your spouse, ancestors, and lineal descendants. For
A (Form 1040) if you itemize your deductions. a list of the other related persons, see Publication 538,
You can also deduct on Schedule C or C-EZ the amountAccounting Periods and Methods.
you pay or incur in resolving asserted tax deficiencies forRent on your home.If you rent your home and use part ofyour business as a sole proprietor or statutory employee.it as your place of business, you may be able to deduct the
rent you pay for that part. You must meet the requirements
for business use of your home. For more information, seePension Plans Business Use of Your Home, later.
Rent paid in advance.Generally, rent paid in your busi-You can set up and maintain the following small business
ness is deductible in the year paid or accrued. If you payretirement plans for yourself and your employees.
rent in advance, you can deduct only the amount that• SEP (Simplified Employee Pension) plans. applies to your use of the rented property during the tax
year. You can deduct the rest of your payment only over• SIMPLE (Savings Incentive Match Plan for Employ-
the period to which it applies.ees) plans.
• Qualified plans (including Keogh or H.R. 10 plans).More information.For more information about rent, see
chapter 4 in Publication 535.
SEP, SIMPLE, and qualified plans offer you and your
employees a tax favored way to save for retirement. You
can deduct contributions you make to the plan for yourTaxesemployees on line 19 of Schedule C. If you are a sole
proprietor, you can deduct contributions you make to theYou can deduct on Schedule C or C-EZ various federal,plan for yourself on line 32 of Form 1040. You can alsostate, local, and foreign taxes directly attributable to yourdeduct trustees’ fees if contributions to the plan do notbusiness.cover them. Earnings on the contributions are generally tax
free until you or your employees receive distributions fromIncome taxes.You can deduct on Schedule C or C-EZ a
the plan. You may also be able to claim a tax credit of 50% state tax on gross income (as distinguished from net in-
of the first $1,000 of qualified startup costs if you begin a come) directly attributable to your business. You can de-
new qualified defined benefit or defined contribution plan duct other state and local income taxes on Schedule A
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 35

Page 36 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
(Form 1040) if you itemize your deductions. Do not deductDo not deduct state and local sales taxes im-
posed on the buyer that you must collect and payfederal income tax.
over to the state or local government. Do notCAUTION
!
include these taxes in gross receipts or sales.Employment taxes. You can deduct the social security,
Medicare, and federal unemployment (FUTA) taxes you
Excise taxes.You can deduct on Schedule C or C-EZ allpaid out of your own funds as an employer. Employment
excise taxes that are ordinary and necessary expenses oftaxes are discussed briefly in chapter 1. You can also
carrying on your business. Excise taxes are discusseddeduct payments you made as an employer to a state
briefly in chapter 1.unemployment compensation fund or to a state disability
benefit fund. Deduct these payments as taxes. Fuel taxes.Taxes on gasoline, diesel fuel, and other
motor fuels you use in your business are usually includedSelf-employment tax.You can deduct one-half of youras part of the cost of the fuel. Do not deduct these taxes asself-employment tax on line 30 of Form 1040. Self-employ-a separate item.ment tax is explained in chapter 1. You may be entitled to a credit or refund for federal
excise tax you paid on fuels used for certain purposes. ForPersonal property tax.You can deduct on Schedule C ormore information, see Publication 378, Fuel Tax CreditsC-EZ any tax imposed by a state or local government onand Refunds.personal property used in your business.
You can also deduct registration fees for the right to use
property within a state or local area. Travel, Meals,
Example. May and Julius Winter drove their car 7,000and Entertainmentbusiness miles out of a total of 10,000 miles. They had to
pay $25 for their annual state license tags and $20 for theirThis section briefly explains the kinds of travel and enter-
city registration sticker. They also paid $235 in city per-tainment expenses you can deduct on Schedule C or
sonal property tax on the car, for a total of $280. They areC-EZ.
claiming their actual car expenses. Because they used the
car 70% for business, they can deduct 70% of the $280, orTravel expenses.These are the ordinary and necessary
$196, as a business expense. expenses of traveling away from home for your business.
You are traveling away from home if both the following
Real estate taxes.You can deduct on Schedule C or conditions are met.
C-EZ the real estate taxes you pay on your business
1. Your duties require you to be away from the generalproperty. Deductible real estate taxes are any state, local,
area of your tax home (defined later) substantiallyor foreign taxes on real estate levied for the general public
longer than an ordinary day’s work.welfare. The taxing authority must base the taxes on the
assessed value of the real estate and charge them uni-2. You need to get sleep or rest to meet the demands
formly against all property under its jurisdiction. of your work while away from home.
For more information about real estate taxes, see chap-Generally, your tax home is your regular place of busi-ter 6 in Publication 535. That chapter explains special rulesness, regardless of where you maintain your family home.for deducting the following items. It includes the entire city or general area in which your
business is located. See Publication 463 for more• Taxes for local benefits, such as those for sidewalks,
information.streets, water mains, and sewer lines.
The following is a brief summary of the expenses you• Real estate taxes when you buy or sell propertycan deduct.during the year.
Transportation.You can deduct the cost of travel by• Real estate taxes if you use an accrual method ofairplane, train, bus, or car between your home and youraccounting and choose to accrue real estate taxbusiness destination.
related to a definite period ratably over that period.
Taxi, commuter bus, and limousine.You can deduct
fares for these and other types of transportation between
Sales tax.Treat any sales tax you pay on a service or onthe airport or station and your hotel, or between the hotel
the purchase or use of property as part of the cost of theand your work location away from home.
service or property. If the service or the cost or use of the
Baggage and shipping. You can deduct the cost ofproperty is a deductible business expense, you can deduct
sending baggage and sample or display material betweenthe tax as part of that service or cost. If the property isyour regular and temporary work locations.merchandise bought for resale, the sales tax is part of the
cost of the merchandise. If the property is depreciable, addCar or truck.You can deduct the costs of operating and
the sales tax to the basis for depreciation. For informationmaintaining your vehicle when traveling away from home
on the basis of property, see Publication 551, Basis ofon business. You can deduct actual expenses or the stan-
Assets. dard mileage rate (discussed earlier under Car and Truck
Page 36 Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 37 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 8-1. When Are Entertainment Expenses Deductible?
(Note. The following is a summary of the rules for deducting entertainment expenses. For more details
about these rules, see Publication 463.) 
General rule You can deduct ordinary and necessary expenses to entertain a client, customer, or
employee if the expenses meet the directly-related test or the associated test.
Definitions • Entertainment includes any activity generally considered to provide entertainment,
amusement, or recreation, and includes meals provided to a customer or client.
• An ordinary expense is one that is common and accepted in your field of business,
trade, or profession.
• A necessary expense is one that is helpful and appropriate, although not necessarily
required, for your business.
Tests to be met Directly-related test
• Entertainment took place in a clear business setting, or
• Main purpose of entertainment was the active conduct of business, and
You did engage in business with the person during the entertainment period, and
You had more than a general expectation of getting income or some other specific
business benefit
Associated test
• Entertainment is associated with your trade or business, and
• Entertainment directly precedes or follows a substantial business discussion.
Other rules • You cannot deduct the cost of your meal as an entertainment expense if you are claiming
the meal as a travel expense.
• You cannot deduct expenses that are lavish or extravagant under the circumstances.
• You generally can deduct only 50% of your unreimbursed entertainment expenses.
Expenses), as well as business-related tolls and parking. If• Providing meals, a hotel suite, or a car to business
you rent a car while away from home on business, you cancustomers or their families.
deduct only the business-use portion of the expenses.To be deductible, the expenses must meet the rules listed
Meals and lodging.You can deduct the cost of mealsin Table 8-1. For details about these rules, see Publication
and lodging if your business trip is overnight or long463.
enough that you need to stop for sleep or rest to properly
perform your duties. In most cases, you can deduct onlyReimbursing your employees for expenses.You gen-
50% of your meal expenses. erally can deduct the amount you reimburse your employ-
ees for travel and entertainment expenses. TheCleaning.You can deduct the costs of dry cleaning and
reimbursement you deduct and the manner in which youlaundry while on your business trip.
deduct it depend in part on whether you reimburse theTelephone. You can deduct the cost of business callsexpenses under an accountable plan or a nonaccountablewhile on your business trip, including business communi-plan. For details, see chapter 13 in Publication 535. Thatcation by fax machine or other communication devices.chapter explains accountable and nonaccountable plans
Tips.You can deduct the tips you pay for any expenseand tells you whether to report the reimbursement on your
in this list. employee’s Form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement.
More information.For more information about travel
expenses, see Publication 463, Travel, Entertainment,
Gift, and Car Expenses. Business Use
Entertainment expenses.You may be able to deduct of Your Homebusiness-related entertainment expenses for entertaining
a client, customer, or employee. In most cases, you canTo deduct expenses related to the part of your home useddeduct only 50% of these expenses. for business, you must meet specific requirements. Even
The following are examples of entertainment expenses.then, your deduction may be limited.
To qualify to claim expenses for business use of your• Entertaining guests at nightclubs, athletic clubs, the-
home, you must meet the following tests.aters, or sporting events.
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 37

Page 38 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Your home office will qualify as your principal place of
1. Your use of the business part of your home must be:business for deducting expenses for its use if you meet the
following requirements.a. Exclusive (however, see Exceptions to exclusive
use, later), • You use it exclusively and regularly for administra-
tive or management activities of your business.b. Regular,
• You have no other fixed location where you conductc. For your business, and
substantial administrative or management activities
of your business.2. The business part of your home must be one of the
following:
Alternatively, if you use your home exclusively and regu-
a. Your principal place of business (defined later),larly for your business, but your home office does not
qualify as your principal place of business based on theb. A place where you meet or deal with patients,
previous rules, you determine your principal place of busi-clients, or customers in the normal course of your
ness based on the following factors.business, or
c. A separate structure (not attached to your home)• The relative importance of the activities performed at
you use in connection with your business. each location.
• If the relative importance factor does not determine
your principal place of business, you can also con-Exclusive use.To qualify under the exclusive use test,sider the time spent at each location.you must use a specific area of your home only for your
trade or business. The area used for business can be aIf, after considering your business locations, your home
room or other separately identifiable space. The spacecannot be identified as your principal place of business,
does not need to be marked off by a permanent partition.you cannot deduct home office expenses. However, for
other ways to qualify to deduct home office expenses, seeYou do not meet the requirements of the exclusive use
Publication 587.test if you use the area in question both for business and
for personal purposes.
Deduction limit.If your gross income from the business
Example. You are an attorney and use a den in youruse of your home equals or exceeds your total business
home to write legal briefs and prepare clients’ tax returns.expenses (including depreciation), you can deduct all your
Your family also uses the den for recreation. The den is notbusiness expenses related to the use of your home. If your
used exclusively in your profession, so you cannot claim agross income from the business use is less than your total
business deduction for its use. business expenses, your deduction for certain expenses
for the business use of your home is limited.Exceptions to exclusive use.You do not have to meet
the exclusive use test if you use part of your home in eitherYour deduction of otherwise nondeductible expenses,
of the following ways. such as insurance, utilities, and depreciation (with depreci-
ation taken last), allocable to the business is limited to the
gross income from the business use of your home minus1. For the storage of inventory or product samples.
the sum of the following.
2. As a daycare facility.
1. The business part of expenses you could deductFor an explanation of these exceptions, see Publication
even if you did not use your home for business (such587, Business Use of Your Home (Including Use by Day-
as mortgage interest, real estate taxes, and casualtycare Providers).
and theft losses that are allowable as itemized de-
ductions on Schedule A (Form 1040)).Regular use.To qualify under the regular use test, you
must use a specific area of your home for business on a2. The business expenses that relate to the business
continuing basis. You do not meet the test if your businessactivity in the home (for example, business phone,
use of the area is only occasional or incidental, even if yousupplies, and depreciation on equipment), but not to
do not use that area for any other purpose. the use of the home itself.
Do not include in (2) above your deduction for one-half of
Principal place of business.You can have more than your self-employment tax.
one business location, including your home, for a singleUse Form 8829, Expenses for Business Use of Yourtrade or business. To qualify to deduct the expenses forHome, to figure your deduction. the business use of your home under the principal place of
business test, your home must be your principal place of
business for that business. To determine your principalMore information.For more information on deducting
place of business, you must consider all the facts and expenses for the business use of your home, see Publica-
circumstances. tion 587.
Page 38 Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 39 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Other Expenses 9.You Can Deduct
Figuring Net ProfitYou may also be able to deduct the following expenses.
See Publication 535 to find out whether you can deduct
or Lossthem.
• Advertising.
Introduction• Clean-fuel vehicles and refueling property.
After figuring your business income and expenses, you are• Donations to business organizations.
ready to figure the net profit or net loss from your business.• Education expenses. You do this by subtracting business expenses from busi-
ness income. If your expenses are less than your income,• Environmental cleanup costs.
the difference is net profit and becomes part of your in-• Impairment-related expenses. come on page 1 of Form 1040. If your expenses are more
than your income, the difference is a net loss. You usually• Interview expense allowances.
can deduct it from gross income on page 1 of Form 1040.• Licenses and regulatory fees. But in some situations your loss is limited. This chapter
briefly explains two of those situations. Other situations• Moving machinery.
that may limit your loss are explained in the instructions for• Outplacement services. line G and line 32 of Schedule C.
• Penalties and fines you pay for late performance or If you have more than one business, you mustnonperformance of a contract. figure your net profit or loss for each business on
• Repairs that keep your property in a normal efficienta separate Schedule C.CAUTION
!
operating condition.
• Repayments of income.
Net Operating Losses (NOLs)• Subscriptions to trade or professional publications.
• Supplies and materials. If your deductions for the year are more than your income
for the year (line 40 of your Form 1040 is a negative• Utilities.
number), you may have a net operating loss (NOL). You
can use an NOL by deducting it from your income in
another year or years.
Expenses You Cannot Deduct Examples of typical losses that may produce an NOL
include, but are not limited to, losses incurred from the
You usually cannot deduct the following as business ex-following.
penses. For more information, see Publication 535. • Your trade or business.
• Bribes and kickbacks. • Your work as an employee (unreimbursed employee
• Charitable contributions. business expenses).
• Demolition expenses or losses. • A casualty or theft.
• Dues to business, social, athletic, luncheon, sport-• Moving expenses.
ing, airline, and hotel clubs. • Rental property.
• Lobbying expenses.
A loss from operating a business is the most common• Penalties and fines you pay to a governmental reason for an NOL.agency or instrumentality because you broke the
For details about NOLs, see Publication 536, Net Oper-law.
ating Losses (NOLs) for Individuals, Estates, and Trusts. It
• Political contributions. explains how to figure an NOL, when to use it, how to claim
an NOL deduction, and how to figure an NOL carryover.• Repairs that add to the value of your property or
significantly increase its life.
Not-for-Profit Activities
If you do not carry on your business to make a profit, there
is a limit on the deductions you can take. You cannot use a
Chapter 9 Figuring Net Profit or LossPage 39

Page 40 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
loss from the activity to offset other income. Activities youLine G.Susan checks “Yes” because she materially par-
do as a hobby, or mainly for sport or recreation, come ticipated in her business during the year. The material
under this limit. participation rules are explained in the instructions for
For details about not-for-profit activities, see chapter 1 Schedule C.
in Publication 535, Business Expenses. That chapter ex-Line H.She leaves the box blank because she did notplains how to determine whether your activity is carried onstart or acquire her business during the year.to make a profit and how to figure the amount of loss you
can deduct.
Part I. Income and
Part III. Cost of Goods Sold
Susan enters items of income in Part I.
10. Line 1.Susan enters her total sales of $410,000 for the
year.
Sample Returns Line 2.She enters the refunds she gave on merchandise
her customers returned, as well as other adjustments sheThis chapter shows how two sole proprietors fill out theirmade to customers’ purchases. They total $1,442.income tax returns. Susan J. Brown reports her net profit
from her business on Schedule C. She cannot use Sched-Line 3.She subtracts line 2 from line 1 and enters
ule C-EZ. Stanley Price reports his net profit from his$408,558.
business on Schedule C-EZ. Line 4.Susan uses Part III on page 2 of Schedule C to
figure her cost of goods sold ($239,349).
Part III, line 33.She checks box “a,” Cost, to show thePreparing the Return
method used to value her inventory.
for Susan J. Brown Part III, line 34.She checks box “No” since there were
no inventory method changes.Susan J. Brown owns and operates Family Fashions, a
ready-to-wear clothing shop. She uses an accrual methodPart III, line 35.Her inventory at the beginning of the
of accounting and files her return on a calendar year basis.year, $42,843, is the same as her inventory at the end of
Five employees worked in her shop during the year.last year. This figure matches the amount on Part III, line
She filed all the necessary employment tax forms and41, of her last year’s Schedule C.
made the required tax deposits. See Publication 15 (Circu-Part III, line 36.The total cost of goods she bought tolar E), Employer’s Tax Guide. sell to customers, minus the cost of the goods she returned
to her suppliers, was $241,026. From this stock, she with-
Schedule C drew clothing and accessories for her own use that cost
$774. She subtracts the cost of these items from her totalFirst, Susan fills in the information required at the top ofpurchases to figure net purchases of $240,252.Schedule C. She starts by entering her name and social
Part III, line 40.Because Susan did not have any costssecurity number. Then she completes lines A through H.
to enter on lines 37 through 39, she adds her netLine A.She enters her principal business activity which ispurchases (line 36) to her beginning inventory (line 35) andfound on page C-9 of the Instructions for Schedule C.enters $283,095 on line 40. This sum is the total goodsSusan locates the major business category that describesSusan had available for sale during the year.her business. She reads down the items under “Retail
Part III, line 41.Susan’s inventory at the end of the yearTrade” to find “Family clothing stores.”
was $43,746.
Line B.She enters 448140, which is the 6-digit business
Part III, line 42.Susan subtracts her inventory at thecode for a family clothing store. She found the code on
end of the year (line 41) from the goods that were availablepage C-9 of the instructions for Schedule C.
for sale (line 40) to get the cost of goods sold during the
Line C.She enters the name of her business—“Familyyear. She enters $239,349 on line 42 and on line 4 of Part I.
Fashions.” For more information on inventories, see chapter 2. For
more information on cost of goods sold, see chapter 6.Line D. She enters her employer identification number
(EIN). She has to have an EIN because she has employ-Line 5.Susan subtracts the cost of goods sold, $239,349ees. For information about EINs, see Identification Num-(line 4), from the amount on line 3, $408,558, and entersbers in chapter 1. $169,209 on line 5.
Line E.She enters her business address. Line 7.Because Susan did not have any income to report
Line F.She checks box 2 for accrual method of account- on line 6, the gross income is the same as the gross profit
ing. (line 5). She enters $169,209 on line 7.
Page 40 Chapter 10 Sample Returns

Page 41 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Line 30.Susan did not use any part of her home forPart II. Expenses
business, so she does not make an entry here. For infor-
Susan enters her expense items in Part II. mation about business use of the home, see Business Use
of Your Home in chapter 8.Line 8.Susan paid $3,500 for advertising.
Line 31.Susan has a net profit of $55,153 (line 29 minusLine 9.She used her van 75% for business during theline 30). She enters her net profit here, on line 12 of Formyear. She spent a total of $3,000 for gas and oil. Other van1040, and on Schedule SE (Form 1040), Section A, line 2.expenses include $950 for insurance, $1,083 for repairs
Line 32.Susan does not have a loss, so she skips thisand upkeep, and $100 for tags. She multiplies the sum of
line. If she had a loss and she was not “at risk” for all herthese expenses ($5,133) by 75% and enters the total
investment in the business, the amount of loss she could($3,850) on line 9. See Car and Truck Expenses in chapter
enter on line 12 of Form 1040 might be limited. For an8.
explanation of an investment “at risk,” see the Schedule C
Line 13.Susan enters the $12,066 depreciation frominstructions for line 32.
Form 4562, discussed later.
Form 4562. DepreciationLine 15.Susan enters $1,400 for insurance on her busi-
ness property (van insurance is included in line 9). Theand Amortization
deduction is only for premiums that give her coverage for
the year. See Insurance in chapter 8. Susan figures her depreciation for the year on Form 4562.
In June 2004, she purchased a computer and printerLine 16b.Susan had borrowed money to use in her busi-($3,050), off-the-shelf software ($600), and a new vanness. The interest on these loans was $2,633 for the year.($18,667). In September 2004, she purchased a sewingSee Interest in chapter 8. machine ($1,236) to use in her store. The computer,
printer, and sewing machine are used 100% for business.Line 18.Susan enters $500 for postage and computer
Before Susan can make decisions concerning the types ofsupplies.
depreciation to take, she must first determine the class of
Line 20b.Her rent for the store was $1,000 a month, orthe property. Computers and peripheral equipment are
$12,000 for the year. See Rent Expense in chapter 8. 5-year property. Vans are 5-year property. Sewing ma-
chines do not have a designated class life, so they areLine 22.She spent $1,203 on supplies. considered to be 7-year property.
Susan fills in the information required at the top of FormLine 23.Susan renewed her business license and paid
4562. She enters her name, the name of her business, andproperty tax on her store fixtures. She also paid the em-
her social security number.ployers share of social security and Medicare taxes for her
employees and paid state and federal unemploymentLines 1 and 3. The maximum amount which can betaxes. She enters the total of all these taxes, $5,727, onclaimed as a section 179 deduction ($102,000) is shownthis line. See Taxes in chapter 8. on line 1. The threshold cost of section 179 property before
reduction in limitation ($410,000) is shown on line 3.Line 25.Susan’s total expense for heat, light, and tele-
phone for the year is $3,570. Line 2.Susan elects to claim a section 179 deduction for
the sewing machine ($1,236) and for the off-the-shelfLine 26.Susan paid her employees a total of $59,050 for
software ($600). She enters $1,836.the year. She does not include in wages any amounts she
paid to herself or withdrew from the business for her ownLine 4.She subtracts line 3 from line 2. Since line 2 is less
use. See Employees’ Pay in chapter 8. than line 3, she enters -0-.
Line 27.Susan enters the total of her other businessLine 5.She subtracts line 4 from line 1 and enters
expenses on this line. These expenses are not included on$102,000.
lines 8 through 26. She lists the type and amount of theLine 6.She enters “off-the-shelf software” on the first lineexpenses separately in Part V of page 2 and carries thein column (a), and enters $600 in columns (b) and (c). Shetotal ($8,557) to line 27. In Part V, she enters bad debts ofenters “sewing machine” on the second line of column (a),$479, bank service charges of $180, Chamber of Com-and enters $1,236 in columns (b) and (c).merce dues of $60, credit card fees of $6,000, trash re-
moval expenses of $1,600, and window washing of $238Line 8.There is no entry in line 7 since she is not claiming
for a total of $8,557. This amount is entered on line 48 anda section 179 expense deduction on any listed property.
Part I, line 27. See chapter 8 for expenses you can orShe totals the amounts in column (c), lines 6 and 7, and
cannot deduct. enters $1,836.
Line 28.Susan adds all her expenses listed in Part II andLine 9.She selects the smaller of either line 5 ($102,000)
enters $114,056 on this line. or line 8 ($1,836) and enters $1,836.
Line 29.She subtracts her total expenses (line 28) fromLine 11.Susan must make a computation for line 11.
her gross income (line 7). Susan has a tentative profit of Since she has no other business income, she can add the
$55,153. $1,836 taken as a section 179 deduction to the net profit
Chapter 10 Sample Returns Page 41

Page 42 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
shown in line 31 of Schedule C ($55,153) to arrive at a total 475 on line 32; and 10,000 on line 33. She checks “Yes” to
business income of $56,989. Since this amount is less lines 34, 35, and 36 because the van was available for
than the amount on line 5, she enters $56,989 on line 11. personal use, was used primarily by Susan, and she had
See Depreciation in chapter 8. another vehicle.
Line 19b.Since Susan claimed the 50% special deprecia-Line 12.She adds lines 9 and 10 for a total of $1,836.
tion allowance for the computer and peripheral equipmentSince this amount is smaller than the amount on line 11,
she must reduce the basis by the amount claimedshe can claim the total elected cost of the section 179
($1,525). Computers and peripheral equipment are 5-yeardeductions. She enters $1,836.
property. She uses the Modified Accelerated Cost Recov-
ery System (MACRS) to figure depreciation. Susan entersLine 14.Susan elects to take the 50% special deprecia-
$1,525 in column (c), 5 yr in column (d), HY in column (e),tion allowance on the 5-year property (the computer,
200 DB in column (f), and $305 in column (g). She usedprinter, and van). The van is considered listed property so
Table A-1 in Publication 946 to determine the percentageit is reported in Part V, line 25. The computer and periph-
she is allowed to take for the first year (20%). She multi-eral equipment are not considered listed property since
plies $1,525 by 20% (.20) to arrive at $305. See Publica-they are used 100% for business and are used only at a
tion 946 for information about MACRS.regular business establishment. The computer and printer
are used 100% for business, so she multiplies the cost ofLine 21.Susan had carried $8,400 from line 28 to line 21.$3,050 ($2,600 + $450) times 50% to arrive at the amount
allowed for the special depreciation allowance ($1,525)Line 22.Susan has a total depreciation deduction of
which is entered on line 14. $12,066. She enters her deduction here and on line 13 of
Schedule C.Part V, line 24a.She checks the “Yes” block since she
has supporting documentation for the business use
Schedule SE. Self-Employment Taxclaimed.
Part V, line 24b.She checks the “Yes” block since theAfter Susan prepares Schedule C, she fills out Schedule
evidence is written. SE. She starts by entering her name and social security
number at the top of the schedule. Then she reads thePart V, line 25.Since the van is used 75% for business,
chart on page 1 of the schedule, which tells her she canshe must multiply the cost, $18,667, times 75% to arrive at
use Section A–Short Schedule SE to figure her self-em-the amount allowed for business use, $14,000. Then she
ployment tax. She fills out the following lines in Section A.multiplies this amount times 50% to arrive at the amount
allowed for the special depreciation allowance for the van.Lines 2 and 3.She enters $55,153. This is her net profitShe enters $7,000 on line 25. from line 31 of Schedule C.
Part V, lines 26.On June 20, Susan bought the new Line 4.She multiplies $55,153 by 92.35% (.9235) to getvan that she placed in service in her business. She entersher net earnings from self-employment ($50,934). This isUSA 280 VAN on line 26, column (a); 06/20/04 in columnher net profit subject to self-employment tax.(b); 75 in column (c); 18,667 in column (d); 7,000 in column
Line 5. Because the amount on line 4 is less than(e); 5 yr in column (f); 200 DB/HY in column (g); 1,400 in
$87,900, Susan multiplies the amount on line 4 ($50,934)column (h); and -0- in column (i). The van weighs over
by 15.3% (.153) to get her self-employment tax of $7,793.6,000 pounds; therefore, it is not a passenger automobile
She enters that amount here and on line 57 of Form 1040.and is not subject to the special deduction limits. The van is
5-year property. She figures depreciation using the 200%Line 6.She multiplies the amount on line 5 by 50% (.5) todeclining balance method and applying the half-year con-get her deduction for one-half of self-employment tax ofvention under MACRS. The van cost $18,667. Her basis$3,897. She enters that amount here and on line 30 offor depreciation is 75% of $18,667, or $14,000, becauseForm 1040.only 75% of the total miles she drove during the year were
business miles. Since she elected to use the 50% special
Form 1040depreciation allowance, she must reduce her basis in the
van ($14,000) to $7,000. Susan does not elect to deductSusan fills out Form 1040 as follows:any part of the cost of the van as a section 179 deduction.
She used Table A-1 in Publication 946 to determine theName, address, and social security number.Susan
percentage she is allowed to take for the first year (20%).enters her name, home address, and social security num-
She multiplies $7,000 by 20% (.20) to arrive at $1,400. Sheber.
enters $1,400 on line 26, column (h).
Presidential election campaign fund.Susan chooses toPart V, line 28.She totals the amounts shown in col-have $3 go to this fund. She checks the box next to “Yes.”umn (h) ($7,000 + $1,400) and enters $8,400 on line 28
Line 1.Susan checks the box on this line because she isand Part IV, line 21.
filing as single.Part V, lines 30 through 36.Because Susan is a sole
proprietor, she must complete lines 30 through 36. InLines 6a and 6d.Susan claims an exemption for herself.
column (a) she enters 7,500 on line 30; 2,025 on line 31; She checks the box next to “Yourself” and enters “1” in the
Page 42 Chapter 10 Sample Returns

Page 43 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
far right-hand entry space. She also enters “1” in the box finds the bracket for incomes of at least $36,850 but less
on line 6d. than $36,900 and sees that the tax for a person filing as
single is $5,956. She enters this amount here.Line 8a.Susan enters $788 of taxable interest credited to
her personal savings account for the year. Lines 44 and 45.Because she does not owe alternative
minimum tax, she leaves line 44 blank and enters $5,956Line 12.She enters her business net profit of $55,153on line 45.from line 31 of Schedule C.
Lines 55 and 56.Because Susan does not have any ofLine 22.Susan adds the amounts on lines 7 through 21the credits listed on lines 46 through 54, she enters -0- onand enters the total, $55,941. line 55 and $5,956 on line 56.
Line 30.Susan enters one-half of her self-employmentLine 57.She enters $7,793 from line 5 in Section A oftax ($3,897). She got this amount from line 6 in Section ASchedule SE.of Schedule SE.
Line 62.Susan adds the amounts on lines 56 through 61Line 31.Susan enters $4,800 as her deduction for her
and enters the total, $13,749.health insurance premiums for the year. Her health insur-
ance plan was established under her business. Line 64.She enters $13,000 of estimated tax payments
she made for the year.Line 32.Susan enters her simplified employee pension
(SEP) deduction of $2,441. She figures her deduction byLine 70.She enters $13,000.using Publication 560.
Line 74.Susan subtracts line 70 from line 62 to get theLine 35.Susan adds the amounts on lines 23 through 34aamount of tax she owes and enters $749 on line 74. Sheand enters the total, $11,138. writes a check payable to the United States Treasury for
$749. On the check she writes her social security number,Line 36.Susan subtracts the amount on line 35 from the
her daytime telephone number, and “2004 Form 1040.”amount on line 22 to arrive at her adjusted gross income,
Her name and address are printed on the check. She$44,803. She also enters this amount on line 37.
sends her payment with Form 1040-V, Payment VoucherLine 39.She enters $4,850. This is the standard deduc-(not illustrated). She fills out that form and sends it to thetion for a single filer. IRS with her check and tax return. 
Line 40.Susan subtracts line 39 from line 37 to getSigning and assembling the return.She signs her$39,953. name and enters the date signed, her occupation, and a
daytime telephone number. Because she does not want toLine 41.She multiplies $3,100 by the number of exemp-
designate a third party to discuss her return with the IRS,tions claimed on line 6d to get her total exemptions,
she checks the “No” block in the Third Party Designee area$3,100.
just above the signature area. She assembles her originalLine 42.Susan subtracts line 41 from line 40 to get herForm 1040, Schedules C and SE, and Form 4562 in thattaxable income, $36,853. order. (See “Attachment Sequence No.” in the upper right
Line 43.Susan uses the Tax Table in the Form 1040 corner of each schedule or form.) Then she makes a copy
instructions to figure her income tax. In the Tax Table she of the return for her records. Finally, she mails it to the IRS.
looks for the income bracket that includes $36,853. She
Chapter 10 Sample Returns Page 43

Page 44 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
SUSAN J. BROWN
1313 EMPIRE BLVD.
ANYTOWN, NY 18725
/H12011
/H12011 1
1
/H12011
55,153
788
55,941
44,803
11,138
3,897
4,800
2,441
111 00 1111
Department of the Treasury—Internal Revenue Service
1040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
OMB No. 1545-0074For the year Jan. 1–Dec. 31, 2004, or other tax year beginning , 2004, ending , 20
Last nameYour first name and initial Your social security number
(See
instructions
on page 16.)
L
A
B
E
L
H
E
R
E
Last name Spouse’s social security numberIf a joint return, spouse’s first name and initial
Use the IRS
label.
Otherwise,
please print
or type.
Home address (number and street). If you have a P.O. box, see page 16. Apt. no.
City, town or post office, state, and ZIP code. If you have a foreign address, see page 16.
Presidential
Election Campaign
1 Single
Filing Status Married filing jointly (even if only one had income)2
Check only
one box.
3
Qualifying widow(er) with dependent child (see page 17)
6a Yourself. If someone can claim you as a dependent, do not check box 6a
Exemptions Spouseb
(4) if qualifying
child for child tax
credit (see page 18)
Dependents:c (2) Dependent’s
social security number
(3) Dependent’s
relationship to
you(1) First name Last name
If more than four
dependents, see
page 18.
d Total number of exemptions claimed
7Wages, salaries, tips, etc. Attach Form(s) W-27
8a8a Taxable interest. Attach Schedule B if requiredIncome
8bb Tax-exempt interest. Do not include on line 8aAttach Form(s)
W-2 here. Also
attach Forms
W-2G and
1099-R if tax
was withheld.
9a9a Ordinary dividends. Attach Schedule B if required
1010 Taxable refunds, credits, or offsets of state and local income taxes (see page 20)
1111 Alimony received
1212 Business income or (loss). Attach Schedule C or C-EZ
Enclose, but do
not attach, any
payment. Also,
please use
Form 1040-V.
13
13 Capital gain or (loss). Attach Schedule D if required. If not required, check here /H17075
1414 Other gains or (losses). Attach Form 4797
15a 15bIRA distributions b Taxable amount (see page 22)15a
16b16aPensions and annuities b Taxable amount (see page 22)16a
1717 Rental real estate, royalties, partnerships, S corporations, trusts, etc. Attach Schedule E
1818 Farm income or (loss). Attach Schedule F
1919 Unemployment compensation
20b20a b Taxable amount (see page 24)20a Social security benefits
2121
22 Add the amounts in the far right column for lines 7 through 21. This is your total income /H1707522
25IRA deduction (see page 26)
23
27
26
One-half of self-employment tax. Attach Schedule SE
29
Self-employed health insurance deduction (see page 30)
27
30
29
Self-employed SEP, SIMPLE, and qualified plans
31
30
Penalty on early withdrawal of savings
32
31
Alimony paid  b Recipient’s SSN /H17075
35Add lines 23 through 34a
32
Subtract line 35 from line 22. This is your adjusted gross income /H17075
33
Adjusted
Gross
Income 36
If you did not
get a W-2,
see page 19. Form
Married filing separately. Enter spouse’s SSN above
and full name here. /H17075
Cat. No. 11320B
/H17075
/H20854
Label
Form 1040 (2004)
IRS Use Only—Do not write or staple in this space.
Head of household (with qualifying person). (See page 17.) If
the qualifying person is a child but not your dependent, enter
this child’s name here. 
/H17075
Other income. List type and amount (see page 24)
Moving expenses. Attach Form 3903
25
26
For Disclosure, Privacy Act, and Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see page 75.
Boxes checked
on 6a and 6b
No. of children
on 6c who:
Dependents on 6c
not entered above
Add numbers on
lines above
/H17075
● lived with you
● did not live with
you due to divorce
or separation
(see page 18)
34a 34a
Student loan interest deduction (see page 28)
33
35
/H17073/H17073Important!
NoYes
Note. Checking “Yes” will not change your tax or reduce your refund.
Do you, or your spouse if filing a joint return, want $3 to go to this fund? /H17075
You must enter
your SSN(s) above.
YesNo
SpouseYou
(See page 16.)
(99)
Tuition and fees deduction (see page 29)
36
4
5
23Educator expenses (see page 26)
9bb Qualified dividends (see page 20)
2004
24 Certain business expenses of reservists, performing artists, and
fee-basis government officials. Attach Form 2106 or 2106-EZ 24
28 Health savings account deduction. Attach Form 8889 28
Page 44 Chapter 10 Sample Returns

Page 45 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
44,803
4,850
39,953
3,100
36,853
5,956
5,956
-0-
5,956
7,793
13,749
13,000
13,000
749
Susan J. Brown 3/27/05 Retail Shop Owner 735-0001555
/H12011
Married filing
jointly or
Qualifying
widow(er),
$9,700
Head of
household,
$7,150
Itemized deductions (from Schedule A) or your standard deduction (see left margin)
Add lines 63, 64, 65a, and 66 through 69. These are your total payments /H17075
Page 2Form 1040 (2004)
Amount from line 36 (adjusted gross income)37 37
Check
if:
38a
Tax and
Credits
38a
Single or
Married filing
separately,
$4,850
If your spouse itemizes on a separate return or you were a dual-status alien, see page 31 and check here /H17075b 38b
39 39
40Subtract line 39 from line 3740
41
If line 37 is $107,025 or less, multiply $3,100 by the total number of exemptions claimed on
line 6d. If line 37 is over $107,025, see the worksheet on page 33
41
42Taxable income. Subtract line 41 from line 40. If line 41 is more than line 40, enter -0-42
43 43
48
52
Education credits. Attach Form 8863
47
Other credits. Check applicable box(es):
46
55
56
Add lines 46 through 54. These are your total credits
Subtract line 55 from line 45. If line 55 is more than line 45, enter -0- /H17075
55
Self-employment tax. Attach Schedule SE
56
Other
Taxes
57
71
Social security and Medicare tax on tip income not reported to employer. Attach Form 4137
59Additional tax on IRAs, other qualified retirement plans, etc. Attach Form 5329 if required
58
60
Add lines 56 through 61. This is your total tax /H17075
61 61
Federal income tax withheld from Forms W-2 and 109963 63
642004 estimated tax payments and amount applied from 2003 return64
Payments
65a
68Amount paid with request for extension to file (see page 54)
67
66Excess social security and tier 1 RRTA tax withheld (see page 54)
68
70
Other payments from:69
72a72a
73 73
If line 70 is more than line 62, subtract line 62 from line 70. This is the amount you overpaid
74 74
Amount of line 71 you want refunded to you /H17075
Refund
75
Amount of line 71 you want applied to your 2005 estimated tax /H17075
Estimated tax penalty (see page 55)
Under penalties of perjury, I declare that I have examined this return and accompanying schedules and statements, and to the be st of my knowledge and
belief, they are true, correct, and complete. Declaration of preparer (other than taxpayer) is based on all information of whic h preparer has any knowledge.
75
You were born before January 2, 1940, Blind.
Spouse was born before January 2, 1940, Blind.
a Form 3800
b Form 8801 c Specify
a Form 2439 b Form 4136
59
Household employment taxes. Attach Schedule H
60
69
Amount
You Owe
Sign
Here DateYour signature
Keep a copy
for your
records.
DateSpouse’s signature. If a joint return, both must sign.
Preparer’s SSN or PTINDatePreparer’s
signature Check if
self-employedPaid
Preparer’s
Use Only
Firm’s name (or
yours if self-employed),
address, and ZIP code
EIN
Phone no.
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
Your occupation
Tax (see page 33). Check if any tax is from:
Amount you owe. Subtract line 70 from line 62. For details on how to pay, see page 55 /H17075
b
Direct deposit?
See page 54
and fill in 72b,
72c, and 72d.
Routing number
Account number
c Checking Savings
a Form(s) 8814 Form 4972
b
d
/H17075
/H17075
70
53
Retirement savings contributions credit. Attach Form 8880
57
58
Advance earned income credit payments from Form(s) W-2
71
/H17075
Child tax credit (see page 37)
Credits from:
51
Additional child tax credit. Attach Form 8812
66
67
Standard
Deduction
for—
Joint return?
See page 17.
Daytime phone number
()
Earned income credit (EIC)
Credit for the elderly or the disabled. Attach Schedule R
44
45
Alternative minimum tax (see page 35). Attach Form 6251
Add lines 43 and 44 /H17075
Credit for child and dependent care expenses. Attach Form 2441
49
If you have a
qualifying
child, attach
Schedule EIC.
44
45
65a
Spouse’s occupation
()
Form 1040 (2004)
● People who
checked any
box on line
38a or 38b or
who can be
claimed as a
dependent,
see page 31.
● All others:
Designee’s
name /H17075
Do you want to allow another person to discuss this return with the IRS (see page 56)?Third Party
Designee Phone
no. /H17075()
Yes. Complete the following. No
Personal identification
number (PIN) /H17075
54
Foreign tax credit. Attach Form 1116 if required
54
a Form 8396 b Form 8859
50
Adoption credit. Attach Form 8839
62 62
Type:
c Form 8885
Total boxes
checked /H17075/H20853/H20854
50
48
52
47
46
53
51
49
65bNontaxable combat pay election /H17075b
Chapter 10 Sample Returns Page 45

Page 46 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
SUSAN J. BROWN
RETAIL TRADE, FAMILY CLOTHING STORE
FAMILY FASHIONS
725 BIG SUR DRIVE
ANYTOWN, NY 18725
111 00 1111
44 8 1 4 0
101 2 34 567
410,000
1,442
408,558
239,349
169,209
169,209
1,203
12,000
5,727
3,570
8,557
59,050
114,056
55,153
55,153
3,850
3,500
12,066
1,400
2,633
500
/H12011
OMB No. 1545-0074SCHEDULE C
(Form 1040) Profit or Loss From Business
(Sole Proprietorship)
/H17075Partnerships, joint ventures, etc., must file Form 1065 or 1065-B.
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 09/H17075Attach to Form 1040 or 1041. /H17075See Instructions for Schedule C (Form 1040).
Name of proprietor Social security number (SSN)
A Principal business or profession, including product or service (see page C-2 of the instructions) B Enter code from pages C-7, 8, & 9
/H17075
D Employer ID number (EIN), if anyBusiness name. If no separate business name, leave blank.C
Accounting method:
E
F
Yes NoG
H
Did you “materially participate” in the operation of this business during 2004? If “No,” see page C-3 for limit on losses
If you started or acquired this business during 2004, check here /H17075
Income
Gross receipts or sales. Caution. If this income was reported to you on Form W-2 and the “Statutory
employee” box on that form was checked, see page C-3 and check here /H17075
1
1
22 Returns and allowances
33 Subtract line 2 from line 1
44 Cost of goods sold (from line 42 on page 2)
5Gross profit. Subtract line 4 from line 35
6Other income, including Federal and state gasoline or fuel tax credit or refund (see page C-3)6
7 Gross income. Add lines 5 and 6 /H170757
Expenses. Enter expenses for business use of your home only on line 30.
8
21Repairs and maintenance21
Advertising8
22Supplies (not included in Part III)22
23
9
Taxes and licenses23
10
Travel, meals, and entertainment:24
Car and truck expenses (see
page C-3)
9
24a
11
Travela
Commissions and fees10
12Depletion12
Meals and
entertainment
b
Depreciation and section 179
expense deduction (not
included in Part III) (see
page C-4)
13
Enter nondeduct-
ible amount in-
cluded on line 24b
(see page C-5)
c
13
14 Employee benefit programs
(other than on line 19)
24d
14
Subtract line 24c from line 24bd
25
15
Utilities25
Insurance (other than health)15
26Wages (less employment credits)26
Interest:16
16aMortgage (paid to banks, etc.)a
Other expenses (from line 48 on
page 2)
27
16bOtherb
17
Legal and professional
services
17
18Office expense18
19Pension and profit-sharing plans19
Rent or lease (see page C-5):20
20aVehicles, machinery, and equipmenta
b Other business property 20b
Total expenses before expenses for business use of home. Add lines 8 through 27 in columns /H1707528 28
31
31
All investment is at risk.32a
32
Some investment is not
at risk.
32b
Schedule C (Form 1040) 2004For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see Form 1040 instructions.
(1) Cash (2) Accrual (3) Other (specify) /H17075
Business address (including suite or room no.) /H17075
City, town or post office, state, and ZIP code
Cat. No. 11334P
29
30
Tentative profit (loss). Subtract line 28 from line 7
Expenses for business use of your home. Attach Form 8829
29
30
/H20854
Part I
Part II
27
Net profit or (loss). Subtract line 30 from line 29.
● If a profit, enter on Form 1040, line 12, and also on Schedule SE, line 2 (statutory employees,
see page C-6). Estates and trusts, enter on Form 1041, line 3.
● If a loss, you must go to line 32.
If you have a loss, check the box that describes your investment in this activity (see page C-6).
● If you checked 32a, enter the loss on Form 1040, line 12, and also on Schedule SE, line 2
(statutory employees, see page C-6). Estates and trusts, enter on Form 1041, line 3.
● If you checked 32b, you must attach Form 6198.
/H20854
(99)
Contract labor (see page C-4)11
2004
/H12011
Page 46 Chapter 10 Sample Returns

Page 47 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
/H12011
42,843
240,252
283,095
43,746
239,349
479
1,600
60
6,000
180
8,557
238
Page 2Schedule C (Form 1040) 2004
Cost of Goods Sold (see page C-6)
35Inventory at beginning of year. If different from last year’s closing inventory, attach explanation
33
36Purchases less cost of items withdrawn for personal use
34
37Cost of labor. Do not include any amounts paid to yourself
35
38Materials and supplies
36
39Other costs
37
40Add lines 35 through 39
38
41Inventory at end of year
39
Cost of goods sold. Subtract line 41 from line 40. Enter the result here and on page 1, line 4
40
42
Part IV
Part III
Information on Your Vehicle. Complete this part only if you are claiming car or truck expenses on
line 9 and are not required to file Form 4562 for this business. See the instructions for line 13 on page
C-4 to find out if you must file Form 4562.
41
When did you place your vehicle in service for business purposes? (month, day, year) /H17075 .
42
Of the total number of miles you drove your vehicle during 2004, enter the number of miles you used your vehicle for:
a Business b Commuting c Other
45 Do you (or your spouse) have another vehicle available for personal use?
46 Was your vehicle available for personal use during off-duty hours?
47a Do you have evidence to support your deduction?
b If “Yes,” is the evidence written?
Yes No
Other Expenses. List below business expenses not included on lines 8–26 or line 30.
48 Total other expenses. Enter here and on page 1, line 27
//
Yes No
Yes No
Yes No
48
Part V
Method(s) used to
value closing inventory: Cost b Other (attach explanation)
Was there any change in determining quantities, costs, or valuations between opening and closing inventory? If
“Yes,” attach explanation
Lower of cost or market ca
NoYes
43
44
Schedule C (Form 1040) 2004
/H12011
BAD DEBT
BANK SERVICE CHARGES
CHAMBER OF COMMERCE DUES
CREDIT CARD FEES
TRASH REMOVAL EXPENSES
WINDOW WASHING
Chapter 10 Sample Returns Page 47

Page 48 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
SUSAN J. BROWN 111 00 1111
55,153
55,153
50,934
7,793
3,897
OMB No. 1545-0074SCHEDULE SE
Self-Employment Tax(Form 1040)
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 17/H17075Attach to Form 1040. /H17075See Instructions for Schedule SE (Form 1040).
Name of person with self-employment income (as shown on Form 1040) Social security number of person
with self-employment income /H17075
Who Must File Schedule SE
You must file Schedule SE if:
● You had net earnings from self-employment from other than church employee income (line 4 of Short Schedule SE or line 4c of
Long Schedule SE) of $400 or more or
Exception. If your only self-employment income was from earnings as a minister, member of a religious order, or Christian Science
practitioner and you filed Form 4361 and received IRS approval not to be taxed on those earnings, do not file Schedule SE. Instead,
write “Exempt–Form 4361” on Form 1040, line 57.
Section A—Short Schedule SE. Caution. Read above to see if you can use Short Schedule SE.
Net farm profit or (loss) from Schedule F, line 36, and farm partnerships, Schedule K-1 (Form
1065), box 14, code A
1
1
Net profit or (loss) from Schedule C, line 31; Schedule C-EZ, line 3; Schedule K-1 (Form 1065),
box 14, code A (other than farming); and Schedule K-1 (Form 1065-B), box 9. Ministers and
members of religious orders, see page SE-1 for amounts to report on this line. See page SE-2
for other income to report
2
2
3Combine lines 1 and 23
Net earnings from self-employment. Multiply line 3 by 92.35% (.9235). If less than $400,
do not file this schedule; you do not owe self-employment tax /H17075
4
4
5 Self-employment tax. If the amount on line 4 is: 
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see Form 1040 instructions. Schedule SE (Form 1040) 2004
● You had church employee income of $108.28 or more. Income from services you performed as a minister or a member of a
religious order is not church employee income (see page SE-1).
Cat. No. 11358Z
Deduction for one-half of self-employment tax. Multiply line 5 by
50% (.5). Enter the result here and on Form 1040, line 30
● $87,900 or less, multiply line 4 by 15.3% (.153). Enter the result here and on 
Form 1040, line 57.
● More than $87,900, multiply line 4 by 2.9% (.029). Then, add $10,899.60 to the
result. Enter the total here and on Form 1040, line 57.
May I Use Short Schedule SE or Must I Use Long Schedule SE?
Did You Receive Wages or Tips in 2004?
Was the total of your wages and tips subject to social security
or railroad retirement tax plus your net earnings from
self-employment more than $87,900?
Did you receive tips subject to social security or Medicare tax
that you did not report to your employer?
Are you using one of the optional methods to figure your net
earnings (see page SE-3)?
Are you a minister, member of a religious order, or Christian
Science practitioner who received IRS approval not to be taxed
on earnings from these sources, but you owe self-employment
tax on other earnings?
Did you receive church employee income reported on Form
W-2 of $108.28 or more?
You May Use Short Schedule SE Below You Must Use Long Schedule SE on page 2
/H17074 /H17074Yes
/H17074YesNo
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
No
No
No
No
Yes
/H17074Yes
/H17074Yes
/H17074Yes
/H17074
/H17074 /H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
No
Note. Even if you had a loss or a small amount of income from self-employment, it may be to your benefit to file Schedule SE and
use either “optional method” in Part II of Long Schedule SE (see page SE-3).
6
5
6
/H20854
(99)
2004
Page 48 Chapter 10 Sample Returns

Page 49 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Susan J. Brown FAMILY FASHIONS 111-00-1111
1,836
102,000
1,836
1,836
56,989
1,836
1,525
600
1,236
600
1,236
OFF-THE-SHELF SOFTWARE
SEWING MACHINE
305200 DBHY5 yr1,525
8,400
12,066
OMB No. 1545-0172Depreciation and Amortization4562Form
(Including Information on Listed Property)
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 67/H17075See separate instructions.
Identifying numberName(s) shown on return Business or activity to which this form relates
Election To Expense Certain Property Under Section 179
Note: If you have any listed property, complete Part V before you complete Part I.
$102,0001Maximum amount. See page 2 of the instructions for a higher limit for certain businesses1
2Total cost of section 179 property placed in service (see page 3 of the instructions)2
$410,0003Threshold cost of section 179 property before reduction in limitation3
4Reduction in limitation. Subtract line 3 from line 2. If zero or less, enter -0-4
Dollar limitation for tax year. Subtract line 4 from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0-. If married filing
separately, see page 3 of the instructions
5
5
(a) Description of property (b) Cost (business use only) (c) Elected cost
6
7Listed property. Enter the amount from line 297
88 Total elected cost of section 179 property. Add amounts in column (c), lines 6 and 7
9Tentative deduction. Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 89
10Carryover of disallowed deduction from line 13 of your 2003 Form 456210
11Business income limitation. Enter the smaller of business income (not less than zero) or line 5 (see instructions)11
12Section 179 expense deduction. Add lines 9 and 10, but do not enter more than line 1112
13 Carryover of disallowed deduction to 2005. Add lines 9 and 10, less line 12 /H1707513
Note: Do not use Part II or Part III below for listed property. Instead, use Part V.
MACRS Depreciation (Do not include listed property.) (See page 5 of the instructions.)
(b) Month and
year placed in
service
(c) Basis for depreciation
(business/investment use
only—see instructions)
(d) Recovery
period(a) (e) Convention (f) Method (g) Depreciation deduction
Section B—Assets Placed in Service During 2004 Tax Year Using the General Depreciation System
3-year property19a
5-year propertyb
7-year propertyc
10-year propertyd
15-year propertye
20-year propertyf
S/LMM27.5 yrs.Residential rental
property
h
S/LMM27.5 yrs.
S/LMMNonresidential real
property
i
S/LMM
Section C—Assets Placed in Service During 2004 Tax Year Using the Alternative Depreciation System
S/L20a Class life
12 yrs. S/Lb 12-year
40 yrs. MM S/Lc 40-year
Special Depreciation Allowance and Other Depreciation (Do not include listed property.)
MACRS deductions for assets placed in service in tax years beginning before 200417 17
15Property subject to section 168(f)(1) election (see page 4 of the instructions)15
Other depreciation (including ACRS) (see page 4 of the instructions)16 16
Summary (see page 8 of the instructions)
2121 Listed property. Enter amount from line 28
Total. Add amounts from line 12, lines 14 through 17, lines 19 and 20 in column (g), and line 21.
Enter here and on the appropriate lines of your return. Partnerships and S corporations—see instr.
22
22
23 For assets shown above and placed in service during the current year,
enter the portion of the basis attributable to section 263A costs 23
Form 4562 (2004)For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see separate instructions. Cat. No. 12906N
Part IV
Part I
Part II
Part III
/H17075Attach to your tax return.
39 yrs.
Section A
18 If you are electing under section 168(i)(4) to group any assets placed in service during the tax year
into one or more general asset accounts, check here /H17075
Classification of property
25-year propertyg 25 yrs. S/L
Special depreciation allowance for qualified property (other than listed property) placed in service
during the tax year (see page 3 of the instructions)
14
14
2004
-0-
Chapter 10 Sample Returns Page 49

Page 50 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
/H12011
USA 280 VAN 06/20/04 75 18,667 7,000 5 yr 200 DB/HY
7,000
-0-
8,400
7,500
2,025
475
10,000
/H12011
/H12011
/H12011
1,400
-0-
Page 2Form 4562 (2004)
Listed Property (Include automobiles, certain other vehicles, cellular telephones, certain computers, and
property used for entertainment, recreation, or amusement.)
Note: For any vehicle for which you are using the standard mileage rate or deducting lease expense, complete only
24a, 24b, columns (a) through (c) of Section A, all of Section B, and Section C if applicable.
Section A—Depreciation and Other Information (Caution: See page 9 of the instructions for limits for passenger automobiles. )
24b24a NoYesIf “Yes,” is the evidence written?NoYesDo you have evidence to support the business/investment use claimed?
(i)
Elected
section 179
cost
(h)
Depreciation
deduction
(g)
Method/
Convention
(f)
Recovery
period
(e)
Basis for depreciation
(business/investment
use only)
(d)
Cost or other
basis
(c)
Business/
investment
use
percentage
(b)
Date placed in
service
(a)
Type of property (list
vehicles first)
Property used more than 50% in a qualified business use (see page 8 of the instructions):26
%
%
%
Property used 50% or less in a qualified business use (see page 8 of the instructions):27
% S/L –
% S/L –
S/L –%
28 Add amounts in column (h), lines 25 through 27. Enter here and on line 21, page 1 28
Add amounts in column (i), line 26. Enter here and on line 7, page 129 29
Section B—Information on Use of Vehicles
(f)
Vehicle 6
(e)
Vehicle 5
(d)
Vehicle 4
(c)
Vehicle 3
(b)
Vehicle 2
(a)
Vehicle 1Total business/investment miles driven
during the year ( do not include commuting
miles—See page 2 of the instructions)
30
Total commuting miles driven during the year31
Total other personal (noncommuting)
miles driven
32
Total miles driven during the year.
Add lines 30 through 32
33
NoYes NoYesNoYesNoYesNoYesNoYesWas the vehicle available for personal
use during off-duty hours?
34
Was the vehicle used primarily by a
more than 5% owner or related person?
35
Is another vehicle available for personal
use?
36
Section C—Questions for Employers Who Provide Vehicles for Use by Their Employees
NoYesDo you maintain a written policy statement that prohibits all personal use of vehicles, including commuting,
by your employees?
37
Do you maintain a written policy statement that prohibits personal use of vehicles, except commuting, by your employees?
See page 10 of the instructions for vehicles used by corporate officers, directors, or 1% or more owners
38
Do you treat all use of vehicles by employees as personal use?39
Do you provide more than five vehicles to your employees, obtain information from your employees about
the use of the vehicles, and retain the information received?
40
Do you meet the requirements concerning qualified automobile demonstration use? (See page 10 of the instructions.)41
Note: If your answer to 37, 38, 39, 40, or 41 is “Yes,” do not complete Section B for the covered vehicles.
Amortization
(e)
Amortization
period or
percentage
(b)
Date amortization
begins
(c)
Amortizable
amount
(d)
Code
section
(f)
Amortization for
this year
(a)
Description of costs
42 Amortization of costs that begins during your 2004 tax year (see page 11 of the instructions):
43 Amortization of costs that began before your 2004 tax year 43
44 Total. Add amounts in column (f). See page 12 of the instructions for where to report 44
Complete this section for vehicles used by a sole proprietor, partner, or other “more than 5% owner,” or related person.
If you provided vehicles to your employees, first answer the questions in Section C to see if you meet an exception to completi ng this section for those vehicles.
Part VI
Part V
Answer these questions to determine if you meet an exception to completing Section B for vehicles used by employees who are
not more than 5% owners or related persons (see page 10 of the instructions).
Form 4562 (2004)
Special depreciation allowance for qualified listed property placed in service during the tax
year and used more than 50% in a qualified business use (see page 8 of the instructions)
25
25
/H12011
Page 50 Chapter 10 Sample Returns

Page 51 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Part III. Information on Your Vehicle
Preparing the Return
Stanley leaves this part blank because he is not deducting
car or truck expenses.for Stanley Price
Stanley Price owns and operates Stan’s Barber Shop. HeSchedule SE. Self-Employment Taxhas been in business for 32 years. Stanley uses the cash
method of accounting and files his return on a calendarAfter Stanley prepares Schedule C-EZ, he fills out Sched-
year basis. ule SE. He starts by entering his name and social security
number at the top of the schedule. Then he reads the chart
on page 1 of the schedule, which tells him he can use
Schedule C-EZ
Section A–Short Schedule SE to figure his self-employ-
Stanley uses Schedule C-EZ to report the net profit from ment tax. He fills out the following lines in Section A.
his business because he meets all of the requirementsLines 2 and 3.He enters $24,500. This is his net profitlisted in Part I of the schedule. Stanley enters his name andfrom line 3 of Schedule C-EZ.social security number at the top of the schedule.
Line 4.He multiplies $24,500 by 92.35% (.9235) to get his
net earnings from self-employment ($22,626). This is his
Part I. General Information net profit subject to self-employment tax.
Stanley fills out Part I as follows: Line 5. Because the amount on line 4 is less than
$87,900, Stanley multiplies the amount on line 4 ($22,626)Line A.He enters his principal business. by 15.3% (.153) to get his self-employment tax of $3,462.
Line B.He enters 812111, which is the 6-digit businessHe enters that amount here and on line 57 of Form 1040.
code for a barber shop. He found the code on page C-8 ofLine 6.He multiplies the amount on line 5 by 50% (.5) tothe instructions for Schedule C. Stanley locates the majorget his deduction for one-half of self-employment tax ofbusiness category that describes his business. He reads$1,731. He enters that amount here and on line 30 of Formdown the items under “Other Services” to find 812111—1040.“Barber shops.”
Line C. He enters the name of his business—“Stan’sForm 1040Barber Shop.”
Stanley fills out Form 1040 as follows:Line D.Stanley leaves this line blank. He does not have
an employer identification number (EIN) because he is notName, address, and social security number.Stanley
required to have one. For information about EINs, seeenters his name, home address, and social security num-
Identification Numbers in chapter 1. ber.
Line E.He enters his business address. Presidential election campaign fund.Stanley chooses
to have $3 go to this fund. He checks the box next to “Yes.”
Part II. Figure Your Net Profit Line 1.Stanley checks the box on this line because he is
filing as single.
Stanley fills out Part II as follows:
Lines 6a and 6d.Stanley claims an exemption for him-
Line 1. Gross receipts.Stanley enters his gross receiptsself. He checks the box next to “Yourself” and enters “1” in
from cutting hair. They include the amounts he charged forthe far right-hand entry space. He also enters “1” in the box
haircuts and all the tips received from his customers. Theon line 6d.
total for the year was $29,500.
Line 8a.Stanley enters $440 of taxable interest credited
Line 2. Total expenses.Stanley enters his expenses forto his personal savings account for the year.
the year. They total $5,000 and consist of the following.
Line 12.He enters his business net profit of $24,500 from
• $545 for advertising in the local newspaper. line 3 of Schedule C-EZ.
• $1,675 for supplies. Line 22.Stanley adds the amounts on lines 7 through 21
and enters the total, $24,940.• $250 for business licenses.
Line 25.Stanley enters the $2,000 contribution he made• $2,530 for utilities (electricity and water).
for the year to his individual retirement arrangement (IRA).
According to the Form 1040 instructions, he can deductLine 3. Net profit.Stanley subtracts his total expensesthis amount.($5,000) from his gross receipts ($29,500) to get his net
profit of $24,500. He enters his net profit here, on line 12 ofLine 30.Stanley enters one-half of his self-employment
Form 1040, and on line 2, Section A, of Schedule SE (Form tax ($1,731). He got this amount from line 6 in Section A of
1040). Schedule SE.
Chapter 10 Sample Returns Page 51

Page 52 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Line 35.Stanley adds the amounts on lines 23 throughLine 57.He enters $3,462 from line 5 in Section A of
34a and enters the total, $3,731. Schedule SE.
Line 36.Stanley subtracts the amount on line 35 from theLine 62.Stanley adds the amounts on lines 56 through 61amount on line 22 to arrive at his adjusted gross income,and enters the total, $5,096.$21,209. He also enters this amount on line 37.
Line 64.He enters $6,000 of estimated tax payments heLine 39.He enters $4,850. This is the standard deductionmade for the year.for a single filer.
Line 70.He enters $6,000.Line 40.Stanley subtracts the amount on line 39 from the
amount on line 37 to get $16,359. Lines 71 and 72a.Stanley subtracts the amount on line
Line 41.He multiplies $3,100 by the number of exemp-62 from the amount on line 70 to arrive at the amount he
tions claimed on line 6d to get his total exemptions, $3,100.overpaid, $904. He wants this amount refunded to him so
he enters it on line 72a. The IRS will send him a check forLine 42.Stanley subtracts the amount on line 41 from thethis amount provided he owes no other taxes, child sup-amount on line 40 to get his taxable income, $13,259.port, spousal support, or certain other federal nontax debt.
Line 43.Stanley uses the Tax Table in the Form 1040If Stanley wanted the refund deposited directly into his
instructions to figure his income tax. In the Tax Table hechecking or savings account, he would have had to com-
looks for the income bracket that includes $13,259. Heplete lines 72b, c, and d.
finds the bracket for incomes of at least $13,250, but less
Signing and assembling the return.He checks the “No”than $13,300 and sees that the tax for a person filing as
block under Third Party Designee because he does notsingle is $1,634. He enters this amount here.
want to designate anyone, signs his name and enters theLines 44 and 45.Because he does not owe alternativedate signed, his occupation, and a daytime telephoneminimum tax, he leaves line 44 blank and enters $1,634 onnumber. He assembles his original Form 1040 and Sched-line 45. ules C-EZ and SE in that order. (See “Attachment Se-
Lines 55 and 56.Because Stanley does not have any of quence No.” in the upper right corner of each schedule or
the credits listed on lines 46 through 54, he enters -0- on form.) Then he makes a copy of the return for his records.
line 55 and $1,634 on line 56. Finally, he mails it to the IRS.
Page 52 Chapter 10 Sample Returns

Page 53 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
STANLEY PRICE
99 OAK ST
ANYTOWN, TX 70000
/H12011
/H12011 1
1
/H12011
24,500
440
24,940
21,209
3,731
1,731
2,000
000 00 0000
Department of the Treasury—Internal Revenue Service
1040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
OMB No. 1545-0074For the year Jan. 1–Dec. 31, 2004, or other tax year beginning , 2004, ending , 20
Last nameYour first name and initial Your social security number
(See
instructions
on page 16.)
L
A
B
E
L
H
E
R
E
Last name Spouse’s social security numberIf a joint return, spouse’s first name and initial
Use the IRS
label.
Otherwise,
please print
or type.
Home address (number and street). If you have a P.O. box, see page 16. Apt. no.
City, town or post office, state, and ZIP code. If you have a foreign address, see page 16.
Presidential
Election Campaign
1 Single
Filing Status Married filing jointly (even if only one had income)2
Check only
one box.
3
Qualifying widow(er) with dependent child (see page 17)
6a Yourself. If someone can claim you as a dependent, do not check box 6a
Exemptions Spouseb
(4) if qualifying
child for child tax
credit (see page 18)
Dependents:c (2) Dependent’s
social security number
(3) Dependent’s
relationship to
you(1) First name Last name
If more than four
dependents, see
page 18.
d Total number of exemptions claimed
7Wages, salaries, tips, etc. Attach Form(s) W-27
8a8a Taxable interest. Attach Schedule B if requiredIncome
8bb Tax-exempt interest. Do not include on line 8aAttach Form(s)
W-2 here. Also
attach Forms
W-2G and
1099-R if tax
was withheld.
9a9a Ordinary dividends. Attach Schedule B if required
1010 Taxable refunds, credits, or offsets of state and local income taxes (see page 20)
1111 Alimony received
1212 Business income or (loss). Attach Schedule C or C-EZ
Enclose, but do
not attach, any
payment. Also,
please use
Form 1040-V.
13
13 Capital gain or (loss). Attach Schedule D if required. If not required, check here /H17075
1414 Other gains or (losses). Attach Form 4797
15a 15bIRA distributions b Taxable amount (see page 22)15a
16b16aPensions and annuities b Taxable amount (see page 22)16a
1717 Rental real estate, royalties, partnerships, S corporations, trusts, etc. Attach Schedule E
1818 Farm income or (loss). Attach Schedule F
1919 Unemployment compensation
20b20a b Taxable amount (see page 24)20a Social security benefits
2121
22 Add the amounts in the far right column for lines 7 through 21. This is your total income /H1707522
25IRA deduction (see page 26)
23
27
26
One-half of self-employment tax. Attach Schedule SE
29
Self-employed health insurance deduction (see page 30)
27
30
29
Self-employed SEP, SIMPLE, and qualified plans
31
30
Penalty on early withdrawal of savings
32
31
Alimony paid  b Recipient’s SSN /H17075
35Add lines 23 through 34a
32
Subtract line 35 from line 22. This is your adjusted gross income /H17075
33
Adjusted
Gross
Income 36
If you did not
get a W-2,
see page 19. Form
Married filing separately. Enter spouse’s SSN above
and full name here. /H17075
Cat. No. 11320B
/H17075
/H20854
Label
Form 1040 (2004)
IRS Use Only—Do not write or staple in this space.
Head of household (with qualifying person). (See page 17.) If
the qualifying person is a child but not your dependent, enter
this child’s name here. 
/H17075
Other income. List type and amount (see page 24)
Moving expenses. Attach Form 3903
25
26
For Disclosure, Privacy Act, and Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see page 75.
Boxes checked
on 6a and 6b
No. of children
on 6c who:
Dependents on 6c
not entered above
Add numbers on
lines above
/H17075
● lived with you
● did not live with
you due to divorce
or separation
(see page 18)
34a 34a
Student loan interest deduction (see page 28)
33
35
/H17073/H17073Important!
NoYes
Note. Checking “Yes” will not change your tax or reduce your refund.
Do you, or your spouse if filing a joint return, want $3 to go to this fund? /H17075
You must enter
your SSN(s) above.
YesNo
SpouseYou
(See page 16.)
(99)
Tuition and fees deduction (see page 29)
36
4
5
23Educator expenses (see page 26)
9bb Qualified dividends (see page 20)
2004
24 Certain business expenses of reservists, performing artists, and
fee-basis government officials. Attach Form 2106 or 2106-EZ 24
28 Health savings account deduction. Attach Form 8889 28
Chapter 10 Sample Returns Page 53

Page 54 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
21,209
4,850
16,359
3,100
13,259
1,634
1,634
-0-
1,634
3,462
5,096
6,000
6,000
904
Stanley Price 3/15/05 Barber 735-0002 555
904
Married filing
jointly or
Qualifying
widow(er),
$9,700
Head of
household,
$7,150
Itemized deductions (from Schedule A) or your standard deduction (see left margin)
Add lines 63, 64, 65a, and 66 through 69. These are your total payments /H17075
Page 2Form 1040 (2004)
Amount from line 36 (adjusted gross income)37 37
Check
if:
38a
Tax and
Credits
38a
Single or
Married filing
separately,
$4,850
If your spouse itemizes on a separate return or you were a dual-status alien, see page 31 and check here /H17075b 38b
39 39
40Subtract line 39 from line 3740
41
If line 37 is $107,025 or less, multiply $3,100 by the total number of exemptions claimed on
line 6d. If line 37 is over $107,025, see the worksheet on page 33
41
42Taxable income. Subtract line 41 from line 40. If line 41 is more than line 40, enter -0-42
43 43
48
52
Education credits. Attach Form 8863
47
Other credits. Check applicable box(es):
46
55
56
Add lines 46 through 54. These are your total credits
Subtract line 55 from line 45. If line 55 is more than line 45, enter -0- /H17075
55
Self-employment tax. Attach Schedule SE
56
Other
Taxes
57
71
Social security and Medicare tax on tip income not reported to employer. Attach Form 4137
59Additional tax on IRAs, other qualified retirement plans, etc. Attach Form 5329 if required
58
60
Add lines 56 through 61. This is your total tax /H17075
61 61
Federal income tax withheld from Forms W-2 and 109963 63
642004 estimated tax payments and amount applied from 2003 return64
Payments
65a
68Amount paid with request for extension to file (see page 54)
67
66Excess social security and tier 1 RRTA tax withheld (see page 54)
68
70
Other payments from:69
72a72a
73 73
If line 70 is more than line 62, subtract line 62 from line 70. This is the amount you overpaid
74 74
Amount of line 71 you want refunded to you /H17075
Refund
75
Amount of line 71 you want applied to your 2005 estimated tax /H17075
Estimated tax penalty (see page 55)
Under penalties of perjury, I declare that I have examined this return and accompanying schedules and statements, and to the be st of my knowledge and
belief, they are true, correct, and complete. Declaration of preparer (other than taxpayer) is based on all information of whic h preparer has any knowledge.
75
You were born before January 2, 1940, Blind.
Spouse was born before January 2, 1940, Blind.
a Form 3800
b Form 8801 c Specify
a Form 2439 b Form 4136
59
Household employment taxes. Attach Schedule H
60
69
Amount
You Owe
Sign
Here DateYour signature
Keep a copy
for your
records.
DateSpouse’s signature. If a joint return, both must sign.
Preparer’s SSN or PTINDatePreparer’s
signature Check if
self-employedPaid
Preparer’s
Use Only
Firm’s name (or
yours if self-employed),
address, and ZIP code
EIN
Phone no.
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
Your occupation
Tax (see page 33). Check if any tax is from:
Amount you owe. Subtract line 70 from line 62. For details on how to pay, see page 55 /H17075
b
Direct deposit?
See page 54
and fill in 72b,
72c, and 72d.
Routing number
Account number
c Checking Savings
a Form(s) 8814 Form 4972
b
d
/H17075
/H17075
70
53
Retirement savings contributions credit. Attach Form 8880
57
58
Advance earned income credit payments from Form(s) W-2
71
/H17075
Child tax credit (see page 37)
Credits from:
51
Additional child tax credit. Attach Form 8812
66
67
Standard
Deduction
for—
Joint return?
See page 17.
Daytime phone number
()
Earned income credit (EIC)
Credit for the elderly or the disabled. Attach Schedule R
44
45
Alternative minimum tax (see page 35). Attach Form 6251
Add lines 43 and 44 /H17075
Credit for child and dependent care expenses. Attach Form 2441
49
If you have a
qualifying
child, attach
Schedule EIC.
44
45
65a
Spouse’s occupation
()
Form 1040 (2004)
● People who
checked any
box on line
38a or 38b or
who can be
claimed as a
dependent,
see page 31.
● All others:
Designee’s
name /H17075
Do you want to allow another person to discuss this return with the IRS (see page 56)?Third Party
Designee Phone
no. /H17075()
Yes. Complete the following. No
Personal identification
number (PIN) /H17075
54
Foreign tax credit. Attach Form 1116 if required
54
a Form 8396 b Form 8859
50
Adoption credit. Attach Form 8839
62 62
Type:
c Form 8885
Total boxes
checked /H17075/H20853/H20854
50
48
52
47
46
53
51
49
65bNontaxable combat pay election /H17075b
/H12011
Page 54 Chapter 10 Sample Returns

Page 55 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
STANLEY PRICE
BARBER SHOP
STAN’S BARBER SHOP
1001 MAPLE AVE.
ANYTOWN, TX 70000
000 00 0000
81 2 1 11
24,500
29,500
5,000
OMB No. 1545-0074SCHEDULE C-EZ
(Form 1040) Net Profit From Business
(Sole Proprietorship)
/H17075Partnerships, joint ventures, etc., must file Form 1065 or 1065-B.
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 09A/H17075Attach to Form 1040 or 1041. /H17075See instructions on back.
Business name. If no separate business name, leave blank. D Employer ID number (EIN), if any
Business address (including suite or room no.). Address not required if same as on Form 1040, page 1.
C
E
Gross receipts. Caution. If this income was reported to you on Form W-2 and the “Statutory
employee” box on that form was checked, see Statutory Employees in the instructions for
Schedule C, line 1, on page C-3 and check here /H170751
22 Total expenses (see instructions). If more than $5,000, you must use Schedule C
3
3 Net profit. Subtract line 2 from line 1. If less than zero, you must use Schedule C. Enter on
Form 1040, line 12, and also on Schedule SE, line 2. (Statutory employees do not report this
amount on Schedule SE, line 2. Estates and trusts, enter on Form 1041, line 3.)
Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040) 2004For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see Form 1040 instructions. Cat. No. 14374D
City, town or post office, state, and ZIP code
You May Use
Schedule C-EZ
Instead of
Schedule C
Only If You:
And You:
● Use the cash method of accounting.
● Had only one business as a sole
proprietor.
● Had business expenses of $5,000 or
less. ● Are not required to file Form 4562,
Depreciation and Amortization, for
this business. See the instructions
for Schedule C, line 13, on page
C-4 to find out if you must file.
● Do not deduct expenses for
business use of your home.
● Do not have prior year unallowed
passive activity losses from this
business.
/H17075 /H17075
Name of proprietor Social security number (SSN)
General Information
A Principal business or profession, including product or service B Enter code from pages C-7, 8, & 9
/H17075
Figure Your Net Profit
Part I
Part II
● Did not have a net loss from your
business.
● Had no employees during the year.
1
● Did not have an inventory at any
time during the year.
Yes NoDo you (or your spouse) have another vehicle available for personal use?6
Yes NoDo you have evidence to support your deduction?8a
Yes NoIf “Yes,” is the evidence written?
Yes NoWas your vehicle available for personal use during off-duty hours?7
Of the total number of miles you drove your vehicle during 2004, enter the number of miles you used your vehicle for:5
Business b Commuting c Other
4
Information on Your Vehicle. Complete this part only if you are claiming car or truck expenses on line 2.Part III
a
b
When did you place your vehicle in service for business purposes? (month, day, year) /H17075 .//
2004
Chapter 10 Sample Returns Page 55

Page 56 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
STANLEY PRICE 000 00 0000
24,500
24,500
22,626
3,462
1,731
OMB No. 1545-0074SCHEDULE SE
Self-Employment Tax(Form 1040)
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 17/H17075Attach to Form 1040. /H17075See Instructions for Schedule SE (Form 1040).
Name of person with self-employment income (as shown on Form 1040) Social security number of person
with self-employment income /H17075
Who Must File Schedule SE
You must file Schedule SE if:
● You had net earnings from self-employment from other than church employee income (line 4 of Short Schedule SE or line 4c of
Long Schedule SE) of $400 or more or
Exception. If your only self-employment income was from earnings as a minister, member of a religious order, or Christian Science
practitioner and you filed Form 4361 and received IRS approval not to be taxed on those earnings, do not file Schedule SE. Instead,
write “Exempt–Form 4361” on Form 1040, line 57.
Section A—Short Schedule SE. Caution. Read above to see if you can use Short Schedule SE.
Net farm profit or (loss) from Schedule F, line 36, and farm partnerships, Schedule K-1 (Form
1065), box 14, code A
1
1
Net profit or (loss) from Schedule C, line 31; Schedule C-EZ, line 3; Schedule K-1 (Form 1065),
box 14, code A (other than farming); and Schedule K-1 (Form 1065-B), box 9. Ministers and
members of religious orders, see page SE-1 for amounts to report on this line. See page SE-2
for other income to report
2
2
3Combine lines 1 and 23
Net earnings from self-employment. Multiply line 3 by 92.35% (.9235). If less than $400,
do not file this schedule; you do not owe self-employment tax /H17075
4
4
5 Self-employment tax. If the amount on line 4 is: 
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see Form 1040 instructions. Schedule SE (Form 1040) 2004
● You had church employee income of $108.28 or more. Income from services you performed as a minister or a member of a
religious order is not church employee income (see page SE-1).
Cat. No. 11358Z
Deduction for one-half of self-employment tax. Multiply line 5 by
50% (.5). Enter the result here and on Form 1040, line 30
● $87,900 or less, multiply line 4 by 15.3% (.153). Enter the result here and on 
Form 1040, line 57.
● More than $87,900, multiply line 4 by 2.9% (.029). Then, add $10,899.60 to the
result. Enter the total here and on Form 1040, line 57.
May I Use Short Schedule SE or Must I Use Long Schedule SE?
Did You Receive Wages or Tips in 2004?
Was the total of your wages and tips subject to social security
or railroad retirement tax plus your net earnings from
self-employment more than $87,900?
Did you receive tips subject to social security or Medicare tax
that you did not report to your employer?
Are you using one of the optional methods to figure your net
earnings (see page SE-3)?
Are you a minister, member of a religious order, or Christian
Science practitioner who received IRS approval not to be taxed
on earnings from these sources, but you owe self-employment
tax on other earnings?
Did you receive church employee income reported on Form
W-2 of $108.28 or more?
You May Use Short Schedule SE Below You Must Use Long Schedule SE on page 2
/H17074 /H17074Yes
/H17074YesNo
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
No
No
No
No
Yes
/H17074Yes
/H17074Yes
/H17074Yes
/H17074
/H17074 /H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
No
Note. Even if you had a loss or a small amount of income from self-employment, it may be to your benefit to file Schedule SE and
use either “optional method” in Part II of Long Schedule SE (see page SE-3).
6
5
6
/H20854
(99)
2004
Page 56 Chapter 10 Sample Returns

Page 57 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appeals and judicial review.If you disagree with us
about the amount of your tax liability or certain collection
11. actions, you have the right to ask the Appeals Office to
review your case. You can also ask a court to review your
case.
Your Rights
Relief from certain penalties and interest.The IRS will
waive penalties when allowed by law if you can show youas a Taxpayer
acted reasonably and in good faith or relied on the incor-
rect advice of an IRS employee. We will waive interest thatThe first part of this chapter explains some of your most
is the result of certain errors or delays caused by an IRSimportant rights as a taxpayer. The second part explains
employee.the examination, appeal, collection, and refund processes.
Examinations, Appeals,Declaration of
Collections, and RefundsTaxpayer Rights
Examinations (audits).We accept most taxpayers’ re-Protection of your rights.IRS employees will explain
turns as filed. If we inquire about your return or select it forand protect your rights as a taxpayer throughout your
examination, it does not suggest that you are dishonest.contact with us.
The inquiry or examination may or may not result in more
tax. We may close your case without change; or, you mayPrivacy and confidentiality.The IRS will not disclose to
receive a refund.anyone the information you give us, except as authorized
The process of selecting a return for examination usu-by law. You have the right to know why we are asking you
ally begins in one of two ways. First, we use computerfor information, how we will use it, and what happens if you
programs to identify returns that may have incorrectdo not provide requested information.
amounts. These programs may be based on information
Professional and courteous service.If you believe thatreturns, such as Forms 1099 and W-2, on studies of past
an IRS employee has not treated you in a professional,examinations, or on certain issues identified by compli-
fair, and courteous manner, you should tell that ance projects. Second, we use information from outside
employee’s supervisor. If the supervisor’s response is notsources that indicates that a return may have incorrect
satisfactory, you should write to the IRS director for youramounts. These sources may include newspapers, public
area or the center where you filed your return. records, and individuals. If we determine that the informa-
tion is accurate and reliable, we may use it to select a
Representation.You can either represent yourself or,return for examination.
with proper written authorization, have someone else rep-Publication 556, Examination of Returns, Appeal
resent you in your place. Your representative must be aRights, and Claims for Refund, explains the rules and
person allowed to practice before the IRS, such as anprocedures that we follow in examinations. The following
attorney, certified public accountant, or enrolled agent. Ifsections give an overview of how we conduct examina-
you are in an interview and ask to consult such a person,tions.
then we must stop and reschedule the interview in most
By mail.We handle many examinations and inquiriescases.
by mail. We will send you a letter with either a request forYou can have someone accompany you at an interview.more information or a reason why we believe a change toYou can make sound recordings of any meetings with ouryour return may be needed. You can respond by mail orexamination or collection personnel, provided you tell us inyou can request a personal interview with an examiner. Ifwriting 10 days before the meeting. you mail us the requested information or provide an expla-
nation, we may or may not agree with you, and we willPayment of only the correct amount of tax.You are
explain the reasons for any changes. Please do not hesi-responsible for paying only the correct amount of tax due
tate to write to us about anything you do not understand.under the law—no more, no less. If you cannot pay all of
your tax when it is due, you may be able to make monthlyBy interview.If we notify you that we will conduct yourinstallment payments. examination through a personal interview, or you request
such an interview, you have the right to ask that theHelp with unresolved tax problems.The Taxpayer Ad- examination take place at a reasonable time and place thatvocate Service can help you if you have tried unsuccess-is convenient for both you and the IRS. If our examinerfully to resolve a problem with the IRS. Your local Taxpayerproposes any changes to your return, he or she will explainAdvocate can offer you special help if you have a signifi-the reasons for the changes. If you do not agree with thesecant hardship as a result of a tax problem. For morechanges, you can meet with the examiner’s supervisor.information, call toll free 1-877-777-4778 (1-800-829-4059
for TTY/TDD) or write to the Taxpayer Advocate at the IRSRepeat examinations.If we examined your return for
office that last contacted you. the same items in either of the 2 previous years and
Chapter 11 Your Rights as a Taxpayer Page 57

Page 58 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
proposed no change to your tax liability, please contact us If you were due a refund but you did not file a return, you
as soon as possible so we can see if we should discontinue must file within 3 years from the date the return was
the examination. originally due to get that refund.
Appeals. If you do not agree with the examiner’s pro-
posed changes, you can appeal them to the Appeals Office
of IRS. Most differences can be settled without expensive
and time-consuming court trials. Your appeal rights are
12.explained in detail in both Publication 5, Your Appeal
Rights and How To Prepare a Protest If You Don’t Agree,
and Publication 556, Examination of Returns, Appeal
How To Get MoreRights, and Claims for Refund.
If you do not wish to use the Appeals Office or disagreeInformationwith its findings, you may be able to take your case to the
U.S. Tax Court, U.S. Court of Federal Claims, or the U.S.This section describes the help the IRS and other federalDistrict Court where you live. If you take your case to court,agencies offer to taxpayers who operate their own busi-the IRS will have the burden of proving certain facts if younesses.kept adequate records to show your tax liability, cooper-
ated with the IRS, and meet certain other conditions. If the
court agrees with you on most issues in your case and
Internal Revenue Servicefinds that our position was largely unjustified, you may be
able to recover some of your administrative and litigation
You can get help with unresolved tax issues, order freecosts. You will not be eligible to recover these costs unless
publications and forms, ask tax questions, and get moreyou tried to resolve your case administratively, including
information from the IRS in several ways. By selecting thegoing through the appeals system, and you gave us the
method that is best for you, you will have quick and easyinformation necessary to resolve the case.
access to tax help.
Collections.Publication 594, The IRS Collection Pro-
Contacting your Taxpayer Advocate.If you have at-cess, explains your rights and responsibilities regarding
tempted to deal with an IRS problem unsuccessfully, youpayment of federal taxes. It describes:
should contact your Taxpayer Advocate.
• What to do when you owe taxes. It describes what toThe Taxpayer Advocate independently represents your
do if you get a tax bill and what to do if you thinkinterests and concerns within the IRS by protecting your
your bill is wrong. It also covers making installmentrights and resolving problems that have not been fixed
payments, delaying collection action, and submittingthrough normal channels. While Taxpayer Advocates can-
an offer in compromise. not change the tax law or make a technical tax decision,
they can clear up problems that resulted from previous• IRS collection actions. It covers liens, releasing a
contacts and ensure that your case is given a completelien, levies, releasing a levy, seizures and sales, and
and impartial review.release of property.
To contact your Taxpayer Advocate:
Your collection appeal rights are explained in detail in• Call the Taxpayer Advocate at 1-877-777-4778.
Publication 1660, Collection Appeal Rights.
• Call, write, or fax the Taxpayer Advocate office in
Innocent spouse relief.Generally, both you and your your area.
spouse are responsible, jointly and individually, for paying• Call 1-800-829-4059 if you are a TTY/TDD user.the full amount of any tax, interest, or penalties due on your
joint return. However, if you qualify for innocent spouse• Visit the website at www.irs.gov/advocate.
relief, you may not have to pay the tax, interest, and
penalties related to your spouse (or former spouse). ForFor more information, see Publication 1546, The Tax-
information on innocent spouse relief and two other wayspayer Advocate Service of the IRS—How to Get Help With
to get relief, see Publication 971, Innocent Spouse Relief,Unresolved Tax Problems.
and Form 8857, Request for Innocent Spouse Relief (AndSmall Business Tax Education Program.Small busi-Separation of Liability and Equitable Relief). ness owners and other self-employed individuals can learn
Refunds. You can file a claim for refund if you think you about business taxes through a unique partnership be-
paid too much tax. You must generally file the claim within tween the IRS and local organizations. Through work-
3 years from the date you filed your original return or 2 shops or in-depth tax courses, instructors provide training
years from the date you paid the tax, whichever is later. on starting a business, recordkeeping, preparing business
The law generally provides for interest on your refund if it is tax returns, self-employment tax issues, and employment
not paid within 45 days of the date you filed your return or taxes.
claim for refund. Publication 556, Examination of Returns, Some courses are offered free as a community service.
Appeal Rights, and Claims for Refund, has more informa- Courses given by an educational facility may include costs
tion on refunds. for materials and tuition. Other courses may have a nomi-
Page 58 Chapter 12 How To Get More Information

Page 59 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
nal fee to offset administrative costs of sponsoring organi-Phone. Many services are available by phone.
zations.
For more information about this program, call the IRS
Monday through Friday during regular business hours.• Ordering forms, instructions, and publications. CallCheck your telephone book for the local number of the IRS1-800-829-3676 to order current-year forms, instruc-office closest to you or you can call 1-800-829-1040.tions and publications and prior-year forms and in-
Free tax services.To find out what services are avail- structions. You should receive your order within 10
able, get Publication 910, IRS Guide to Free Tax Services. days.
It contains a list of free tax publications and an index of tax
• Asking tax questions. Call the IRS with your taxtopics. It also describes other free tax information services,questions at 1-800-829-1040.including tax education and assistance programs and a list
• Solving problems. You can get face-to-face helpof TeleTax topics.
solving tax problems every business day in IRS Tax-Internet. You can access the IRS website 24 payer Assistance Centers. An employee can explainhours a day, 7 days a week, at www.irs.gov to: IRS letters, request adjustment to your account, or
help you set up a payment plan. Call your local
• E-file your return. Find out about commercial tax Taxpayer Assistance Center for an appointment. To
preparation and e-file services available free to eligi- find the number, go to www.irs.gov/localcontacts or
ble taxpayers. look in the phone book under United States Govern-
ment, Internal Revenue Service.• Check the status of your 2004 refund. Click on
Where’s My Refund. Be sure to wait at least 6 weeks• TTY/TDD equipment. If you have access to TTY/
from the date you filed your return (3 weeks if you TDD equipment, call 1-800-829-4059 to ask tax or
filed electronically). Have your 2004 tax return avail- account questions or to order forms and publica-
able because you will need to know your filing status tions.
and the exact whole dollar amount of your refund.
• TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 and press 2 to
• Download forms, instructions, and publications. listen to pre-recorded messages covering various
tax topics.• Order IRS products online.
• Refund information. If you would like to check the• Research your tax questions online. status of your 2004 refund, call 1-800-829-4477 and
• Search publications online by topic or keyword. press 1 for automated refund information or call
1-800-829-1954. Be sure to wait at least 6 weeks• View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs) published infrom the date you filed your return (3 weeks if youthe last few years. filed electronically). Have your 2004 tax return avail-
• Figure your withholding allowances using our Formable because you will need to know your filing status
W-4 calculator. and the exact whole dollar amount of your refund.
• Sign up to receive local and national tax news by
email. Evaluating the quality of our telephone services. To
ensure that IRS representatives give accurate, courteous,• Get information on starting and operating a smalland professional answers, we use several methods tobusiness. evaluate the quality of our telephone services. One method
. is for a second IRS representative to sometimes listen in
on or record telephone calls. Another is to ask some callers
to complete a short survey at the end of the call.
Fax. You can get over 100 of the most requested Walk-in. Many products and services are avail-
forms and instructions 24 hours a day, 7 days a able on a walk-in basis.
week, by fax. Just call 703-368-9694 from the
telephone connected to your fax. When you call, you will• Products. You can walk in to many post offices,hear instructions on how to use the service. The items youlibraries, and IRS offices to pick up certain forms,request will be faxed to you. instructions, and publications. Some IRS offices, li-For help with transmission problems, call braries, grocery stores, copy centers, city and county703-487-4608. governments, credit unions, and office supply storesLong distance charges may apply. have a collection of products available to print from a
CD-ROM or photocopy from reproducible proofs.
Also, some IRS offices and libraries have the Inter-
nal Revenue Code, regulations, Internal Revenue
Bulletins, and Cumulative Bulletins available for re-
search purposes.
Chapter 12 How To Get More Information Page 59

Page 60 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Services. You can walk in to your local Taxpayer information, such as how to prepare a business plan,
Assistance Center every business day to ask tax finding financing for your business, and much more. The
questions or get help with a tax problem. An em- design of the CD makes finding information easy and quick
ployee can explain IRS letters, request adjustments and incorporates file formats and browsers that can be run
to your account, or help you set up a payment plan. on virtually any desktop or laptop computer.
You can set up an appointment by calling your localIt is available in early April. You can get a free copy by
Center and, at the prompt, leaving a message re-calling 1-800-829-3676 or by visiting the website at
questing Everyday Tax Solutions help. A representa-www.irs.gov/smallbiz.
tive will call you back within 2 business days to
schedule an in-person appointment at your conve-Comments on IRS enforcement actions. The Small
nience. To find the number, go to www.irs.gov/local- Business and Agriculture Regulatory Enforcement
contacts or look in the phone book under United Ombudsman and 10 Regional Fairness Boards were es-
States Government, Internal Revenue Service. tablished to receive comments from small business about
federal agency enforcement actions. The Ombudsman will
annually evaluate the enforcement activities of eachMail. You can send your order for forms, instruc-
agency and rate its responsiveness to small business. Iftions, and publications to the Distribution Center
you wish to comment on the enforcement actions of thenearest to you and receive a response within 10
IRS, you can:business days after your request is received. Use the
address that applies to your part of the country. • Call 1-888-REG-FAIR (1-888-734-3247),
• Western part of U.S.: • Send an email to ombudsman@sba.gov , orWestern Area Distribution Center
Rancho Cordova, CA 95743-0001 • Download the appraisal form at www.sba.gov/
ombudsman .• Central part of U.S.:
Central Area Distribution Center
P.O. Box 8903
Bloomington, IL 61702-8903
Small Business Administration
• Eastern part of U.S. and foreign addresses: 
The Small Business Administration (SBA) offers trainingEastern Area Distribution Center
and educational programs, counseling services, financialP.O. Box 85074
programs, and contract assistance for small business own-Richmond, VA 23261-5074
ers. The SBA also has publications and videos on a variety
of business topics. The following briefly describes assis-CD-ROM for tax products. You can order Publi-tance provided by the SBA.cation 1796, IRS Federal Tax Products CD-ROM,
and obtain: Small Business Development Centers (SBDCs).
SBDCs provide counseling, training, and technical serv-
• Current-year tax forms, instructions, and publica-ices to current and prospective small business owners who
tions. cannot afford the services of a private consultant. Help is
available when beginning, improving, or expanding a small• Prior-year forms and instructions. business.
• Frequently requested tax forms that can be filled in
Business Information Centers (BICs).BICs offer aelectronically, printed out for submission, and saved
small business reference library, management videofor recordkeeping.
tapes, and computer technology to help plan a business.• Internal Revenue Bulletins. BICs also offer one-on-one assistance. Individuals who
are in business or are interested in starting a business canBuy the CD-ROM from National Technical Informationuse BICs as often as they wish at no charge.Service (NTIS) at www.irs.gov/cdorders for $22 (no han-
dling fee) or call 1-877-233-6767 toll free to buy theService Corps of Retired Executives (SCORE).
CD-ROM for $22 (plus a $5 handling fee). The first releaseSCORE provides small business counseling and training
is available in early January and the final release is avail-to current and prospective small business owners. SCORE
able in late February. is made up of current and former business people who
offer their expertise and knowledge to help people start,CD-ROM for small businesses.  Publication manage, and expand a small business. SCORE also offers3207, The Small Business Resource Guide, a variety of small business workshops.CD-ROM 2004, is a must for every small busi-
ness owner or any taxpayer about to start a business. ThisInternet. You can access the SBA website at
handy, interactive CD contains all the business tax forms,www.sba.gov. While visiting the SBA website,
instructions and publications needed to successfully man- you can find a variety of information of interest to
age a business. In addition, the CD provides other helpful small business owners.
Page 60 Chapter 12 How To Get More Information

Page 61 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Phone.  Call the SBA Answer Desk at Internet. You can access the GPO website at
1-800-UASK-SBA (1-800-827-5722) for general www.access.gpo.gov.
information about programs available to assist
small business owners.
Walk-in. You can walk in to a Small Business Mail. Write to the GPO at the following address.
Development Center or Business Information
Center to request assistance with your small
business. To find the location nearest you, access the SBA
on the Internet or call the SBA Answer Desk. Superintendent of Documents
U.S. Government Printing Office
P.O. Box 371954
Pittsburgh, PA 15250-7954
Other Federal Agencies
Phone. Call the GPO toll-free at 1-866-512-1800Other federal agencies also publish publications and pam-or at 202-512-1800 from the Washington, DCphlets to assist small businesses. Most of these are avail-area.able from the Superintendant of Documents at the
Government Printing Office. You can get information and
order these publications and pamphlets in several ways.
Chapter 12 How To Get More Information Page 61

Page 62 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.
Index
 See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Cost of goods sold.............. 2 6Necessary expense............. 3 0A
Net operating loss.............. 3 9Credit:Accounting method:
Nonbusiness bad debt.......... 3 0Alcohol fuels.................... 1 9Accrual.....................14, 30
Ordinary expense............... 3 0Biodiesel fuels.................. 1 9Cash ........................14, 30
Principal place of business..... 3 8Clean-fuel vehicle.............. 3 0Change in...................... 1 7
Contributions to selected Qualified long-term realCombination.................... 1 6
community development property ...................... 2 6Special......................... 1 7
corporations.................. 2 0Qualified real property businessAccounting periods............. 1 3
Disabled access................ 2 0 debt.......................... 2 3Accrual method of Electric vehicle................. 3 0Rent ............................ 3 5accounting..................... 1 4Empowerment zone Restricted property............. 2 4Expenses ....................... 1 5employment .................. 2 0Retail space.................... 2 5Income — general rule......... 1 4 Energy.......................... 2 0Self-employment tax............. 9Income — special rules........ 1 5 Enhanced oil recovery.......... 2 0Sole proprietor................... 3Related persons, special General business............... 1 9Statutory employee.............. 3rule........................... 1 5How to claim.................... 2 1Tax home ....................... 3 1Adjusted basis of property...... 1 8 Indian employment............. 2 0Tax year........................ 1 3Alcohol fuels credit.............. 1 9Investment...................... 2 0Trade discount..............26, 27Alternative minimum tax........ 2 1 Liberty zone business Travel expenses................ 3 6Appeal rights.................... 5 8employee..................... 2 0Depreciation:Assistance (See Tax help) Low sulfur diesel fuel Deduction....................... 3 2Audits ............................ 5 7production.................... 2 0Listed property.................. 3 2Low-income housing............ 2 0Recapture...................... 2 5Orphan drug.................... 2 0B Special allowance.............. 3 2Reforestation................... 2 0Bad debt ......................... 3 0 Disabled access credit.......... 2 0Rehabilitation................... 2 0Barter income.................... 2 1 Disposition of property:Renewable electricity and refinedBasis of property................ 1 8 Business property.............. 1 7coal production............... 2 0Installment sale.............18, 19Biodiesel fuels credit............ 1 9Research ....................... 2 0Like-kind exchange.....18, 19, 25Business credits................. 1 9Taxes paid on certain employee Nontaxable exchange.......... 1 8Business expenses.............. 3 0 tips........................... 2 0Sale of a business.............. 1 8Business income ................ 2 1Welfare-to-work................. 2 0Dividend income................. 2 3Work opportunity............... 2 1
Donation of inventory........... 2 7C Drawing account................. 2 7Calendar tax year defined....... 1 3D
Canceled debt................... 2 3Damages as income ............. 2 4
ECapital gain or loss.............. 1 9Debt:
B a d ............................. 3 0e-file............................... 7Car expenses ................30, 31
Canceled ....................... 2 3EFTPS ............................. 9Cash discount...............26, 27
Qualified real property Electric vehicle credit........... 3 0Cash method of accounting..... 1 4
business..................... 2 3Expenses ....................... 1 4 Electronic filing................... 7
Debts:Income ......................... 1 4 Employee benefit programs..... 3 3
Refund offset against............ 7Change, accounting method.... 1 7 Employees’ pay.................. 3 3
Definitions:Changing methods .............. 1 6 Employer identification numberAccounting method............. 1 3Claim for refund................. 5 8 (EIN)............................. 6Accounting periods............. 1 3Clean-fuel vehicle credit........ 3 0 Employment taxes:Bartering........................ 2 1About ........................... 1 1Collection of tax................. 5 8Basis ........................... 1 8Deduction for................... 3 6Combination method of Business bad debt.............. 3 0accounting..................... 1 6 Empowerment zone employmentCash discount..............26, 27 credit........................... 2 0Comments on publication........ 3 Dispositions of property......... 1 8Energy credit.................... 2 0Condemned property ............ 1 9Drawing account................ 2 7
Enhanced oil recoveryConsignments ................... 2 5Entertainment expenses........ 3 7
credit........................... 2 0Construction allowances........ 2 5 Fair market value............... 1 8
Entertainment expenses........ 3 7Contributions to selected Fringe benefit................... 3 3
Escrow, payments placed in.... 2 6community development Local transportation
corporations, credit for....... 2 0 expenses..................... 3 0Estimated tax..................... 9
Page 62

Page 63 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Examinations (audits)........... 5 7 Local transportationG
expenses ...................... 3 0Excise taxes: General business credit......... 1 9
Lodging .......................... 3 7About ........................... 1 1Gross profit:
Deduction for................... 3 6 Long-term capital gain orAccuracy ....................... 2 9
loss ............................ 1 9Expenses ........................ 3 0Additions to..................... 2 9
Lost income...................... 2 4
Low sulfur diesel fuel productionF H credit........................... 2 0Fair market value defined....... 1 8Health insurance, deduction for Low-income housing credit..... 2 0Filing business taxes............. 6 self-employed................. 3 4
Fiscal tax year defined.......... 1 3Help (See Tax help)
MForm: Help from Small Business
Meals ............................. 3 71040 ............................. 7Administration................. 6 0
1040-ES ......................... 9 Mileage rate for vehicles........ 3 1Home, business use of.......... 3 7
1040–V ...................... 8 ,  4 3 More information (See Tax help)Husband and wife business...... 3
1099-B.......................... 2 2
1099-MISC .................11, 22 NI1128 ............................ 1 3
Net operating losses............ 3 9Identification numbers........... 62210 ............................. 9
Net profit or loss................. 3 9Income:2290 ............................ 1 1
Barter........................... 2 1New York Liberty Zone business3115 ............................ 1 7
employee credit............... 2 0Bonus .......................... 2 23468 ............................ 2 0
Canceled lease payments...... 2 2Nonbusiness bad debt.......... 3 03800 ............................ 2 1
Dividend........................ 2 34562 ............................ 3 2 Nondeductible insurance
How to account for.............. 2 64684 ............................ 1 9 premiums ...................... 3 4
Other types..................... 2 44797 ........................19, 25 Nonemployee
Paid to a third party.........22, 264868 ............................. 9 compensation ................. 2 1
Prepaid rent.................... 2 25884 ............................ 2 1 Nontaxable exchanges.......... 1 8
Rental.......................... 2 26251 ............................ 2 1 Not-for-profit activities.......... 3 9
Income tax:6252 ............................ 1 9
About ............................ 76478 ............................ 1 9
ODeduction for................... 3 56765 ............................ 2 0
Ordinary gain or loss............ 1 9How to pay...................... 97 2 0 ............................. 1 1
Orphan drug credit.............. 2 0Underpayment penalty........... 98300 ............................ 1 2
Other deductible expenses...... 3 98586 ............................ 2 0Income tax return, who must
8594 ............................ 1 8file............................... 7Other nondeductible
8820 ............................ 2 0 expenses ...................... 3 9Independent contractor......... 1 1
8824 ........................18, 19 Indian employment credit....... 2 0
8826 ............................ 2 0Individual taxpayer identificationP8829 ............................ 3 8number (ITIN)................... 6Parking fees..................... 3 18830 ............................ 2 0Information returns.............. 1 1Partners, husband and wife...... 38835 ............................ 2 0Innocent spouse relief........... 5 8Pay, different kinds of........... 3 38844 ............................ 2 0Installment sales................. 1 8Paying:8845 ............................ 2 0Insurance:8846 ............................ 2 0 Business taxes.................. 6Expense ........................ 3 38847 ............................ 2 0 Income tax....................... 9Proceeds ....................... 2 68857 ............................ 5 8 Penalty:Interest:8861 ............................ 2 0 Failure to file informationExpense ........................ 3 48864 ............................ 1 9 returns....................... 1 2Income ......................... 2 38884 ............................ 2 0 Failure to furnish correct payeeInventories....................... 1 68896 ............................ 2 0 statements................... 1 2Investment credit................ 2 09 8 2 ............................. 2 3 Underpayment of tax............ 9IRS mission....................... 3Schedule C...................... 7 Pension plans.................... 3 5Schedule C-EZ.................. 7 Personal property tax........... 3 6SS-4 ............................. 6K Prepaid expense:SS-5 ............................. 6Kickbacks ....................24, 39 Extends useful life.............. 3 4W - 2............................. 1 2
Rent ............................ 3 5W - 7.............................. 6
W - 9.............................. 7L Professional fees................ 3 5
Fringe benefits................... 3 3Legal fees........................ 3 5Promissory notes................ 2 4
Fuel taxes........................ 3 6Like-kind exchanges........18, 25 Publications (See Tax help)
Page 63

Page 64 of 64 of Publication 334 10:48 - 22-DEC-2004
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Section 179 deduction........... 3 2Taxes:Q
Deduction for................... 3 5Self-employed health insuranceQualified real property business
Employment ................11, 36deduction...................... 3 4debt ............................ 2 3
Excise......................11, 36Self-employment tax:
Fuel............................. 3 6About ............................ 9R Income ...................... 7 ,  3 5Deduction for................... 3 6Real estate rents................. 2 2 Paid on certain employeeTax rate........................ 1 0Real estate taxes................ 3 6 tips........................... 2 0Time limit for posting income.... 9Recovery of deductions......... 2 4 Personal property............... 3 6Short-term capital gain orReforestation credit............. 2 0 Real estate..................... 3 6loss ............................ 1 9Refund: Sales ........................... 3 6Small BusinessOffset against debts............. 7 Self-employment............. 9 ,  3 6Administration................. 6 0Rehabilitation credit............. 2 0 Taxpayer Advocate.............. 5 8Social security coverage......... 9Related persons: Taxpayer rights.................. 5 7Social security number (SSN).... 6Special rule..................... 1 5 Tolls.............................. 3 1Sole proprietor, defined.......... 3Unreasonable rent.............. 3 5 Trade discount...............26, 27Sport utility vehicle.............. 3 2Renewable electricity and refined Transportation expenses........ 3 0Standard mileage rate........... 3 1coal production credit......... 2 0 Travel expenses................. 3 6Statutory employee............... 3Rent expense .................... 3 5 Truck expenses..............30, 31Suggestions for publication..... 3Rental income................... 2 2 TTY/TDD information............ 5 8SUV ............................... 3 2Repayment of income ........... 1 4
Research credit.................. 2 0 UTRestricted property.............. 2 4 Underpayment of tax penalty.... 9Tax help.......................... 5 8Retirement plans................ 3 5 Uniform capitalization rules..... 1 7Tax home ....................31, 36
Tax preparation fees............. 3 5S WTax refund:Salaries.......................... 3 3 Wages ............................ 3 3Claim for........................ 5 8Sale of a business............... 1 8 Welfare-to-work credit........... 2 0Offset against debts............. 7Sales of assets.................. 1 7 Work opportunity credit......... 2 1Tax return:Sales tax......................... 3 6How to file....................... 7 ■Sample returns.................. 4 0Who must file.................... 7
Schedule C........................ 7Tax year.......................... 1 3
Schedule C-EZ.................... 7
Page 64