Contents
What’s New .................. 1
Reminders ................... 2
Introduction .................. 2
Chapter 1. Rental Income and 
Expenses (If No Personal Use 
of Dwelling) ............... 3
Rental Income .............. 3
Rental Expenses ............. 3
Chapter 2. Depreciation of 
Rental Property ............. 6
The Basics ................ 6
Special Depreciation Allowance .... 8
MACRS Depreciation .......... 8
Claiming the Correct Amount of 
Depreciation ............ 12
Chapter 3. Reporting Rental 
Income, Expenses, and 
Losses ................. 12
Which Forms To Use ......... 12
Limits on Rental Losses ........ 12
At-Risk Rules ........... 13
Passive Activity Limits ...... 13
Casualties and Thefts ......... 14
Example ................. 14
Chapter 4. Special Situations ...... 15
Condominiums ............. 15
Cooperatives .............. 15
Property Changed to Rental Use ... 15
Renting Part of Property ........ 16
Not Rented for Profit .......... 16
Example—Property Changed to 
Rental Use ............. 16
Chapter 5. Personal Use of 
Dwelling Unit (Including 
Vacation Home) ............ 17
Dividing Expenses ........... 17
Dwelling Unit Used as a Home .... 18
Reporting Income and 
Deductions ............. 19
Worksheet 5-1. Worksheet for 
Figuring Rental Deductions 
for a Dwelling Unit Used as a 
Home ................ 20
Chapter 6. How To Get Tax Help .... 23
Index ..................... 26
Future Developments
For the latest information about developments 
related to Pub. 527, such as legislation enacted 
after it was published, go to IRS.gov/Pub527.
What’s New
Excess business loss limitation.  If you re-
port a loss on line 26, 32, 37, or 39 of your 
Schedule E (Form 1040), you may be subject to 
a business loss limitation. The disallowed loss 
Department 
of the 
Treasury
Internal 
Revenue 
Service
Publication 527
Cat. No. 15052W
Residential
Rental
Property
(Including Rental of 
Vacation Homes)
For use in preparing
2021 Returns
Get forms and other information faster and easier at:
• IRS.gov (English) 
• IRS.gov/Spanish (Español) 
• IRS.gov/Chinese (中文) 
• IRS.gov/Korean (한국어) 
• IRS.gov/Russian (Pусский) 
• IRS.gov/Vietnamese (Tiếng Việt) 
Userid: CPM Schema: tipx Leadpct: 100% Pt. size: 8  Draft  Ok to Print
AH XSL/XML Fileid: … tions/p527/2021/a/xml/cycle04/source (Init. & Date) _______
Page 1 of 27  10:59 - 19-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Jan 19, 2022

resulting from the limitation will not be reflected 
on line 26, 32, 37, or 39 of your Schedule E. In-
stead, use Form 461 to determine the amount 
of your excess business loss, which will be in-
cluded as income on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), 
line 8o. Any disallowed loss resulting from this 
limitation will be treated as a net operating loss 
that must be carried forward and deducted in a 
subsequent year.
See Form 461 and its instructions for details 
on the excess business loss limitation.
Section 179 deduction dollar limits.  For tax 
years beginning in 2021, the maximum section 
179 expense deduction is $1,050,000. This limit 
is reduced by the amount by which the cost of 
section 179 property placed in service during 
the tax year exceeds $2,620,000.
Accelerated depreciation for qualified In-
dian reservation property.  The accelerated 
recovery period for qualified Indian reservation 
property will not apply to property placed in 
service after December 31, 2021.
Credits for self -employed persons. Refund-
able credits are available to certain self -em-
ployed persons impacted by the coronavirus. 
See the Instructions for Form 7202, Credits for 
Sick Leave and Family Leave for Certain 
Self-Employed Individuals, for more informa-
tion.
Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) safe 
harbor. Revenue Procedure 2021 -20 has al-
lowed for a safe harbor for certain taxpayers 
who did not deduct certain otherwise deductible 
expenses paid or incurred during the tax year(s) 
ending after March 26, 2020, and on or before 
December 31, 2020, that resulted in, or were 
expected to result in, forgiveness of the loan. To 
find more information, including requirements, 
of this safe harbor, see IRS.gov/irb/
2021-19_IRB#REV-PROC-2021-20.
The COVID -19 related credit for qualified 
sick and family leave wages.  The Families 
First Coronavirus Response Act (FFCRA) was 
amended by recent legislation. The FFCRA re-
quirement that employers provide paid sick and 
family leave for reasons related to COVID -19 
(the employer mandate) expired on December 
31, 2020; however, the COVID -related Tax Re-
lief Act of 2020 extends the periods for which 
employers providing leave that otherwise meets 
the requirements of the FFCRA may continue to 
claim tax credits for qualified sick and family 
leave wages paid for leave taken before April 1, 
2021.
The American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (the 
ARP) adds new sections 3131 and 3132 to the 
Internal Revenue Code to provide credits for 
qualified sick and family leave wages similar to 
the credits that were previously enacted under 
the FFCRA and amended and extended by the 
COVID-related Tax Relief Act of 2020. The 
credits under section 3131 and 3132 are availa-
ble for qualified leave wages paid for leave 
taken after March 31, 2021, and before October 
1, 2021.
Reminders
Net Investment Income Tax (NIIT).  You may 
be subject to the NIIT. NIIT is a 3.8% tax on the 
lesser of net investment income or the excess 
of modified adjusted gross income (MAGI) over 
the threshold amount. Net investment income 
may include rental income and other income 
from passive activities. Use Form 8960 to figure 
this tax. For more information on NIIT, go to 
IRS.gov/NIIT.
Self-employed tax payments deferred from 
2020. If you elected to defer self -employed tax 
payments from 2020, see How self-employed 
individuals and household employers repay 
deferred Social Security tax  for more informa-
tion about due date(s) and payment options.
Photographs of missing children.  The Inter-
nal Revenue Service is a proud partner with the 
National Center for Missing & Exploited 
Children® (NCMEC) . Photographs of missing 
children selected by the Center may appear in 
this publication on pages that would otherwise 
be blank. You can help bring these children 
home by looking at the photographs and calling 
1-800-THE-LOST (1 -800-843-5678) if you rec-
ognize a child.
Introduction
Do you own a second house that you rent out 
all the time? Do you own a vacation home that 
you rent out when you or your family isn't using 
it?
These are two common types of residential 
rental activities discussed in this publication. In 
most cases, all rental income must be reported 
on your tax return, but there are differences in 
the expenses you are allowed to deduct and in 
the way the rental activity is reported on your re-
turn.
Chapter 1 discusses rental -for-profit activity 
in which there is no personal use of the prop-
erty. It examines some common types of rental 
income and when each is reported, as well as 
some common types of expenses and which 
are deductible.
Chapter 2  discusses depreciation as it ap-
plies to your rental real estate activity —what 
property can be depreciated and how much it 
can be depreciated.
Chapter 3 covers the reporting of your rental 
income and deductions, including casualties 
and thefts, limitations on losses, and claiming 
the correct amount of depreciation.
Chapter 4  discusses special rental situa-
tions. These include condominiums, coopera-
tives, property changed to rental use, renting 
only part of your property, and a not -for-profit 
rental activity.
Chapter 5  discusses the rules for rental in-
come and expenses when there is also per-
sonal use of the dwelling unit, such as a vaca-
tion home.
Finally, chapter 6  explains how to get tax 
help from the IRS.
Sale or exchange of rental property.  For in-
formation on how to figure and report any gain 
or loss from the sale, exchange, or other dispo-
sition of your rental property, see Pub. 544.
Sale of main home used as rental prop-
erty. For information on how to figure and re-
port any gain or loss from the sale or other dis-
position of your main home that you also used 
as rental property, see Pub. 523.
Tax-free exchange of rental property oc-
casionally used for personal purposes.  If 
you meet certain qualifying use standards, you 
may qualify for a tax -free exchange (a like -kind 
or section 1031 exchange) of one piece of 
rental property you own for a similar piece of 
rental property, even if you have used the rental 
property for personal purposes.
For information on the qualifying use stand-
ards, see Revenue Procedure 2008 -16, 
2008-10 I.R.B. 547, available at IRS.gov/irb/
2008-10_IRB#RP-2008-16. For more informa-
tion on like -kind exchanges, see chapter 1 of 
Pub. 544.
Comments and suggestions.  We welcome 
your comments about this publication and sug-
gestions for future editions.
You can send us comments through 
IRS.gov/FormComments. Or, you can write to 
the Internal Revenue Service, Tax Forms and 
Publications, 1111 Constitution Ave. NW, 
IR-6526, Washington, DC 20224.
Although we can’t respond individually to 
each comment received, we do appreciate your 
feedback and will consider your comments and 
suggestions as we revise our tax forms, instruc-
tions, and publications. Don’t send tax ques-
tions, tax returns, or payments to the above ad-
dress.
Getting answers to your tax questions. 
If you have a tax question not answered by this 
publication or the How To Get Tax Help  section 
at the end of this publication, go to the IRS In-
teractive Tax Assistant page at IRS.gov/
Help/ITA where you can find topics by using the 
search feature or viewing the categories listed.
Getting tax forms, instructions, and pub-
lications. Go to IRS.gov/Forms to download 
current and prior -year forms, instructions, and 
publications.
Ordering tax forms, instructions, and 
publications. Go to IRS.gov/OrderForms to 
order current forms, instructions, and publica-
tions; call 800 -829-3676 to order prior -year 
forms and instructions. The IRS will process 
your order for forms and publications as soon 
as possible. Don’t resubmit requests you’ve al-
ready sent us. You can get forms and publica-
tions faster online.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
463 Travel, Gift, and Car Expenses
523 Selling Your Home
534 Depreciating Property Placed in 
Service Before 1987
535 Business Expenses
544 Sales and Other Dispositions of 
Assets
547 Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
551 Basis of Assets
925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
946 How To Depreciate Property
  463
  523
  534
  535
  544
  547
  551
  925
  946
Page 2 of 27  Fileid: … tions/p527/2021/a/xml/cycle04/source 10:59 - 19-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 2 Publication 527 (2021)

Form (and Instructions)
461 Excess Business Loss Limitation
4562 Depreciation and Amortization
5213 Election To Postpone Determination 
as To Whether the Presumption 
Applies That an Activity Is Engaged 
in for Profit
8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitations
8960 Net Investment Income 
Tax—Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
Schedule E (Form 1040) Supplemental 
Income and Loss
1.
Rental Income 
and Expenses (If 
No Personal Use 
of Dwelling)
This chapter discusses the various types of 
rental income and expenses for a residential 
rental activity with no personal use of the dwell-
ing. Generally, each year, you will report all in-
come and deduct all out -of-pocket expenses in 
full. The deduction to recover the cost of your 
rental property —depreciation—is taken over a 
prescribed number of years, and is discussed in 
chapter 2.
If your rental income is from property 
you also use personally or rent to 
someone at less than a fair rental price, 
first read chapter 5.
Rental Income
In most cases, you must include in your gross 
income all amounts you receive as rent. Rental 
income is any payment you receive for the use 
or occupation of property. It isn’t limited to 
amounts you receive as normal rental pay-
ments.
When To Report
When you report rental income on your tax re-
turn generally depends on whether you are a 
cash or an accrual basis taxpayer. Most individ-
ual taxpayers use the cash method.
Cash method. You are a cash basis taxpayer 
if you report income on your return in the year 
you actually or constructively receive it, regard-
less of when it was earned. You constructively 
receive income when it is made available to 
you, for example, by being credited to your 
bank account.
  461 
  4562
  5213
  8582
  8960
  Schedule E (Form 1040)
CAUTION
!
Accrual method.  If you are an accrual basis 
taxpayer, you generally report income when 
you earn it, rather than when you receive it. You 
generally deduct your expenses when you incur 
them, rather than when you pay them.
More information.  See Pub. 538, Accounting 
Periods and Methods, for more information 
about when you constructively receive income 
and accrual methods of accounting.
Types of Income
The following are common types of rental in-
come.
Advance rent.  Advance rent is any amount 
you receive before the period that it covers. In-
clude advance rent in your rental income in the 
year you receive it regardless of the period cov-
ered or the method of accounting you use.
Example. On March 18, 2021, you signed 
a 10 -year lease to rent your property. During 
2021, you received $9,600 for the first year's 
rent and $9,600 as rent for the last year of the 
lease. You must include $19,200 in your rental 
income in 2021.
Canceling a lease.  If your tenant pays you to 
cancel a lease, the amount you receive is rent. 
Include the payment in your rental income in the 
year you receive it regardless of your method of 
accounting.
Expenses paid by tenant.  If your tenant pays 
any of your expenses, those payments are 
rental income. Because you must include this 
amount in income, you can also deduct the ex-
penses if they are deductible rental expenses. 
For more information, see Rental Expenses , 
later.
Example 1. Your tenant pays the water and 
sewage bill for your rental property and deducts 
the amount from the normal rent payment. Un-
der the terms of the lease, your tenant doesn’t 
have to pay this bill. Include the utility bill paid 
by the tenant and any amount received as a 
rent payment in your rental income. You can de-
duct the utility payment made by your tenant as 
a rental expense.
Example 2. While you are out of town, the 
furnace in your rental property stops working. 
Your tenant pays for the necessary repairs and 
deducts the repair bill from the rent payment. In-
clude the repair bill paid by the tenant and any 
amount received as a rent payment in your 
rental income. You can deduct the repair pay-
ment made by your tenant as a rental expense.
Property or services.  If you receive property 
or services as rent, instead of money, include 
the fair market value of the property or services 
in your rental income.
If the services are provided at an agreed 
upon or specified price, that price is the fair 
market value unless there is evidence to the 
contrary.
Example. Your tenant is a house painter. 
He offers to paint your rental property instead of 
paying 2 months rent. You accept his offer.
Include in your rental income the amount the 
tenant would have paid for 2 months rent. You 
can deduct that same amount as a rental ex-
pense for painting your property.
Security deposits.  Don’t include a security 
deposit in your income when you receive it if 
you plan to return it to your tenant at the end of 
the lease. But if you keep part or all of the se-
curity deposit during any year because your 
tenant doesn’t live up to the terms of the lease, 
include the amount you keep in your income in 
that year.
If an amount called a security deposit is to 
be used as a final payment of rent, it is advance 
rent. Include it in your income when you receive 
it.
Other Sources of Rental Income
Lease with option to buy.  If the rental agree-
ment gives your tenant the right to buy your 
rental property, the payments you receive under 
the agreement are generally rental income. If 
your tenant exercises the right to buy the prop-
erty, the payments you receive for the period af-
ter the date of sale are considered part of the 
selling price.
Part interest.  If you own a part interest in 
rental property, you must report your part of the 
rental income from the property.
Rental of property also used as your home.
If you rent property that you also use as your 
home and you rent it less than 15 days during 
the tax year, don’t include the rent you receive 
in your income. Also, expenses from this activ-
ity are not considered rental expenses. For 
more information, see Used as a home but ren-
ted less than 15 days  under Reporting Income 
and Deductions in chapter 5.
Rental Expenses
In most cases, the expenses of renting your 
property, such as maintenance, insurance, 
taxes, and interest, can be deducted from your 
rental income.
Personal use of rental property.  If you 
sometimes use your rental property for personal 
purposes, you must divide your expenses be-
tween rental and personal use. Also, your rental 
expense deductions may be limited. See chap-
ter 5.
Part interest.  If you own a part interest in 
rental property, you can deduct expenses you 
paid according to your percentage of owner-
ship.
Example. Roger owns a one-half undivided 
interest in a rental house. Last year, he paid 
$968 for necessary repairs on the property. 
Roger can deduct $484 (50% × $968) as a 
rental expense. He is entitled to reimbursement 
for the remaining half from the co-owner.
Page 3 of 27  Fileid: … tions/p527/2021/a/xml/cycle04/source 10:59 - 19-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 1 Rental Income and Expenses (If No Personal Use of Dwelling)  Page 3

When To Deduct
You generally deduct your rental expenses in 
the year you pay them.
If you use the accrual method, see Pub. 538 
for more information.
Types of Expenses
Listed below are the most common rental ex-
penses.
• Advertising.
• Auto and travel expenses.
• Cleaning and maintenance.
• Commissions.
• Depreciation.
• Insurance.
• Interest (other).
• Legal and other professional fees.
• Local transportation expenses.
• Management fees.
• Mortgage interest paid to banks, etc.
• Points.
• Rental payments.
• Repairs.
• Taxes.
• Utilities.
Some of these expenses, as well as other less 
common ones, are discussed below.
Depreciation. Depreciation is a capital ex-
pense. It is the mechanism for recovering your 
cost in an income -producing property and must 
be taken over the expected life of the property.
You can begin to depreciate rental property 
when it is ready and available for rent. See 
Placed in Service  under When Does Deprecia-
tion Begin and End? in chapter 2.
Insurance premiums paid in advance. If you 
pay an insurance premium for more than 1 year 
in advance, you can’t deduct the total premium 
in the year you pay it. For each year of cover-
age, you can deduct only the part of the pre-
mium payment that applies to that year. See 
chapter 6 of Pub. 535 for information on deduc-
tible premiums.
Interest expense.  You can deduct mortgage 
interest you pay on your rental property. When 
you refinance a rental property for more than 
the previous outstanding balance, the portion of 
the interest allocable to loan proceeds not rela-
ted to rental use generally can’t be deducted as 
a rental expense. Chapter 4 of Pub. 535 ex-
plains mortgage interest in detail.
Expenses paid to obtain a mortgage.
Certain expenses you pay to obtain a mortgage 
on your rental property can’t be deducted as in-
terest. These expenses, which include mort-
gage commissions, abstract fees, and record-
ing fees, are capital expenses that are part of 
your basis in the property.
Form 1098, Mortgage Interest State-
ment. If you paid $600 or more of mortgage in-
terest on your rental property to any one per-
son, you should receive a Form 1098 or similar 
statement showing the interest you paid for the 
year. If you and at least one other person (other 
than your spouse if you file a joint return) were 
liable for, and paid interest on, the mortgage, 
and the other person received the Form 1098, 
report your share of the interest on Schedule E 
(Form 1040), line 13. Attach a statement to your 
return showing the name and address of the 
other person. On the dotted line next to line 13, 
enter “See attached.”
Legal and other professional fees.  You can 
deduct, as a rental expense, legal and other 
professional expenses such as tax return prep-
aration fees you paid to prepare Schedule E, 
Part I. For example, on your 2021 Schedule E, 
you can deduct fees paid in 2021 to prepare 
Part I of your 2020 Schedule E. You can also 
deduct, as a rental expense, any expense 
(other than federal taxes and penalties) you 
paid to resolve a tax underpayment related to 
your rental activities.
Local benefit taxes.  In most cases, you can’t 
deduct charges for local benefits that increase 
the value of your property, such as charges for 
putting in streets, sidewalks, or water and 
sewer systems. These charges are nondepreci-
able capital expenditures and must be added to 
the basis of your property. However, you can 
deduct local benefit taxes that are for maintain-
ing, repairing, or paying interest charges for the 
benefits.
Local transportation expenses.  You may be 
able to deduct your ordinary and necessary lo-
cal transportation expenses if you incur them to 
collect rental income or to manage, conserve, 
or maintain your rental property. However, 
transportation expenses incurred to travel be-
tween your home and a rental property gener-
ally constitute nondeductible commuting costs 
unless you use your home as your principal 
place of business. See Pub. 587, Business Use 
of Your Home, for information on determining if 
your home office qualifies as a principal place of 
business.
Generally, if you use your personal car, 
pickup truck, or light van for rental activities, you 
can deduct the expenses using one of two 
methods: actual expenses or the standard mile-
age rate. For 2021, the standard mileage rate 
for business use is 56 cents a mile. For more in-
formation, see chapter 4 of Pub. 463. 
To deduct car expenses under either 
method, you must keep records that 
follow the rules in chapter 5 of Pub. 
463. In addition, you must complete Form 4562, 
Part V, and attach it to your tax return.
Pre-rental expenses. You can deduct your or-
dinary and necessary expenses for managing, 
conserving, or maintaining rental property from 
the time you make it available for rent.
Rental of equipment. You can deduct the rent 
you pay for equipment that you use for rental 
purposes. However, in some cases, lease con-
tracts are actually purchase contracts. If so, you 
can’t deduct these payments. You can recover 
the cost of purchased equipment through de-
preciation.
Rental of property.  You can deduct the rent 
you pay for property that you use for rental pur-
poses. If you buy a leasehold for rental purpo-
RECORDS
ses, you can deduct an equal part of the cost 
each year over the term of the lease.
Travel expenses.  You can deduct the ordi-
nary and necessary expenses of traveling away 
from home if the primary purpose of the trip is to 
collect rental income or to manage, conserve, 
or maintain your rental property. You must prop-
erly allocate your expenses between rental and 
nonrental activities. You can’t deduct the cost of 
traveling away from home if the primary pur-
pose of the trip is to improve the property. The 
cost of improvements is recovered by taking 
depreciation. For information on travel expen-
ses, see chapter 1 of Pub. 463.
To deduct travel expenses, you must 
keep records that follow the rules in 
chapter 5 of Pub. 463.
Uncollected rent. If you are a cash basis tax-
payer, don’t deduct uncollected rent. Because 
you haven’t included it in your income, it’s not 
deductible.
If you use an accrual method, report income 
when you earn it. If you are unable to collect the 
rent, you may be able to deduct it as a business 
bad debt. See chapter 10 of Pub. 535 for more 
information about business bad debts.
Vacant rental property.  If you hold property 
for rental purposes, you may be able to deduct 
your ordinary and necessary expenses (includ-
ing depreciation) for managing, conserving, or 
maintaining the property while the property is 
vacant. However, you can’t deduct any loss of 
rental income for the period the property is va-
cant.
Vacant while listed for sale.  If you sell 
property you held for rental purposes, you can 
deduct the ordinary and necessary expenses 
for managing, conserving, or maintaining the 
property until it is sold. If the property isn’t held 
out and available for rent while listed for sale, 
the expenses aren’t deductible rental expenses.
Points
The term “points” is often used to describe 
some of the charges paid, or treated as paid, by 
a borrower to take out a loan or a mortgage. 
These charges are also called loan origination 
fees, maximum loan charges, or premium 
charges. Any of these charges (points) that are 
solely for the use of money are interest. Be-
cause points are prepaid interest, you generally 
can’t deduct the full amount in the year paid, but 
must deduct the interest over the term of the 
loan.
The method used to figure the amount of 
points you can deduct each year follows the 
original issue discount (OID) rules. In this case, 
points are equivalent to OID, which is the differ-
ence between:
• The amount borrowed (redemption price at 
maturity, or principal); and
• The proceeds (issue price).
The first step is to determine whether your 
total OID (which you may have on bonds or 
other investments in addition to the mortgage 
loan), including the OID resulting from the 
RECORDS
Page 4 of 27  Fileid: … tions/p527/2021/a/xml/cycle04/source 10:59 - 19-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 4  Chapter 1 Rental Income and Expenses (If No Personal Use of Dwelling)

points, is insignificant or de minimis. If the OID 
isn’t de minimis, you must use the con-
stant-yield method to figure how much you can 
deduct.
De minimis OID.  The OID is de minimis if it is 
less than one -fourth of 1% (0.0025) of the sta-
ted redemption price at maturity (principal 
amount of the loan) multiplied by the number of 
full years from the date of original issue to ma-
turity (term of the loan).
If the OID is de minimis, you can choose one 
of the following ways to figure the amount of 
points you can deduct each year.
• On a constant-yield basis over the term of 
the loan.
• On a straight line basis over the term of the 
loan.
• In proportion to stated interest payments.
• In its entirety at maturity of the loan.
You make this choice by deducting the OID 
(points) in a manner consistent with the method 
chosen on your timely filed tax return for the tax 
year in which the loan is issued.
Example. Carol took out a $100,000 mort-
gage loan on January 1, 2021, to buy a house 
she will use as a rental during 2021. The loan is 
to be repaid over 30 years. During 2021, Carol 
paid $10,000 of mortgage interest (stated inter-
est) to the lender. When the loan was made, 
she paid $1,500 in points to the lender. The 
points reduced the principal amount of the loan 
from $100,000 to $98,500, resulting in $1,500 
of OID. Carol determines that the points (OID) 
she paid are de minimis based on the following 
computation.
Redemption price at maturity (principal 
amount of the loan) ............... $100,000
Multiplied by: The term of the 
loan in complete years ............ × 30
Multiplied by ..................... × 0.0025
De minimis amount ............ $  7,500
The points (OID) she paid ($1,500) are less 
than the de minimis amount ($7,500). There-
fore, Carol has de minimis OID and she can 
choose one of the four ways discussed earlier 
to figure the amount she can deduct each year. 
Under the straight line method, she can deduct 
$50 each year for 30 years.
Constant-yield method.  If the OID isn’t de 
minimis, you must use the constant -yield 
method to figure how much you can deduct 
each year.
You figure your deduction for the first year in 
the following manner.
1. Determine the issue price of the loan. If 
you paid points on the loan, the issue price 
is generally the difference between the 
principal and the points.
2. Multiply the result in (1) by the yield to ma-
turity (defined later).
3. Subtract any qualified stated interest pay-
ments (defined later) from the result in (2). 
This is the OID you can deduct in the first 
year.
Yield to maturity (YTM).  This rate is gen-
erally shown in the literature you receive from 
your lender. If you don’t have this information, 
consult your lender or tax advisor. In general, 
the YTM is the discount rate that, when used in 
computing the present value of all principal and 
interest payments, produces an amount equal 
to the principal amount of the loan.
Qualified stated interest (QSI).  In gen-
eral, this is the stated interest that is uncondi-
tionally payable in cash or property (other than 
another loan of the issuer) at least annually over 
the term of the loan at a fixed rate.
Example—Year 1. The facts are the same 
as in the previous example. The YTM on Carol's 
loan is 10.2467%, compounded annually.
She figured the amount of points (OID) she 
could deduct in 2021 as follows.
Principal amount of the loan .......... $100,000
Minus: Points (OID) ................ – 1,500
Issue price of the loan .............. $ 98,500
Multiplied by: YTM ................ × 0.102467
Total .......................... 10,093
Minus: QSI ...................... – 10,000
Points (OID) deductible in 2021 .... $     93
To figure your deduction in any subsequent 
year, you start with the adjusted issue price. To 
get the adjusted issue price, add to the issue 
price figured in Year 1 any OID previously de-
ducted. Then, follow steps (2) and (3), earlier.
Example—Year 2.  Carol figured the de-
duction for 2022 as follows.
Issue price ...................... $98,500
Plus: Points (OID) deducted 
in 2021 ....................... + 93
Adjusted issue price ............... $98,593
Multiplied by: YTM ................ × 0.102467
Total .......................... 10,103
Minus: QSI ...................... – 10,000
Points (OID) deductible in 2022 .... $ 103
Loan or mortgage ends.  If your loan or mort-
gage ends, you may be able to deduct any re-
maining points (OID) in the tax year in which the 
loan or mortgage ends. A loan or mortgage may 
end due to a refinancing, prepayment, foreclo-
sure, or similar event. However, if the refinanc-
ing is with the same lender, the remaining 
points (OID) generally aren’t deductible in the 
year in which the refinancing occurs, but may 
be deductible over the term of the new mort-
gage or loan.
Points when loan refinance is more than 
the previous outstanding balance.  When 
you refinance a rental property for more than 
the previous outstanding balance, the portion of 
the points allocable to loan proceeds not rela-
ted to rental use generally can’t be deducted as 
a rental expense.
Example. Charles refinanced a loan with a 
balance of $100,000. The amount of the new 
loan was $120,000. Charles used the additional 
$20,000 to purchase a car. The points allocable 
to the $20,000 would be treated as nondeducti-
ble personal interest.
Repairs and Improvements
Generally, an expense for repairing or maintain-
ing your rental property may be deducted if you 
aren’t required to capitalize the expense.
Improvements. You must capitalize any ex-
pense you pay to improve your rental property. 
An expense is for an improvement if it results in 
a betterment to your property, restores your 
property, or adapts your property to a new or 
different use. Table 1 -1 shows examples of 
many improvements.
Betterments. Expenses that may result in 
a betterment to your property include expenses 
for fixing a pre -existing defect or condition, en-
larging or expanding your property, or increas-
ing the capacity, strength, or quality of your 
property.
Restoration. Expenses that may be for re-
storation include expenses for replacing a sub-
stantial structural part of your property, repairing 
damage to your property after you properly ad-
justed the basis of your property as a result of a 
casualty loss, or rebuilding your property to a 
like-new condition.
Adaptation. Expenses that may be for 
adaptation include expenses for altering your 
property to a use that isn’t consistent with the 
intended ordinary use of your property when 
you began renting the property.
De minimis safe harbor for tangible 
property.  If you elect this de minimis safe 
Examples of Improvements
Additions
Bedroom
Bathroom
Deck
Garage
Porch
Patio
 
Lawn & Grounds
Landscaping
Driveway
Walkway
Fence
Retaining wall
Sprinkler system
Swimming pool
Miscellaneous
Storm windows, doors
New roof
Central vacuum
Wiring upgrades
Satellite dish
Security system 
 
Heating & Air Conditioning
Heating system
Central air conditioning
Furnace
Duct work
Central humidifier
Filtration system
Plumbing
Septic system
Water heater
Soft water system
Filtration system
 
Interior Improvements
Built-in appliances
Kitchen modernization
Flooring
Wall-to-wall carpeting
 
Insulation
Attic
Walls, floor
Pipes, duct work
Table 1-1.
Page 5 of 27  Fileid: … tions/p527/2021/a/xml/cycle04/source 10:59 - 19-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 1 Rental Income and Expenses (If No Personal Use of Dwelling)  Page 5

harbor for your rental activity for the tax year, 
you aren’t required to capitalize the de minimis 
costs of acquiring or producing certain real and 
tangible personal property and may deduct 
these amounts as rental expenses on line 19 of 
Schedule E. For more information on electing 
and using the de minimis safe harbor for tangi-
ble property, see chapter 1 of Pub. 535.
Safe harbor for routine maintenance.  If 
you determine that your cost was for an im-
provement to a building or equipment, you may 
still be able to deduct your cost under the rou-
tine maintenance safe harbor. See Pub. 535 for 
more information.
Separate the costs of repairs and im-
provements, and keep accurate re-
cords. You will need to know the cost 
of improvements when you sell or depreciate 
your property.
The expenses you capitalize for improving 
your property can generally be depreciated as if 
the improvement were separate property.
2.
Depreciation of 
Rental Property
You recover the cost of income-producing prop-
erty through yearly tax deductions. You do this 
by depreciating the property; that is, by deduct-
ing some of the cost each year on your tax re-
turn.
Three factors determine how much depreciation 
you can deduct each year: (1) your basis in the 
property, (2) the recovery period for the prop-
erty, and (3) the depreciation method used. You 
can’t simply deduct your mortgage or principal 
payments, or the cost of furniture, fixtures, and 
equipment, as an expense.
You can deduct depreciation only on the part of 
your property used for rental purposes. Depre-
ciation reduces your basis for figuring gain or 
loss on a later sale or exchange.
You may have to use Form 4562 to figure and 
report your depreciation. See Which Forms To 
Use in chapter 3. Also, see Pub. 946.
Section 179 deduction.  The section 179 de-
duction is a means of recovering part or all of 
the cost of certain qualifying property in the year 
you place the property in service. It is separate 
from your depreciation deduction. See chap-
ter 2 of Pub. 946 for more information about 
claiming this deduction.
Alternative minimum tax (AMT).  If you use 
accelerated depreciation, you may be subject to 
the AMT. Accelerated depreciation allows you 
to deduct more depreciation earlier in the recov-
ery period than you could deduct using a 
RECORDS
straight line method (same deduction each 
year).
The prescribed depreciation methods for 
rental real estate aren’t accelerated, so the de-
preciation deduction isn’t adjusted for the AMT. 
However, accelerated methods are generally 
used for other property connected with rental 
activities (for example, appliances and 
wall-to-wall carpeting).
To find out if you are subject to the AMT, 
see the Instructions for Form 6251.
The Basics
The following section discusses the information 
you will need to have about the rental property 
and the decisions to be made before figuring 
your depreciation deduction.
What Rental Property Can Be 
Depreciated?
You can depreciate your property if it meets all 
the following requirements.
• You own the property.
• You use the property in your business or 
income-producing activity (such as rental 
property).
• The property has a determinable useful 
life.
• The property is expected to last more than 
1 year.
Property you own. To claim depreciation, you 
must usually be the owner of the property. You 
are considered to be the owner of the property 
even if it’s subject to a debt.
Rented property. Generally, if you pay rent 
for property, you can’t depreciate that property. 
Usually, only the owner can depreciate it. How-
ever, if you make permanent improvements to 
leased property, you may be able to depreciate 
the improvements. See Additions or improve-
ments to property , later in this chapter, under 
Recovery Periods Under GDS.
Cooperative apartments. If you are a ten-
ant-stockholder in a cooperative housing corpo-
ration and rent your cooperative apartment to 
others, you can depreciate your stock in the 
corporation. See chapter 4.
Property having a determinable useful life.
To be depreciable, your property must have a 
determinable useful life. This means that it must 
be something that wears out, decays, gets used 
up, becomes obsolete, or loses its value from 
natural causes.
What Rental Property Can’t Be 
Depreciated?
Certain property can’t be depreciated. This in-
cludes land and certain excepted property.
Land. You can’t depreciate the cost of land be-
cause land generally doesn’t wear out, become 
obsolete, or get used up. But if it does, the loss 
is accounted for upon disposition. The costs of 
clearing, grading, planting, and landscaping are 
usually all part of the cost of land and can’t be 
depreciated. You may, however, be able to de-
preciate certain land preparation costs if the 
costs are so closely associated with other de-
preciable property that you can determine a life 
for them along with the life of the associated 
property.
Example. You built a new house to use as 
a rental and paid for grading, clearing, seeding, 
and planting bushes and trees. Some of the 
bushes and trees were planted right next to the 
house, while others were planted around the 
outer border of the lot. If you replace the house, 
you would have to destroy the bushes and trees 
right next to it. These bushes and trees are 
closely associated with the house, so they have 
a determinable useful life. Therefore, you can 
depreciate them. Add your other land prepara-
tion costs to the basis of your land because 
they have no determinable life and you can’t de-
preciate them.
Excepted property.  Even if the property 
meets all the requirements listed earlier under 
What Rental Property Can Be Depreciated , you 
can’t depreciate the following property.
• Property placed in service and disposed of 
(or taken out of business use) in the same 
year.
• Equipment used to build capital improve-
ments. You must add otherwise allowable 
depreciation on the equipment during the 
period of construction to the basis of your 
improvements.
For more information, see chapter 1 of Pub. 
946.
When Does Depreciation 
Begin and End?
You begin to depreciate your rental property 
when you place it in service for the production 
of income. You stop depreciating it either when 
you have fully recovered your cost or other ba-
sis, or when you retire it from service, whichever 
happens first.
Placed in Service
You place property in service in a rental activity 
when it is ready and available for a specific use 
in that activity. Even if you aren’t using the prop-
erty, it is in service when it is ready and availa-
ble for its specific use.
Example 1.  On November 22 of last year, 
you purchased a dishwasher for your rental 
property. The appliance was delivered on De-
cember 7, but wasn’t installed and ready for use 
until January 3 of this year. Because the dish-
washer wasn’t ready for use last year, it isn’t 
considered placed in service until this year.
If the appliance had been installed and 
ready for use when it was delivered in Decem-
ber of last year, it would have been considered 
placed in service in December, even if it wasn’t 
actually used until this year.
Example 2.  On April 6, you purchased a 
house to use as residential rental property. You 
made extensive repairs to the house and had it 
ready for rent on July 5. You began to advertise 
the house for rent in July and actually rented it 
Page 6 of 27  Fileid: … tions/p527/2021/a/xml/cycle04/source 10:59 - 19-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 6  Chapter 2 Depreciation of Rental Property

beginning September 1. The house is consid-
ered placed in service in July when it was ready 
and available for rent. You can begin to depreci-
ate the house in July.
Example 3. You moved from your home in 
July. During August and September, you made 
several repairs to the house. On October 1, you 
listed the property for rent with a real estate 
company, which rented it on December 1. The 
property is considered placed in service on Oc-
tober 1, the date when it was available for rent.
Conversion to business use.  If you place 
property in service in a personal activity, you 
can’t claim depreciation. However, if you 
change the property's use to business or the 
production of income, you can begin to depreci-
ate it at the time of the change. You place the 
property in service for business or income -pro-
ducing use on the date of the change.
Example. You bought a house and used it 
as your personal home several years before 
you converted it to rental property. Although its 
specific use was personal and no depreciation 
was allowable, you placed the home in service 
when you began using it as your home. You can 
begin to claim depreciation in the year you con-
verted it to rental property because at that time 
its use changed to the production of income.
Idle Property
Continue to claim a deduction for depreciation 
on property used in your rental activity even if it 
is temporarily idle (not in use). For example, if 
you must make repairs after a tenant moves 
out, you still depreciate the rental property dur-
ing the time it isn’t available for rent.
Cost or Other Basis Fully 
Recovered
You must stop depreciating property when the 
total of your yearly depreciation deductions 
equals your cost or other basis of your property. 
For this purpose, your yearly depreciation de-
ductions include any depreciation that you were 
allowed to claim, even if you didn’t claim it. See 
Basis of Depreciable Property, later.
Retired From Service
You stop depreciating property when you retire 
it from service, even if you haven’t fully recov-
ered its cost or other basis. You retire property 
from service when you permanently withdraw it 
from use in a trade or business or from use in 
the production of income because of any of the 
following events.
• You sell or exchange the property.
• You convert the property to personal use.
• You abandon the property.
• The property is destroyed.
Depreciation Methods
Generally, you must use the Modified Acceler-
ated Cost Recovery System (MACRS) to de-
preciate residential rental property placed in 
service after 1986.
If you placed rental property in service be-
fore 1987, you are using one of the following 
methods.
• Accelerated Cost Recovery System 
(ACRS) for property placed in service after 
1980 but before 1987.
• Straight line or declining balance method 
over the useful life of property placed in 
service before 1981.
See MACRS Depreciation, later, for more infor-
mation.
Rental property placed in service before 
2021. Continue to use the same method of fig-
uring depreciation that you used in the past.
Use of real property changed.  Generally, 
you must use MACRS to depreciate real prop-
erty that you acquired for personal use before 
1987 and changed to business or income -pro-
ducing use after 1986. This includes your resi-
dence that you changed to rental use. See 
Property Owned or Used in 1986 in chapter 1 of 
Pub. 946 for those situations in which MACRS 
isn’t allowed.
Improvements made after 1986. Treat an im-
provement made after 1986 to property you 
placed in service before 1987 as separate de-
preciable property. As a result, you can depreci-
ate that improvement as separate property un-
der MACRS if it is the type of property that 
otherwise qualifies for MACRS depreciation. 
For more information about improvements, see 
Additions or improvements to property , later in 
this chapter, under Recovery Periods Under 
GDS.
This publication discusses MACRS de-
preciation only. If you need information 
about depreciating property placed in 
service before 1987, see Pub. 534.
Basis of Depreciable 
Property
The basis of property used in a rental activity is 
generally its adjusted basis when you place it in 
service in that activity. This is its cost or other 
basis when you acquired it, adjusted for certain 
items occurring before you place it in service in 
the rental activity.
If you depreciate your property under 
MACRS, you may also have to reduce your ba-
sis by certain deductions and credits with re-
spect to the property.
Basis and adjusted basis are explained in 
the following discussions.
If you used the property for personal 
purposes before changing it to rental 
use, its basis for depreciation is the 
lesser of its adjusted basis or its fair market 
value when you change it to rental use. See Ba-
sis of Property Changed to Rental Use  in chap-
ter 4.
Cost Basis
The basis of property you buy is usually its cost. 
The cost is the amount you pay for it in cash, in 
CAUTION
!
CAUTION
!
debt obligation, in other property, or in services. 
Your cost also includes amounts you pay for:
• Sales tax charged on the purchase (but 
see Exception next),
• Freight charges to obtain the property, and
• Installation and testing charges.
Exception. If you deducted state and local 
general sales taxes as an itemized deduction 
on Schedule A (Form 1040), don’t include as 
part of your cost basis the sales taxes you de-
ducted. Such taxes were deductible before 
1987 and after 2003.
Loans with low or no interest.  If you buy 
property on any payment plan that charges little 
or no interest, the basis of your property is your 
stated purchase price, less the amount consid-
ered to be unstated interest. See Unstated In-
terest and Original Issue Discount (OID)  in Pub. 
537, Installment Sales.
Real property.  If you buy real property, such 
as a building and land, certain fees and other 
expenses you pay are part of your cost basis in 
the property.
Real estate taxes.  If you buy real property 
and agree to pay real estate taxes on it that 
were owed by the seller and the seller doesn’t 
reimburse you, the taxes you pay are treated as 
part of your basis in the property. You can’t de-
duct them as taxes paid.
If you reimburse the seller for real estate 
taxes the seller paid for you, you can usually 
deduct that amount. Don’t include that amount 
in your basis in the property.
Settlement fees and other costs. The fol-
lowing settlement fees and closing costs for 
buying the property are part of your basis in the 
property.
• Abstract fees.
• Charges for installing utility services.
• Legal fees.
• Recording fees.
• Surveys.
• Transfer taxes.
• Title insurance.
• Any amounts the seller owes that you 
agree to pay, such as back taxes or inter-
est, recording or mortgage fees, charges 
for improvements or repairs, and sales 
commissions.
The following are settlement fees and clos-
ing costs you can’t include in your basis in the 
property.
1. Fire insurance premiums.
2. Rent or other charges relating to occu-
pancy of the property before closing.
3. Charges connected with getting or refi-
nancing a loan, such as:
a. Points (discount points, loan origina-
tion fees),
b. Mortgage insurance premiums,
c. Loan assumption fees,
d. Cost of a credit report, and
e. Fees for an appraisal required by a 
lender.
Page 7 of 27  Fileid: … tions/p527/2021/a/xml/cycle04/source 10:59 - 19-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 2 Depreciation of Rental Property  Page 7

Also, don’t include amounts placed in es-
crow for the future payment of items such as 
taxes and insurance.
Assumption of a mortgage.  If you buy 
property and become liable for an existing mort-
gage on the property, your basis is the amount 
you pay for the property plus the amount re-
maining to be paid on the mortgage.
Example. You buy a building for $60,000 
cash and assume a mortgage of $240,000 on it. 
Your basis is $300,000.
Separating cost of land and buildings.  If 
you buy buildings and your cost includes the 
cost of the land on which they stand, you must 
divide the cost between the land and the build-
ings to figure the basis for depreciation of the 
buildings. The part of the cost that you allocate 
to each asset is the ratio of the fair market value 
of that asset to the fair market value of the 
whole property at the time you buy it.
If you aren’t certain of the fair market values 
of the land and the buildings, you can divide the 
cost between them based on their assessed 
values for real estate tax purposes.
Example. You buy a house and land for 
$200,000. The purchase contract doesn’t spec-
ify how much of the purchase price is for the 
house and how much is for the land.
The latest real estate tax assessment on the 
property was based on an assessed value of 
$160,000, of which $136,000 was for the house 
and $24,000 was for the land.
You can allocate 85% ($136,000 ÷ 
$160,000) of the purchase price to the house 
and 15% ($24,000 ÷ $160,000) of the purchase 
price to the land.
Your basis in the house is $170,000 (85% of 
$200,000) and your basis in the land is $30,000 
(15% of $200,000).
Basis Other Than Cost
You can’t use cost as a basis for property that 
you received:
• In return for services you performed;
• In an exchange for other property;
• As a gift;
• From your spouse, or from your former 
spouse as the result of a divorce; or
• As an inheritance.
If you received property in one of these 
ways, see Pub. 551 for information on how to 
figure your basis.
Adjusted Basis
To figure your property's basis for depreciation, 
you may have to make certain adjustments (in-
creases and decreases) to the basis of the 
property for events occurring between the time 
you acquired the property and the time you 
placed it in service for business or the produc-
tion of income. The result of these adjustments 
to the basis is the adjusted basis.
Increases to basis.  You must increase the 
basis of any property by the cost of all items 
properly added to a capital account. These in-
clude the following.
• The cost of any additions or improvements 
made before placing your property into 
service as a rental that have a useful life of 
more than 1 year.
• Amounts spent after a casualty to restore 
the damaged property.
• The cost of extending utility service lines to 
the property.
• Legal fees, such as the cost of defending 
and perfecting title, or settling zoning is-
sues.
Additions or improvements.  Add to the 
basis of your property the amount an addition or 
improvement actually costs you, including any 
amount you borrowed to make the addition or 
improvement. This includes all direct costs, 
such as material and labor, but doesn’t include 
your own labor. It also includes all expenses re-
lated to the addition or improvement.
For example, if you had an architect draw up 
plans for remodeling your property, the archi-
tect's fee is a part of the cost of the remodeling. 
Or, if you had your lot surveyed to put up a 
fence, the cost of the survey is a part of the cost 
of the fence.
Keep separate accounts for depreciable ad-
ditions or improvements made after you place 
the property in service in your rental activity. For 
information on depreciating additions or im-
provements, see Additions or improvements to 
property, later in this chapter, under Recovery 
Periods Under GDS.
The cost of landscaping improvements 
is usually treated as an addition to the 
basis of the land, which isn’t deprecia-
ble. However, see What Rental Property Can’t 
Be Depreciated, earlier.
Assessments for local improvements.
Assessments for items which tend to increase 
the value of property, such as streets and side-
walks, must be added to the basis of the prop-
erty. For example, if your city installs curbing on 
the street in front of your house, and assesses 
you and your neighbors for its cost, you must 
add the assessment to the basis of your prop-
erty. Also, add the cost of legal fees paid to ob-
tain a decrease in an assessment levied against 
property to pay for local improvements. You 
can’t deduct these items as taxes or depreciate 
them.
However, you can deduct assessments for 
the purpose of maintenance or repairs or for the 
purpose of meeting interest charges related to 
the improvements. Don’t add them to your basis 
in the property.
Deducting vs. capitalizing costs.  Don’t 
add to your basis costs you can deduct as cur-
rent expenses. However, there are certain costs 
you can choose either to deduct or to capitalize. 
If you capitalize these costs, include them in 
your basis. If you deduct them, don’t include 
them in your basis.
The costs you may choose to deduct or cap-
italize include carrying charges, such as interest 
and taxes, that you must pay to own property.
For more information about deducting or 
capitalizing costs and how to make the election, 
see Carrying Charges in chapter 7 of Pub. 535.
CAUTION
!
Decreases to basis.  You must decrease the 
basis of your property by any items that repre-
sent a return of your cost. These include the fol-
lowing.
• Insurance or other payment you receive as 
the result of a casualty or theft loss. 
• Casualty loss not covered by insurance for 
which you took a deduction.
• Amount(s) you receive for granting an 
easement. 
• Residential energy credits you were al-
lowed before 1986 or after 2005 if you 
added the cost of the energy items to the 
basis of your home. 
• Exclusion from income of subsidies for en-
ergy conservation measures.
• Special depreciation allowance or a sec-
tion 179 deduction claimed on qualified 
property.
• Depreciation you deducted or could have 
deducted on your tax returns under the 
method of depreciation you chose. If you 
didn’t deduct enough or deducted too 
much in any year, see Depreciation under 
Decreases to Basis in Pub. 551.
If your rental property was previously used 
as your main home, you must also decrease the 
basis by the following.
• Gain you postponed from the sale of your 
main home before May 7, 1997, if the re-
placement home was converted to your 
rental property.
• District of Columbia first-time homebuyer 
credit allowed on the purchase of your 
main home after August 4, 1997, and be-
fore January 1, 2012.
• Amount of qualified principal residence in-
debtedness discharged on or after January 
1, 2007.
Special Depreciation 
Allowance
For 2021, some properties used in connection 
with residential real property activities may 
qualify for a special depreciation allowance. 
This allowance is figured before you figure your 
regular depreciation deduction. See chapter 3 
of Pub. 946 for details. Also, see the instruc-
tions for Form 4562, line 14.
If you qualify for, but choose not to take, a 
special depreciation allowance, you must attach 
a statement to your return. The details of this 
election are in chapter 3 of Pub. 946 and the in-
structions for Form 4562, line 14.
MACRS Depreciation
Most business and investment property placed 
in service after 1986 is depreciated using 
MACRS. 
This section explains how to determine 
which MACRS depreciation system applies to 
your property. It also discusses other informa-
tion you need to know before you can figure de-
preciation under MACRS. This information in-
cludes the property's:
• Recovery class,
• Applicable recovery period,
Page 8 of 27  Fileid: … tions/p527/2021/a/xml/cycle04/source 10:59 - 19-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 8  Chapter 2 Depreciation of Rental Property

• Convention,
• Placed-in-service date,
• Basis for depreciation, and
• Depreciation method.
Depreciation Systems
MACRS consists of two systems that determine 
how you depreciate your property —the General 
Depreciation System (GDS) and the Alternative 
Depreciation System (ADS). You must use 
GDS unless you are specifically required by law 
to use ADS or you elect to use ADS.
Excluded Property
You can’t use MACRS for certain personal 
property (such as furniture or appliances) 
placed in service in your rental property in 2021 
if it had been previously placed in service be-
fore 1987, when MACRS became effective.
In most cases, personal property is exclu-
ded from MACRS if you (or a person related to 
you) owned or used it in 1986 or if your tenant is 
a person (or someone related to the person) 
who owned or used it in 1986. However, the 
property isn’t excluded if your 2021 deduction 
under MACRS (using a half -year convention) is 
less than the deduction you would have under 
ACRS. For more information, see What Method 
Can You Use To Depreciate Your Property?  in 
chapter 1 of Pub. 946.
Electing ADS
If you choose, you can use the ADS method for 
most property. Under ADS, you use the straight 
line method of depreciation.
The election of ADS for one item in a class 
of property generally applies to all property in 
that class placed in service during the tax year 
of the election. However, the election applies on 
a property -by-property basis for residential 
rental property and nonresidential real property.
If you choose to use ADS for your residential 
rental property, the election must be made in 
the first year the property is placed in service. 
Once you make this election, you can never re-
voke it.
For property placed in service during 2021, 
you make the election to use ADS by entering 
the depreciation on Form 4562, Part III, Sec-
tion C, line 20c.
Property Classes Under GDS
Each item of property that can be depreciated 
under MACRS is assigned to a property class, 
determined by its class life. The property class 
generally determines the depreciation method, 
recovery period, and convention.
The property classes under GDS are: 
• 3-year property,
• 5-year property,
• 7-year property,
• 10-year property,
• 15-year property,
• 20-year property,
• Nonresidential real property, and
• Residential rental property.
Under MACRS, property that you placed in 
service during 2021 in your rental activities gen-
erally falls into one of the following classes.
• 5-year property. This class includes com-
puters and peripheral equipment, office 
machinery (typewriters, calculators, cop-
iers, etc.), automobiles, and light trucks.
This class also includes appliances, 
carpeting, and furniture used in a residen-
tial rental real estate activity.
Depreciation is limited on automobiles 
and other property used for transportation 
and property of a type generally used for 
entertainment, recreation, or amusement. 
See chapter 5 of Pub. 946.
• 7-year property. This class includes of-
fice furniture and equipment (desks, file 
cabinets, and similar items). This class 
also includes any property that doesn’t 
have a class life and that hasn’t been des-
ignated by law as being in any other class.
• 15-year property. This class includes 
roads, fences, and shrubbery (if deprecia-
ble).
• Residential rental property. This class 
includes any real property that is a rental 
building or structure (including a mobile 
home) for which 80% or more of the gross 
rental income for the tax year is from dwell-
ing units. It doesn’t include a unit in a hotel, 
motel, inn, or other establishment where 
more than half of the units are used on a 
transient basis. If you live in any part of the 
building or structure, the gross rental in-
come includes the fair rental value of the 
part you live in. 
The other property classes generally 
don’t apply to property used in rental 
activities. These classes aren’t dis-
cussed in this publication. See Pub. 946 for 
more information.
CAUTION
!
MACRS Recovery Periods for 
Property Used in
Rental Activities
Table 2-1.
Keep for Your Records
MACRS Recovery Period 
Type of Property
General
Depreciation
System
Alternative
Depreciation
System 
Computers and their peripheral equipment .............. 5 years 5 years
Office machinery, such as:
• Typewriters
• Calculators
• Copiers .................. .................. 5 years 6 years
Automobiles .................................... 5 years 5 years
Light trucks ..................................... 5 years 5 years
Appliances, such as:
• Stoves
• Refrigerators ................ ................ 5 years 9 years
Carpets ........................................ 5 years 9 years
Furniture used in rental property ...................... 5 years 9 years
Office furniture and equipment, such as:
• Desks
• Files ................... ................... 7 years 10 years
Any property that doesn’t have a class life and that hasn’t been 
designated by law as being in any other class ............ 7 years 12 years
Roads ......................................... 15 years 20 years
Shrubbery ...................................... 15 years 20 years
Fences ........................................ 15 years 20 years
Residential rental property (buildings or structures) and 
structural components such as furnaces, waterpipes, venting, 
etc. ........................................... 27.5 years 30 years1
Additions and improvements, such as a new roof ......... The same recovery period as 
that of the property to which the 
addition or improvement is 
made, determined as if the 
property were placed in service 
at the same time as the addition 
or improvement.
1 40 years for property placed in service before January 1, 2018. However, the ADS recovery period for 
residential rental property placed in service before January 1, 2018, is 30 years if the property is held by an 
electing real property trade or business (as defined in section 163(j)(7)(B)) and section 168(g)(1)(A), (B), 
(C), (D), or (E) did not apply to the property before January 1, 2018. 
Page 9 of 27  Fileid: … tions/p527/2021/a/xml/cycle04/source 10:59 - 19-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 2 Depreciation of Rental Property  Page 9

Recovery Periods Under 
GDS
The recovery period of property is the number 
of years over which you recover its cost or other 
basis. The recovery periods are generally lon-
ger under ADS than GDS.
The recovery period of property depends on 
its property class. Under GDS, the recovery pe-
riod of an asset is generally the same as its 
property class.
Class lives and recovery periods for most 
assets are listed in Appendix B  of Pub. 946. 
See Table 2 -1 for recovery periods of property 
commonly used in residential rental activities.
Qualified Indian reservation property. 
Shorter recovery periods are provided under 
MACRS for qualified Indian reservation prop-
erty placed in service on Indian reservations. 
For more information, see Pub. 946.
Additions or improvements to property.
Treat additions or improvements you make to 
your depreciable rental property as separate 
property items for depreciation purposes.
The property class and recovery period of 
the addition or improvement are the ones that 
would apply to the original property if you had 
placed it in service at the same time as the ad-
dition or improvement.
The recovery period for an addition or im-
provement to property begins on the later of:
• The date the addition or improvement is 
placed in service, or
• The date the property to which the addition 
or improvement was made is placed in 
service.
Example. You own a residential rental 
house that you have been renting since 1986 
and depreciating under ACRS. You built an ad-
dition onto the house and placed it in service in 
2021. You must use MACRS for the addition. 
Under GDS, the addition is depreciated as resi-
dential rental property over 27.5 years.
Conventions
A convention is a method established under 
MACRS to set the beginning and end of the re-
covery period. The convention you use deter-
mines the number of months for which you can 
claim depreciation in the year you place prop-
erty in service and in the year you dispose of 
the property.
Mid-month convention. A mid-month conven-
tion is used for all residential rental property and 
nonresidential real property. Under this conven-
tion, you treat all property placed in service, or 
disposed of, during any month as placed in 
service, or disposed of, at the midpoint of that 
month.
Mid-quarter convention.  A mid -quarter con-
vention must be used if the mid -month conven-
tion doesn’t apply and the total depreciable ba-
sis of MACRS property placed in service in the 
last 3 months of a tax year (excluding nonresi-
dential real property, residential rental property, 
and property placed in service and disposed of 
in the same year) is more than 40% of the total 
basis of all such property you place in service 
during the year.
Under this convention, you treat all property 
placed in service, or disposed of, during any 
quarter of a tax year as placed in service, or dis-
posed of, at the midpoint of the quarter.
Example. During the tax year, Tom pur-
chased the following items to use in his rental 
property. He elects not to claim the special de-
preciation allowance discussed earlier.
• A dishwasher for $400 that he placed in 
service in January.
• Used furniture for $100 that he placed in 
service in September.
• A refrigerator for $800 that he placed in 
service in October.
Tom uses the calendar year as his tax year. 
The total basis of all property placed in service 
that year is $1,300. The $800 basis of the refrig-
erator placed in service during the last 3 months 
of his tax year exceeds $520 (40% × $1,300). 
Tom must use the mid -quarter convention in-
stead of the half -year convention for all three 
items.
Half-year convention.  The half -year conven-
tion is used if neither the mid -quarter conven-
tion nor the mid -month convention applies. Un-
der this convention, you treat all property 
placed in service, or disposed of, during a tax 
year as placed in service, or disposed of, at the 
midpoint of that tax year.
If this convention applies, you deduct a half 
year of depreciation for the first year and the 
last year that you depreciate the property. You 
deduct a full year of depreciation for any other 
year during the recovery period.
Figuring Your Depreciation 
Deduction
You can figure your MACRS depreciation de-
duction in one of two ways. The deduction is 
substantially the same both ways. You can fig-
ure the deduction using either:
• The depreciation method and convention 
that apply over the recovery period of the 
property, or
• The percentage from the MACRS percent-
age tables.
In this publication, we will use the percent-
age tables. For instructions on how to compute 
the deduction, see chapter 4 of Pub. 946.
Residential rental property.  You must use 
the straight line method and a mid -month con-
vention for residential rental property. In the first 
year that you claim depreciation for residential 
rental property, you can claim depreciation only 
for the number of months the property is in use. 
Use the mid -month convention (explained un-
der Conventions, earlier).
5-, 7-, or 15-year property. For property in the 
5- or 7 -year class, use the 200% declining bal-
ance (DB) method and a half -year convention. 
However, in limited cases, you must use the 
mid-quarter convention, if it applies. For prop-
erty in the 15 -year class, use the 150% DB 
method and a half-year convention.
You can also choose to use the 150% DB 
method for property in the 5 - or 7 -year class. 
The choice to use the 150% method for one 
item in a class of property applies to all property 
in that class that is placed in service during the 
tax year of the election. You make this election 
on Form 4562. In Part III, column (f), enter “150 
DB.” Once you make this election, you can’t 
change to another method.
If you use either the 200% or 150% DB 
method, figure your deduction using the straight 
line method in the first tax year that the straight 
line method gives you an equal or larger deduc-
tion.
You can also choose to use the straight line 
method with a half -year or mid -quarter conven-
tion for 5-, 7-, or 15-year property. The choice to 
use the straight line method for one item in a 
class of property applies to all property in that 
class that is placed in service during the tax 
year of the election. You elect the straight line 
method on Form 4562. In Part III, column (f), 
enter “S/L.” Once you make this election, you 
can’t change to another method.
MACRS Percentage Tables
You can use the percentages in Table 2 -2 to 
compute annual depreciation under MACRS. 
The tables show the percentages for the first 
few years or until the change to the straight line 
method is made. See Appendix A  of Pub. 946 
for complete tables. The percentages in Tables 
2-2a, 2-2b, and 2-2c make the change from DB 
to straight line in the year that straight line will 
give a larger deduction.
If you elect to use the straight line method 
for 5-, 7-, or 15 -year property, or the 150% DB 
method for 5- or 7-year property, use the tables 
in Appendix A of Pub. 946.
How to use the percentage tables. You must 
apply the table rates to your property's unadjus-
ted basis (defined later) each year of the recov-
ery period.
Once you begin using a percentage table to 
figure depreciation, you must continue to use it 
for the entire recovery period unless there is an 
adjustment to the basis of your property for a 
reason other than:
1. Depreciation allowed or allowable, or
2. An addition or improvement that is depre-
ciated as a separate item of property.
If there is an adjustment for any reason 
other than (1) or (2), for example, because of a 
deductible casualty loss, you can no longer use 
the table. For the year of the adjustment and for 
the remaining recovery period, figure deprecia-
tion using the property's adjusted basis at the 
end of the year and the appropriate deprecia-
tion method, as explained earlier under Figuring 
Your Depreciation Deduction . See Figuring the 
Deduction Without Using the Tables  in chap-
ter 4 of Pub. 946.
Unadjusted basis. This is the same basis 
you would use to figure gain on a sale (see Ba-
sis of Depreciable Property, earlier), but without 
reducing your original basis by any MACRS de-
preciation taken in earlier years.
Page 10 of 27  Fileid: … tions/p527/2021/a/xml/cycle04/source 10:59 - 19-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 10  Chapter 2 Depreciation of Rental Property

However, you do reduce your original basis 
by other amounts claimed on the property, in-
cluding:
• Any amortization,
• Any section 179 deduction, and
• Any special depreciation allowance.
For more information, see chapter 4 of Pub. 
946.
Tables 2 -2a, 2 -2b, and 2 -2c. The percen-
tages in these tables take into account the 
half-year and mid-quarter conventions. Use Ta-
ble 2 -2a for 5 -year property, Table 2 -2b for 
7-year property, and Table 2 -2c for 15 -year 
property. Use the percentage in the second col-
umn (half -year convention) unless you are re-
quired to use the mid-quarter convention  (ex-
plained earlier). If you must use the mid -quarter 
convention, use the column that corresponds to 
the calendar year quarter in which you placed 
the property in service.
Example 1. You purchased a stove and re-
frigerator and placed them in service in June. 
Your basis in the stove is $600 and your basis 
in the refrigerator is $1,000. Both are 5 -year 
property. Using the half -year convention col-
umn in Table 2-2a, the depreciation percentage 
for Year 1 is 20%. For that year, your deprecia-
tion deduction is $120 ($600 × 20% (0.20)) for 
the stove and $200 ($1,000 × 20% (0.20)) for 
the refrigerator.
For Year 2, the depreciation percentage is 
32%. That year's depreciation deduction will be 
$192 ($600 × 32% (0.32)) for the stove and 
$320 ($1,000 × 32% (0.32)) for the refrigerator.
Example 2.  Assume the same facts as in 
Example 1 , except you buy the refrigerator in 
October instead of June. Because the refrigera-
tor was placed in service in the last 3 months of 
the tax year, and its basis ($1,000) is more than 
40% of the total basis of all property placed in 
service during the year ($1,600 × 40% (0.40) = 
$640), you are required to use the mid -quarter 
convention to figure depreciation on both the 
stove and refrigerator.
Because you placed the refrigerator in serv-
ice in October, you use the fourth quarter col-
umn of Table 2 -2a and find the depreciation 
percentage for Year 1 is 5%. Your depreciation 
deduction for the refrigerator is $50 ($1,000 x 
5% (0.05)).
Because you placed the stove in service in 
June, you use the second quarter column of Ta-
ble 2 -2a and find the depreciation percentage 
for Year 1 is 25%. For that year, your deprecia-
tion deduction for the stove is $150 ($600 x 
25% (0.25)).
Table 2-2d. Use this table when you are using 
the GDS 27. 5-year option for residential rental 
property. Find the row for the month that you 
placed the property in service. Use the percen-
tages listed for that month to figure your depre-
ciation deduction. The mid -month convention is 
taken into account in the percentages shown in 
the table. Continue to use the same row 
(month) under the column for the appropriate 
year.
Example. You purchased a single family 
rental house for $185,000 and placed it in serv-
ice on February 8. The sales contract showed 
that the building cost $160,000 and the land 
cost $25,000. Your basis for depreciation is its 
original cost, $160,000. This is the first year of 
service for your residential rental property and 
you decide to use GDS, which has a recovery 
period of 27.5 years. Using Table 2 -2d, you find 
that the depreciation percentage for property 
placed in service in February of Year 1 is 
3.182%. That year's depreciation deduction is 
$5,091 ($160,000 x 3.182% (0.03182)).
Figuring MACRS 
Depreciation Under ADS
Table 2-1 shows the ADS recovery periods for 
property used in rental activities.
See Appendix B of Pub. 946 for other prop-
erty. If your property isn’t listed in Appendix B, it 
is considered to have no class life. Under ADS, 
personal property with no class life is depreci-
ated using a recovery period of 12 years.
Use the mid -month convention for residen-
tial rental property and nonresidential real 
Table 2-2. Optional MACRS GDS Percentage Tables
a. MACRS 5-Year Property (200% DB)
Half-year convention Mid-quarter convention
Year First
quarter
Second
quarter
Third
quarter
Fourth
quarter
1
2
3
4
5
6
20.00%
32.00
19.20
11.52
11.52
5.76
35.00%
26.00
15.60
11.01
11.01
1.38
25.00%
30.00
18.00
11.37
11.37
4.26
15.00%
34.00
20.40
12.24
11.30
7.06
5.00%
38.00
22.80
13.68
10.94
9.58
b. MACRS 7-Year Property (200% DB)
Half-year convention Mid-quarter convention
Year First
quarter
Second
quarter
Third
quarter
Fourth
quarter
1
2
3
4
5
6
c. MACRS 15-Year Property (150% DB)
Half-year convention Mid-quarter convention
Year First
quarter
Second
quarter
Third
quarter
Fourth
quarter
1
2
3
4
5
6
d. Residential Rental Property-GDS  (27.5-year S/L with mid-month convention)
14.29%
24.49
17.49
12.49
8.93
8.92
25.00%
21.43
15.31
10.93
8.75
8.74
17.85%
23.47
16.76
11.97
8.87
8.87
10.71%
25.51
18.22
13.02
9.30
8.85
3.57%
27.55
19.68
14.06
10.04
8.73
5.00%
9.50
8.55
7.70
6.93
6.23
8.75%
9.13
8.21
7.39
6.65
5.99
6.25%
9.38
8.44
7.59
6.83
6.15
3.75%
9.63
8.66
7.80
7.02
6.31
1.25%
9.88
8.89
8.00
7.20
6.48
Use the row for the month of the taxable year placed in service.
Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Year 6
Jan.
Feb.
March
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
3.485% 3.636%
3.182
2.879
2.576
2.273
1.970
1.667
1.364
1.061
0.758
0.455
0.152
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636%
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636%
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636%
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636%
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
3.636
7 5.90 5.90 5.91 5.90 5.90
8 5.90 5.91 5.90 5.90 5.90
7 8.93 8.75 8.87 8.86 8.73
Page 11 of 27  Fileid: … tions/p527/2021/a/xml/cycle04/source 10:59 - 19-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 2 Depreciation of Rental Property  Page 11

property. For all other property, use the 
half-year or mid -quarter convention, as appro-
priate. 
See Pub. 946 for ADS depreciation tables.
Claiming the Correct 
Amount of Depreciation
You should claim the correct amount of depreci-
ation each tax year. If you didn’t claim all the 
depreciation you were entitled to deduct, you 
must still reduce your basis in the property by 
the full amount of depreciation that you could 
have deducted. For more information, see De-
preciation under Decreases to Basis  in Pub. 
551.
If you deducted an incorrect amount of de-
preciation for property in any year, you may be 
able to make a correction by filing Form 1040-X, 
Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return. If 
you aren’t allowed to make the correction on an 
amended return, you may be able to change 
your accounting method to claim the correct 
amount of depreciation. See How Do You Cor-
rect Depreciation Deductions?  in Pub. 946 for 
more information.
3.
Reporting
Rental Income, 
Expenses, and 
Losses
Figuring the net income or loss for a residential 
rental activity may involve more than just listing 
the income and deductions on Schedule E 
(Form 1040). There are activities that don’t 
qualify to use Schedule E, such as when the ac-
tivity isn’t engaged in to make a profit or when 
you provide substantial services in conjunction 
with the property.
There are also the limitations that may need to 
be applied if you have a net loss on Schedule E. 
There are two: (1) the limitation based on the 
amount of investment you have at risk in your 
rental activity, and (2) the special limits imposed 
on passive activities.
You may also have a gain or loss related to your 
rental property from a casualty or theft. This is 
considered separately from the income and ex-
pense information you report on Schedule E.
Which Forms To Use
The basic form for reporting residential rental in-
come and expenses is Schedule E (Form 
1040). However, don’t use that schedule to re-
port a not -for-profit activity. See Not Rented for 
Profit, later, in chapter 4. There are also other 
rental situations in which forms other than 
Schedule E would be used.
Schedule E (Form 1040)
If you rent buildings, rooms, or apartments, and 
provide basic services such as heat and light, 
trash collection, etc., you normally report your 
rental income and expenses on Schedule E, 
Part I.
List your total income, expenses, and depre-
ciation for each rental property. Be sure to enter 
the number of fair rental and personal -use days 
on line 2.
If you have more than three rental or royalty 
properties, complete and attach as many 
Schedules E as are needed to separately list all 
of the properties. However, fill in lines 23a 
through 26 on only one Schedule E. The figures 
on lines 23a through 26 on that Schedule E 
should be the combined totals for all properties 
reported on your Schedules E.
On Schedule E, page 1, line 18, enter the 
depreciation you are claiming for each property. 
You may also need to attach Form 4562 to 
claim some or all of your depreciation. See 
Form 4562, later, for more information.
If you have a loss from your rental real es-
tate activity, you may also need to complete 
one or both of the following forms.
• Form 6198, At-Risk Limitations. See 
At-Risk Rules, later. Also, see Pub. 925.
• Form 8582, Passive Activity Loss Limita-
tions. See Passive Activity Limits, later.
Page 2 of Schedule E is used to report in-
come or loss from partnerships, S corporations, 
estates, trusts, and real estate mortgage invest-
ment conduits. If you need to use page 2 of 
Schedule E and you have more than three 
rental or royalty properties, be sure to use 
page 2 of the same Schedule E you used to en-
ter the combined totals for your rental activity on 
page 1. Also, include the amount from line 26 
(Part I) in the “Total income or (loss)” on line 41 
(Part V).
Form 4562.  You must complete and attach 
Form 4562 if you are claiming the following de-
preciation in your rental activity.
• Depreciation, including the special depre-
ciation allowance, on property placed in 
service during 2021.
• Depreciation on listed property (such as a 
car), regardless of when it was placed in 
service.
Otherwise, figure your depreciation on your own 
worksheet. You don’t have to attach these com-
putations to your return, but you should keep 
them in your records for future reference.
You may also need to attach Form 4562 if 
you are claiming a section 179 deduction, am-
ortizing costs that began during 2021, or claim-
ing any other deduction for a vehicle, including 
the standard mileage rate or lease expenses.
See Pub. 946 for information on preparing 
Form 4562.
Schedule C (Form 1040), 
Profit or Loss From Business
Generally, Schedule C is used when you pro-
vide substantial services in conjunction with the 
property or the rental is part of a trade or busi-
ness as a real estate dealer.
Providing substantial services.  If you pro-
vide substantial services that are primarily for 
your tenant's convenience, such as regular 
cleaning, changing linen, or maid service, you 
report your rental income and expenses on 
Schedule C. Use Form 1065, U.S. Return of 
Partnership Income, if your rental activity is a 
partnership (including a partnership with your 
spouse unless it is a qualified joint venture). 
Substantial services don’t include the furnishing 
of heat and light, cleaning of public areas, trash 
collection, etc. For more information, see Pub. 
334, Tax Guide for Small Business. Also, you 
may have to pay self -employment tax on your 
rental income using Schedule SE (Form 1040), 
Self-Employment Tax. For a discussion of “sub-
stantial services,” see Real Estate Rents  in 
chapter 5 of Pub. 334.
Qualified Joint Venture
If you and your spouse each materially partici-
pate (see Material participation  under Passive 
Activity Limits, later) as the only members of a 
jointly owned and operated real estate busi-
ness, and you file a joint return for the tax year, 
you can make a joint election to be treated as a 
qualified joint venture instead of a partnership. 
This election, in most cases, won’t increase the 
total tax owed on the joint return, but it does 
give each of you credit for social security earn-
ings on which retirement benefits are based 
and for Medicare coverage if your rental income 
is subject to self-employment tax.
If you make this election, you must report 
rental real estate income on Schedule E (or 
Schedule C, if you provide substantial serv-
ices). You won’t be required to file Form 1065 
for any year the election is in effect. Rental real 
estate income generally isn’t included in net 
earnings from self -employment subject to 
self-employment tax and is generally subject to 
the passive activity limits.
If you and your spouse filed a Form 1065 for 
the year prior to the election, the partnership 
terminates at the end of the tax year immedi-
ately preceding the year the election takes ef-
fect.
For more information on qualified joint ven-
tures, go to IRS.gov/QJV.
Limits on Rental Losses
If you have a loss from your rental real estate 
activity, two sets of rules may limit the amount 
of loss you can report on Schedule E. You must 
consider these rules in the order shown below. 
Both are discussed in this section.
1. At-risk rules. These rules are applied first if 
there is investment in your rental real es-
tate activity for which you aren’t at risk. 
Page 12 of 27  Fileid: … tions/p527/2021/a/xml/cycle04/source 10:59 - 19-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 12  Chapter 3 Reporting Rental Income, Expenses, and Losses

This applies only if the real property was 
placed in service after 1986.
2. Passive activity limits. Generally, rental 
real estate activities are considered pas-
sive activities and losses aren’t deductible 
unless you have income from other pas-
sive activities to offset them. However, 
there are exceptions.
Excess business loss limitation.  In addition 
to at -risk rules and passive activity limits, ex-
cess business loss rules apply to losses from all 
noncorporate trades or businesses. This busi-
ness loss limitation is figured using Form 461 
after you complete your Schedule E. Any limita-
tion to your loss resulting from these rules will 
not be reflected on your Schedule E. Instead, it 
will be added to your income on Form 1040 and 
treated as a net operating loss that must be car-
ried forward and deducted in a subsequent 
year.
At-Risk Rules
You may be subject to the at -risk rules if you 
have:
• A loss from an activity carried on as a trade 
or business or for the production of in-
come, and
• Amounts invested in the activity for which 
you aren’t fully at risk.
Losses from holding real property (other 
than mineral property) placed in service before 
1987 aren’t subject to the at-risk rules.
In most cases, any loss from an activity sub-
ject to the at-risk rules is allowed only to the ex-
tent of the total amount you have at risk in the 
activity at the end of the tax year. You are con-
sidered at risk in an activity to the extent of cash 
and the adjusted basis of other property you 
contributed to the activity and certain amounts 
borrowed for use in the activity. Any loss that is 
disallowed because of the at -risk limits is trea-
ted as a deduction from the same activity in the 
next tax year. See Pub. 925 for a discussion of 
the at-risk rules.
Form 6198.  If you are subject to the at -risk 
rules, file Form 6198 with your tax return.
Passive Activity Limits
In most cases, all rental real estate activities 
(except those of certain real estate professio-
nals, discussed later) are passive activities. For 
this purpose, a rental activity is an activity from 
which you receive income mainly for the use of 
tangible property, rather than for services. For a 
discussion of activities that aren’t considered 
rental activities, see Rental Activities  in Pub. 
925.
Deductions or losses from passive activities 
are limited. You generally can’t offset income, 
other than passive income, with losses from 
passive activities. Nor can you offset taxes on 
income, other than passive income, with credits 
resulting from passive activities. Any excess 
loss or credit is carried forward to the next tax 
year. Exceptions to the rules for figuring passive 
activity limits for personal use of a dwelling unit 
and for rental real estate with active participa-
tion are discussed later.
For a detailed discussion of these rules, see 
Pub. 925.
Real estate professionals.  If you are a real 
estate professional, complete line 43 of Sched-
ule E.
You qualify as a real estate professional for 
the tax year if you meet both of the following re-
quirements.
• More than half of the personal services you 
perform in all trades or businesses during 
the tax year are performed in real property 
trades or businesses in which you materi-
ally participate.
• You perform more than 750 hours of serv-
ices during the tax year in real property 
trades or businesses in which you materi-
ally participate.
If you qualify as a real estate professional, 
rental real estate activities in which you materi-
ally participated aren’t passive activities. For 
purposes of determining whether you materially 
participated in your rental real estate activities, 
each interest in rental real estate is a separate 
activity unless you elect to treat all your inter-
ests in rental real estate as one activity.
Don’t count personal services you perform 
as an employee in real property trades or busi-
nesses unless you are a 5% owner of your em-
ployer. You are a 5% owner if you own (or are 
considered to own) more than 5% of your em-
ployer's outstanding stock, or capital or profits 
interest.
Don’t count your spouse's personal services 
to determine whether you met the requirements 
listed earlier to qualify as a real estate profes-
sional. However, you can count your spouse's 
participation in an activity in determining if you 
materially participated.
Real property trades or businesses.  A 
real property trade or business is a trade or 
business that does any of the following with real 
property.
• Develops or redevelops it.
• Constructs or reconstructs it.
• Acquires it.
• Converts it.
• Rents or leases it.
• Operates or manages it.
• Brokers it.
Choice to treat all interests as one activity. 
If you were a real estate professional and had 
more than one rental real estate interest during 
the year, you can choose to treat all the inter-
ests as one activity. You can make this choice 
for any year that you qualify as a real estate 
professional. If you forgo making the choice for 
one year, you can still make it for a later year.
If you make the choice, it is binding for the 
tax year you make it and for any later year that 
you are a real estate professional. This is true 
even if you aren’t a real estate professional in 
any intervening year. (For that year, the excep-
tion for real estate professionals won’t apply in 
determining whether your activity is subject to 
the passive activity rules.)
See the Instructions for Schedule E for infor-
mation about making this choice.
Material participation. Generally, you materi-
ally participated in an activity for the tax year if 
you were involved in its operations on a regular, 
continuous, and substantial basis during the 
year. For details, see Pub. 925 or the Instruc-
tions for Schedule C.
Participating spouse.  If you are married, 
determine whether you materially participated in 
an activity by also counting any participation in 
the activity by your spouse during the year. Do 
this even if your spouse owns no interest in the 
activity or files a separate return for the year.
Form 8582.  You may have to complete Form 
8582 to figure the amount of any passive activ-
ity loss for the current tax year for all activities 
and the amount of the passive activity loss al-
lowed on your tax return. See Form 8582 not re-
quired, later in this chapter, to determine if you 
must complete Form 8582.
If you are required to complete Form 8582 
and are also subject to the at -risk rules, include 
the amount from Form 6198, line 21 (deductible 
loss), in column (b) of Form 8582, Worksheet 1 
or 2, as required.
Exception for Personal Use of 
Dwelling Unit
If you used the rental property as a home during 
the year, any income, deductions, gain, or loss 
allocable to such use is not to be taken into ac-
count for purposes of the passive activity loss 
limitation. Instead, follow the rules explained in 
chapter 5.
Exception for Rental Real Estate 
With Active Participation
If you or your spouse actively participated in a 
passive rental real estate activity, you may be 
able to deduct up to $25,000 of loss from the 
activity from your nonpassive income. This spe-
cial allowance is an exception to the general 
rule disallowing losses in excess of income 
from passive activities. Similarly, you may be 
able to offset credits from the activity against 
the tax on up to $25,000 of nonpassive income 
after taking into account any losses allowed un-
der this exception.
Example. Jane is single and has $40,000 
in wages, $2,000 of passive income from a limi-
ted partnership, and $3,500 of passive loss 
from a rental real estate activity in which she ac-
tively participated. $2,000 of Jane's $3,500 loss 
offsets her passive income. The remaining 
$1,500 loss can be deducted from her $40,000 
wages.
The special allowance isn’t available if 
you were married, lived with your 
spouse at any time during the year, 
and are filing a separate return.
Active participation. You actively participated 
in a rental real estate activity if you (and your 
spouse) owned at least 10% of the rental prop-
erty and you made management decisions or 
arranged for others to provide services (such as 
repairs) in a significant and bona fide sense. 
Management decisions that may count as ac-
tive participation include approving new 
CAUTION
!
Page 13 of 27  Fileid: … tions/p527/2021/a/xml/cycle04/source 10:59 - 19-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 3 Reporting Rental Income, Expenses, and Losses  Page 13

tenants, deciding on rental terms, approving ex-
penditures, and other similar decisions.
Example. Mike is single and had the follow-
ing income and losses during the tax year.
Salary ....................... $42,300
Dividends ..................... 300
Interest ...................... 1,400
Rental loss .................... (4,000 )
The rental loss was from the rental of a 
house Mike owned. Mike had advertised and 
rented the house to the current tenant himself. 
He also collected the rents, which usually came 
by mail. All repairs were either made or contrac-
ted out by Mike.
Although the rental loss is from a passive 
activity, because Mike actively participated in 
the rental property management, he can use 
the entire $4,000 loss to offset his other income.
Maximum special allowance.  The maximum 
special allowance is:
• $25,000 for single individuals and married 
individuals filing a joint return for the tax 
year,
• $12,500 for married individuals who file 
separate returns for the tax year and lived 
apart from their spouses at all times during 
the tax year, and
• $25,000 for a qualifying estate reduced by 
the special allowance for which the surviv-
ing spouse qualified.
If your MAGI is $100,000 or less ($50,000 or 
less if married filing separately), you can deduct 
your loss up to the amount specified above. If 
your MAGI is more than $100,000 (more than 
$50,000 if married filing separately), your spe-
cial allowance is limited to 50% of the difference 
between $150,000 ($75,000 if married filing 
separately) and your MAGI.
Generally, if your MAGI is $150,000 or more 
($75,000 or more if you are married filing sepa-
rately), there is no special allowance.
Modified adjusted gross income (MAGI).
This is your adjusted gross income from Form 
1040, 1040 -SR, or 1040 -NR, line 11, figured 
without taking into account:
1. The taxable amount of social security or 
equivalent tier 1 railroad retirement bene-
fits,
2. The deductible contributions to traditional 
individual retirement accounts (IRAs) and 
section 501(c)(18) pension plans,
3. The exclusion from income of interest from 
series EE and I U.S. savings bonds used 
to pay higher educational expenses,
4. The exclusion of amounts received under 
an employer's adoption assistance pro-
gram,
5. Any passive activity income or loss inclu-
ded on Form 8582,
6. Any rental real estate loss allowed to real 
estate professionals,
7. Any overall loss from a publicly traded 
partnership (see Publicly Traded Partner-
ships (PTPs) in the Instructions for Form 
8582),
8. The deduction allowed for one-half of 
self-employment tax,
9. The deduction allowed for interest paid on 
student loans, and
10. The deduction allowed for foreign-derived 
intangible income and global intangible 
low-taxed income.
Form 8582 not required.  Don’t complete 
Form 8582 if you meet all of the following condi-
tions.
• Your only passive activities were rental real 
estate activities in which you actively par-
ticipated.
• Your overall net loss from these activities is 
$25,000 or less ($12,500 or less if married 
filing separately and you lived apart from 
your spouse all year).
• If married filing separately, you lived apart 
from your spouse all year.
• You have no prior year unallowed losses 
from these (or any other passive) activities.
• You have no current or prior year unal-
lowed credits from passive activities.
• Your MAGI is $100,000 or less ($50,000 or 
less if married filing separately and you 
lived apart from your spouse all year).
• You don’t hold any interest in a rental real 
estate activity as a limited partner or as a 
beneficiary of an estate or a trust.
If you meet all of the conditions listed above, 
your rental real estate activities aren’t limited by 
the passive activity rules and you don’t have to 
complete Form 8582. On lines 23a through 23e 
of your Schedule E, enter the applicable 
amounts.
Casualties and Thefts
As a result of a casualty or theft, you may have 
a loss related to your rental property. You may 
be able to deduct the loss on your income tax 
return.
Casualty. This is the damage, destruction, or 
loss of property resulting from an identifiable 
event that is sudden, unexpected, or unusual. 
Such events include a storm, fire, or earth-
quake.
Theft. This is defined as the unlawful taking 
and removing of your money or property with 
the intent to deprive you of it.
Gain from casualty or theft.  It is also possi-
ble to have a gain from a casualty or theft if you 
receive money, including insurance, that is 
more than your adjusted basis in the property. 
Generally, you must report this gain. However, 
under certain circumstances, you may defer 
paying tax by choosing to postpone reporting 
the gain. To do this, you must generally buy re-
placement property within 2 years after the 
close of the first tax year in which any part of 
your gain is realized. In certain circumstances, 
the replacement period can be greater than 2 
years; see Replacement Period in Pub. 547 for 
more information. The cost of the replacement 
property must be equal to or more than the net 
insurance or other payment you received.
More information.  For information on busi-
ness and nonbusiness casualty and theft los-
ses, see Pub. 547.
How to report.  If you had a casualty or theft 
that involved property used in your rental activ-
ity, figure the net gain or loss in Section B of 
Form 4684, Casualties and Thefts. Follow the 
Instructions for Form 4684 for where to carry 
your net gain or loss.
Example
In February 2016, Marie bought a rental house 
for $135,000 (house $120,000 and land 
$15,000) and immediately began renting it out. 
In 2021, she rented it all 12 months for a 
monthly rental fee of $1,125. In addition to her 
rental income of $13,500 (12 x $1,125), Marie 
had the following expenses.
Mortgage interest ................... $8,000
Fire insurance (1-year policy) ........... 250
Miscellaneous repairs ................ 400
Real estate taxes imposed and paid ...... 500
Maintenance ...................... 200
Marie depreciates the residential rental 
property under MACRS GDS. This means using 
the straight line method over a recovery period 
of 27.5 years.
She uses Table 2-2d to find her depreciation 
percentage. Because she placed the property 
in service in February 2016, she continues to 
use that row of Table 2 -2d. For year 6, the rate 
is 3.636%.
Marie figures her net rental income or loss 
for the house as follows.
Total rental income received 
($1,125 × 12) ...................... $13,500
Minus: Expenses
Mortgage interest .......... $8,000
Fire insurance ............. 250
Miscellaneous repairs ........ 400
Real estate taxes .......... 500
Maintenance .............. 200
Total expenses ................... 9,350
Balance .......................... $4,150
Minus: Depreciation ($120,000 x 3.636% 
(0.03636)) ...................... 4,363
Net rental (loss) for house ......... ($213)
Marie had a net loss for the year. Because 
she actively participated in her passive rental 
real estate activity and her loss was less than 
$25,000, she can deduct the loss on her return. 
Marie also meets all of the requirements for not 
having to file Form 8582. She uses Schedule E, 
Part I, to report her rental income and expen-
ses. She enters her income, expenses, and de-
preciation for the house in the column for Prop-
erty A and enters her loss on line 22. Form 4562 
isn’t required.
Page 14 of 27  Fileid: … tions/p527/2021/a/xml/cycle04/source 10:59 - 19-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 14  Chapter 3 Reporting Rental Income, Expenses, and Losses

4.
Special 
Situations
This chapter discusses some rental real estate 
activities that are subject to additional rules.
Condominiums
A condominium is most often a dwelling unit in 
a multi -unit building, but can also take other 
forms, such as a townhouse or garden apart-
ment.
If you own a condominium, you also own a 
share of the common elements, such as land, 
lobbies, elevators, and service areas. You and 
the other condominium owners may pay dues 
or assessments to a special corporation that is 
organized to take care of the common ele-
ments.
Special rules apply if you rent your condo-
minium to others. You can deduct as rental ex-
penses all the expenses discussed in chapters 
1 and 2. In addition, you can deduct any dues 
or assessments paid for maintenance of the 
common elements.
You can’t deduct special assessments you 
pay to a condominium management corporation 
for improvements. However, you may be able to 
recover your share of the cost of any improve-
ment by taking depreciation.
Cooperatives
If you live in a cooperative, you don’t own your 
apartment. Instead, a corporation owns the 
apartments and you are a tenant -stockholder in 
the cooperative housing corporation. If you rent 
your apartment to others, you can usually de-
duct, as a rental expense, all the maintenance 
fees you pay to the cooperative housing corpo-
ration.
In addition to the maintenance fees paid to 
the cooperative housing corporation, you can 
deduct your direct payments for repairs, up-
keep, and other rental expenses, including in-
terest paid on a loan used to buy your stock in 
the corporation.
Depreciation
You will be depreciating your stock in the corpo-
ration rather than the apartment itself. Figure 
your depreciation deduction as follows.
1. Figure the depreciation for all the depreci-
able real property owned by the corpora-
tion. (Depreciation methods are discussed 
in chapter 2 of this publication and Pub. 
946.) If you bought your cooperative stock 
after its first offering, figure the deprecia-
ble basis of this property as follows.
a. Multiply your cost per share by the to-
tal number of outstanding shares.
b. Add to the amount figured in (a) any 
mortgage debt on the property on the 
date you bought the stock.
c. Subtract from the amount figured in 
(b) any mortgage debt that isn’t for the 
depreciable real property, such as the 
part for the land.
2. Subtract from the amount figured in (1) 
any depreciation for space owned by the 
corporation that can be rented but can’t be 
lived in by tenant-stockholders.
3. Divide the number of your shares of stock 
by the total number of shares outstanding, 
including any shares held by the corpora-
tion.
4. Multiply the result of (2) by the percentage 
you figured in (3). This is your depreciation 
on the stock.
Your depreciation deduction for the year 
can’t be more than the part of your adjusted ba-
sis (defined in chapter 2) in the stock of the cor-
poration that is allocable to your rental property.
Payments added to capital account.  Pay-
ments earmarked for a capital asset or improve-
ment, or otherwise charged to the corporation's 
capital account are added to the basis of your 
stock in the corporation. For example, you can’t 
deduct a payment used to pave a community 
parking lot, install a new roof, or pay the princi-
pal of the corporation's mortgage.
Treat as a capital cost the amount you were 
assessed for capital items. This can’t be more 
than the amount by which your payments to the 
corporation exceeded your share of the corpo-
ration's mortgage interest and real estate taxes.
Your share of interest and taxes is the 
amount the corporation elected to allocate to 
you, if it reasonably reflects those expenses for 
your apartment. Otherwise, figure your share in 
the following manner.
1. Divide the number of your shares of stock 
by the total number of shares outstanding, 
including any shares held by the corpora-
tion.
2. Multiply the corporation's deductible inter-
est by the number you figured in (1). This 
is your share of the interest.
3. Multiply the corporation's deductible taxes 
by the number you figured in (1). This is 
your share of the taxes.
Property Changed to 
Rental Use
If you change your home or other property (or a 
part of it) to rental use at any time other than the 
beginning of your tax year, you must divide 
yearly expenses, such as taxes and insurance, 
between rental use and personal use.
You can deduct as rental expenses only the 
part of the expense that is for the part of the 
year the property was used or held for rental 
purposes.
You can’t deduct depreciation or insurance 
for the part of the year the property was held for 
personal use. However, you can include the 
home mortgage interest, mortgage insurance 
premiums, and real estate tax expenses for the 
part of the year the property was held for per-
sonal use when figuring the amount you can de-
duct on Schedule A.
Example. Your tax year is the calendar 
year. You moved from your home in May and 
started renting it out on June 1. You can deduct 
as rental expenses seven -twelfths of your 
yearly expenses, such as taxes and insurance.
Starting with June, you can deduct as rental 
expenses the amounts you pay for items gener-
ally billed monthly, such as utilities.
When figuring depreciation, treat the prop-
erty as placed in service on June 1.
Basis of Property
Changed to Rental Use
When you change property you held for per-
sonal use to rental use (for example, you rent 
your former home), the basis for depreciation 
will be the lesser of the fair market value or ad-
justed basis on the date of conversion.
Fair market value.  This is the price at which 
the property would change hands between a 
willing buyer and a willing seller, neither having 
to buy or sell, and both having reasonable 
knowledge of all the relevant facts. Sales of 
similar property, on or about the same date, 
may be helpful in figuring the fair market value 
of the property.
Figuring the basis. The basis for depreciation 
is the lesser of:
• The fair market value of the property on the 
date you changed it to rental use; or
• Your adjusted basis on the date of the 
change—that is, your original cost or other 
basis of the property, plus the cost of per-
manent additions or improvements since 
you acquired it, minus deductions for any 
casualty or theft losses claimed on earlier 
years' income tax returns and other de-
creases to basis. For other increases and 
decreases to basis, see Adjusted Basis in 
chapter 2.
Example. You originally built a house for 
$140,000 on a lot that cost you $14,000, which 
you used as your home for many years. Before 
changing the property to rental use this year, 
you added $28,000 of permanent improve-
ments to the house and claimed a $3,500 casu-
alty loss deduction for damage to the house. 
Part of the improvements qualified for a $500 
residential energy credit, which you claimed on 
a prior year tax return. Because land isn’t de-
preciable, you can only include the cost of the 
house when figuring the basis for depreciation.
The adjusted basis of the house at the time 
of the change in its use was $164,000 
($140,000 + $28,000 − $3,500 − $500).
On the date of the change in use, your prop-
erty had a fair market value of $168,000, of 
which $21,000 was for the land and $147,000 
was for the house.
Page 15 of 27  Fileid: … tions/p527/2021/a/xml/cycle04/source 10:59 - 19-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 4 Special Situations  Page 15

The basis for depreciation on the house is 
the fair market value on the date of the change 
($147,000) because it is less than your adjusted 
basis ($164,000).
Cooperatives
If you change your cooperative apartment to 
rental use, figure your allowable depreciation as 
explained earlier. (Depreciation methods are 
discussed in chapter 2  of this publication and 
Pub. 946.) The basis of all the depreciable real 
property owned by the cooperative housing cor-
poration is the smaller of the following amounts.
• The fair market value of the property on the 
date you change your apartment to rental 
use. This is considered to be the same as 
the corporation's adjusted basis minus 
straight line depreciation, unless this value 
is unrealistic.
• The corporation's adjusted basis in the 
property on that date. Don’t subtract de-
preciation when figuring the corporation's 
adjusted basis.
If you bought the stock after its first offering, 
the corporation's adjusted basis in the property 
is the amount figured in (1) under Depreciation 
(under Cooperatives, near the beginning of this 
chapter). The fair market value of the property is 
considered to be the same as the corporation's 
adjusted basis figured in this way minus straight 
line depreciation, unless the value is unrealistic.
Figuring the Depreciation 
Deduction
To figure the deduction, use the depreciation 
system in effect when you convert your resi-
dence to rental use. Generally, that will be 
MACRS for any conversion after 1986. Treat 
the property as placed in service on the conver-
sion date.
Example. Your converted residence (see 
the previous example under Figuring the basis ) 
was available for rent on August 1. Using Ta-
ble 2 -2d (see chapter 2 ), the percentage for 
Year 1 beginning in August is 1.364% and the 
depreciation deduction for Year 1 is $2,005 
($147,000 × 0.01364).
Renting Part of Property
If you rent part of your property, you must divide 
certain expenses between the part of the prop-
erty used for rental purposes and the part of the 
property used for personal purposes, as though 
you actually had two separate pieces of prop-
erty.
You can deduct the expenses related to the 
part of the property used for rental purposes, 
such as home mortgage interest, mortgage in-
surance premiums, and real estate taxes, as 
rental expenses on Schedule E (Form 1040). 
You can also deduct as rental expenses a por-
tion of other expenses that are normally nonde-
ductible personal expenses, such as expenses 
for electricity or painting the outside of the 
house.
There is no change in the types of expenses 
deductible for the personal -use part of your 
property. Generally, these expenses may be 
deducted only if you itemize your deductions on 
Schedule A (Form 1040).
You can’t deduct any part of the cost of the 
first phone line even if your tenants have unlimi-
ted use of it.
You don’t have to divide the expenses that 
belong only to the rental part of your property. 
For example, if you paint a room that you rent or 
pay premiums for liability insurance in connec-
tion with renting a room in your home, your en-
tire cost is a rental expense. If you install a sec-
ond phone line strictly for your tenant's use, all 
the cost of the second line is deductible as a 
rental expense. You can deduct depreciation on 
the part of the house used for rental purposes 
as well as on the furniture and equipment you 
use for rental purposes.
How to divide expenses.  If an expense is for 
both rental use and personal use, such as mort-
gage interest or heat for the entire house, you 
must divide the expense between rental use 
and personal use. You can use any reasonable 
method for dividing the expense. It may be rea-
sonable to divide the cost of some items (for ex-
ample, water) based on the number of people 
using them. The two most common methods for 
dividing an expense are (1) the number of 
rooms in your home, and (2) the square footage 
of your home.
Example. You rent a room in your house. 
The room is 12 × 15 feet, or 180 square feet. 
Your entire house has 1,800 square feet of floor 
space. You can deduct as a rental expense 
10% of any expense that must be divided be-
tween rental use and personal use. If your heat-
ing bill for the year for the entire house was 
$600, $60 ($600 × 10% (0.10)) is a rental ex-
pense. The balance, $540, is a personal ex-
pense that you can’t deduct.
Duplex. A common situation is the duplex 
where you live in one unit and rent out the other. 
Certain expenses apply to the entire property, 
such as mortgage interest and real estate 
taxes, and must be split to determine rental and 
personal expenses.
Example. You own a duplex and live in one 
half, renting the other half. Both units are ap-
proximately the same size. Last year, you paid 
a total of $10,000 mortgage interest and $2,000 
real estate taxes for the entire property. You 
can deduct $5,000 mortgage interest and 
$1,000 real estate taxes on Schedule E. If you 
itemize your deductions, include the other 
$5,000 mortgage interest and $1,000 real es-
tate taxes when figuring the amount you can 
deduct on Schedule A.
Not Rented for Profit
If you don’t rent your property to make a profit, 
you can’t deduct rental expenses in excess of 
the amount of your rental income. You can’t de-
duct a loss or carry forward to the next year any 
rental expenses that are more than your rental 
income for the year.
Where to report.  Report your not -for-profit 
rental income on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), 
line 8i. If you itemize your deductions, include 
your mortgage interest and mortgage insurance 
premiums (if you use the property as your main 
home or second home), real estate taxes, and 
casualty losses from your not -for-profit rental 
activity when figuring the amount you can de-
duct on Schedule A.
Presumption of profit. If your rental income is 
more than your rental expenses for at least 3 
years out of a period of 5 consecutive years, 
you are presumed to be renting your property to 
make a profit.
Postponing decision.  If you are starting 
your rental activity and don’t have 3 years 
showing a profit, you can elect to have the pre-
sumption made after you have the 5 years of 
experience required by the test. You may 
choose to postpone the decision of whether the 
rental is for profit by filing Form 5213. You must 
file Form 5213 within 3 years after the due date 
of your return (determined without extensions) 
for the year in which you first carried on the ac-
tivity or, if earlier, within 60 days after receiving 
written notice from the IRS proposing to disal-
low deductions attributable to the activity.
More information. For more information about 
the rules for an activity not engaged in for profit, 
see Not-for-Profit Activities in chapter 1 of Pub. 
535.
Example—Property 
Changed to Rental Use
In January, Eileen bought a condominium apart-
ment to live in. Instead of selling the house she 
had been living in, she decided to change it to 
rental property. Eileen selected a tenant and 
started renting the house on February 1. Eileen 
charges $750 a month for rent and collects it 
herself. Eileen also received a $750 security 
deposit from her tenant. Because she plans to 
return it to her tenant at the end of the lease, 
she doesn’t include it in her income. Her rental 
expenses for the year are as follows.
Mortgage interest ................ $1,800
Fire insurance (1-year policy) ........ 100
Miscellaneous repairs (after renting) ... 297
Real estate taxes imposed and paid ... 1,200
Eileen must divide the real estate taxes, 
mortgage interest, and fire insurance between 
the personal use of the property and the rental 
use of the property. She can deduct 
eleven-twelfths of these expenses as rental ex-
penses. She can include the balance of the real 
estate taxes and mortgage interest when figur-
ing the amount she can deduct on Schedule A if 
she itemizes. She can’t deduct the balance of 
the fire insurance because it is a personal ex-
pense.
Eileen bought this house in 1987 for 
$35,000. Her property tax was based on as-
sessed values of $10,000 for the land and 
$25,000 for the house. Before changing it to 
rental property, Eileen added several improve-
ments to the house. She figures her adjusted 
basis as follows.
Page 16 of 27  Fileid: … tions/p527/2021/a/xml/cycle04/source 10:59 - 19-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 16  Chapter 4 Special Situations

Improvements Cost
House ....................... $25,000
Remodeled kitchen .............. 4,200
Recreation room ............... 5,800
New roof ..................... 1,600
Patio and deck ................. 2,400
Adjusted basis ............ $39,000
On February 1, when Eileen changed her 
house to rental property, the property had a fair 
market value of $152,000. Of this amount, 
$35,000 was for the land and $117,000 was for 
the house.
Because Eileen's adjusted basis is less than 
the fair market value on the date of the change, 
Eileen uses $39,000 as her basis for deprecia-
tion.
As specified for residential rental property, 
Eileen must use the straight line method of de-
preciation over the GDS or ADS recovery pe-
riod. She chooses the GDS recovery period of 
27.5 years.
She uses Table 2-2d to find her depreciation 
percentage. Because she placed the property 
in service in February, the percentage is 
3.182%.
On April 1, Eileen bought a new dishwasher 
for the rental property at a cost of $425. The 
dishwasher is personal property used in a rental 
real estate activity, which has a 5 -year recovery 
period. She uses Table 2-2a to find the depreci-
ation percentage for Year 1 under “Half -year 
convention” (20%) to figure her depreciation de-
duction.
On May 1, Eileen paid $4,000 to have a fur-
nace installed in the house. The furnace is resi-
dential rental property. Because she placed the 
property in service in May, the depreciation per-
centage from Table 2-2d is 2.273%.
Eileen figures her net rental income or loss 
for the house as follows.
Total rental income received 
($750 × 11) ..................... $8,250
Minus: Expenses
Mortgage interest ($1,800 × 
11/12) ................... $1,650
Fire insurance ($100 × 
11/12) ................... 92
Miscellaneous repairs ...... 297
Real estate taxes ($1,200 × 
11/12) ................... 1,100
Total expenses .................. 3,139
Balance ......................... $5,111
Minus: Depreciation
House ($39,000 × 
0.03182) ................ $1,241
Dishwasher ($425 × 
0.20) ................... 85
Furnace ($4,000 × 
0.02273) ................ 91
Total depreciation ................ 1,417
Net rental income for 
house .............. $3,694
Eileen uses Schedule E, Part I, to report her 
rental income and expenses. She enters her in-
come, expenses, and depreciation for the 
house in the column for Property A. Because all 
property was placed in service this year, Eileen 
must use Form 4562 to figure the depreciation. 
See the Instructions for Form 4562 for more in-
formation on preparing the form.
5.
Personal Use of 
Dwelling Unit 
(Including 
Vacation Home)
If you have any personal use of a dwelling unit 
(including a vacation home) that you rent, you 
must divide your expenses between rental use 
and personal use. In general, your rental expen-
ses will be no more than your total expenses 
multiplied by a fraction, the denominator of 
which is the total number of days the dwelling 
unit is used and the numerator of which is the 
total number of days actually rented at a fair 
rental price. Only your rental expenses may be 
deducted on Schedule E (Form 1040). Some of 
your personal expenses may be deductible on 
Schedule A (Form 1040) if you itemize your de-
ductions.
You must also determine if the dwelling unit is 
considered a home. The amount of rental ex-
penses that you can deduct may be limited if 
the dwelling unit is considered a home. 
Whether a dwelling unit is considered a home 
depends on how many days during the year are 
considered to be days of personal use. There is 
a special rule if you used the dwelling unit as a 
home and you rented it for less than 15 days 
during the year.
Dwelling unit.  A dwelling unit includes a 
house, apartment, condominium, mobile home, 
boat, vacation home, or similar property. It also 
includes all structures or other property belong-
ing to the dwelling unit. A dwelling unit has ba-
sic living accommodations, such as sleeping 
space, a toilet, and cooking facilities.
A dwelling unit doesn’t include property (or 
part of the property) used solely as a hotel, mo-
tel, inn, or similar establishment. Property is 
used solely as a hotel, motel, inn, or similar es-
tablishment if it is regularly available for occu-
pancy by paying customers and isn’t used by 
an owner as a home during the year.
Example. You rent a room in your home 
that is always available for short -term occu-
pancy by paying customers. You don’t use the 
room yourself and you allow only paying cus-
tomers to use the room. This room is used 
solely as a hotel, motel, inn, or similar establish-
ment and isn’t a dwelling unit.
Dividing Expenses
If you use a dwelling unit for both rental and per-
sonal purposes, divide your expenses between 
the rental use and the personal use based on 
the number of days used for each purpose.
When dividing your expenses, follow these 
rules.
• Any day that the unit is rented at a fair 
rental price is a day of rental use even if 
you used the unit for personal purposes 
that day. (This rule doesn’t apply when de-
termining whether you used the unit as a 
home.)
• Any day that the unit is available for rent 
but not actually rented isn’t a day of rental 
use.
Fair rental price.  A fair rental price for your 
property is generally the amount of rent that a 
person who isn’t related to you would be willing 
to pay. The rent you charge isn’t a fair rental 
price if it is substantially less than the rents 
charged for other properties that are similar to 
your property in your area.
Ask yourself the following questions when 
comparing another property with yours.
• Is it used for the same purpose?
• Is it approximately the same size?
• Is it in approximately the same condition?
• Does it have similar furnishings?
• Is it in a similar location?
If any of the answers are no, the properties 
probably aren’t similar.
Example. Your beach cottage was availa-
ble for rent from June 1 through August 31 (92 
days). Except for the first week in August (7 
days), when you were unable to find a renter, 
you rented the cottage at a fair rental price dur-
ing that time. The person who rented the cot-
tage for July allowed you to use it over the 
weekend (2 days) without any reduction in or 
refund of rent. Your family also used the cottage 
during the last 2 weeks of May (14 days). The 
cottage wasn’t used at all before May 17 or af-
ter August 31.
You figure the part of the cottage expenses 
to treat as rental expenses as follows.
• The cottage was used for rental a total of 
85 days (92 − 7). The days it was available 
for rent but not rented (7 days) aren’t days 
of rental use. The July weekend (2 days) 
you used it is rental use because you re-
ceived a fair rental price for the weekend.
• You used the cottage for personal purpo-
ses for 14 days (the last 2 weeks in May).
• The total use of the cottage was 99 days 
(14 days personal use + 85 days rental 
use).
• Your rental expenses are 85/99 (86%) of 
the cottage expenses.
Note. When determining whether you used 
the cottage as a home, the July weekend (2 
days) you used it is considered personal use 
even though you received a fair rental price for 
the weekend. Therefore, you had 16 days of 
personal use and 83 days of rental use for this 
purpose. Because you used the cottage for 
personal purposes more than 14 days and 
Page 17 of 27  Fileid: … tions/p527/2021/a/xml/cycle04/source 10:59 - 19-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 5 Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including Vacation Home)  Page 17

more than 10% of the days of rental use (8 
days), you used it as a home. If you have a net 
loss, you may not be able to deduct all of the 
rental expenses. See Dwelling Unit Used as a 
Home next.
Dwelling Unit Used as a 
Home
If you use a dwelling unit for both rental and per-
sonal purposes, the tax treatment of the rental 
expenses you figured earlier under Dividing Ex-
penses and rental income depends on whether 
you are considered to be using the dwelling unit 
as a home.
You use a dwelling unit as a home during 
the tax year if you use it for personal purposes 
more than the greater of:
1. 14 days, or
2. 10% of the total days it is rented to others 
at a fair rental price.
See What is a day of personal use, later.
If a dwelling unit is used for personal purpo-
ses on a day it is rented at a fair rental price 
(discussed earlier), don’t count that day as a 
day of rental use in applying (2) above. Instead, 
count it as a day of personal use in applying 
both (1) and (2) above.
What is a day of personal use? A day of per-
sonal use of a dwelling unit is any day that the 
unit is used by any of the following persons.
1. You or any other person who owns an in-
terest in it, unless you rent it to another 
owner as his or her main home under a 
shared equity financing agreement (de-
fined later). However, see Days used as a 
main home before or after renting, later.
2. A member of your family or a member of 
the family of any other person who owns 
an interest in it, unless the family member 
uses the dwelling unit as his or her main 
home and pays a fair rental price. Family 
includes only your spouse, brothers and 
sisters, half brothers and half sisters, an-
cestors (parents, grandparents, etc.), and 
lineal descendants (children, grandchil-
dren, etc.).
3. Anyone under an arrangement that lets 
you use some other dwelling unit.
4. Anyone at less than a fair rental price.
Main home. If the other person or member 
of the family in (1) or (2) has more than one 
home, his or her main home is ordinarily the 
one he or she lived in most of the time.
Shared equity financing agreement. This 
is an agreement under which two or more per-
sons acquire undivided interests for more than 
50 years in an entire dwelling unit, including the 
land, and one or more of the co -owners is enti-
tled to occupy the unit as his or her main home 
upon payment of rent to the other co-owner(s).
Donation of use of the property. You use 
a dwelling unit for personal purposes if:
• You donate the use of the unit to a charita-
ble organization,
• The organization sells the use of the unit at 
a fundraising event, and
• The “purchaser” uses the unit.
Examples. The following examples show 
how to determine if you have days of personal 
use.
Example 1.  You and your neighbor are 
co-owners of a condominium at the beach. Last 
year, you rented the unit to vacationers when-
ever possible. The unit wasn’t used as a main 
home by anyone. Your neighbor used the unit 
for 2 weeks last year; you didn’t use it at all.
Because your neighbor has an interest in 
the unit, both of you are considered to have 
used the unit for personal purposes during 
those 2 weeks.
Example 2.  You and your neighbors are 
co-owners of a house under a shared equity fi-
nancing agreement. Your neighbors live in the 
house and pay you a fair rental price.
Even though your neighbors have an inter-
est in the house, the days your neighbors live 
there aren’t counted as days of personal use by 
you. This is because your neighbors rent the 
house as their main home under a shared 
equity financing agreement.
Example 3. You own a rental property that 
you rent to your son. Your son doesn’t own any 
interest in this property. He uses it as his main 
home and pays you a fair rental price.
Your son's use of the property isn’t personal 
use by you because your son is using it as his 
main home, he owns no interest in the property, 
and he is paying you a fair rental price.
Example 4.  You rent your beach house to 
Rosa. Rosa rents her cabin in the mountains to 
you. You each pay a fair rental price.
You are using your beach house for per-
sonal purposes on the days that Rosa uses it 
because your house is used by Rosa under an 
arrangement that allows you to use her cabin.
Example 5. You rent an apartment to your 
mother at less than a fair rental price. You are 
using the apartment for personal purposes on 
the days that your mother rents it because you 
rent it for less than a fair rental price.
Days used for repairs and maintenance.
Any day that you spend working substantially 
full time repairing and maintaining (not improv-
ing) your property isn’t counted as a day of per-
sonal use. Don’t count such a day as a day of 
personal use even if family members use the 
property for recreational purposes on the same 
day.
Example. Corey owns a cabin in the moun-
tains that he rents for most of the year. He 
spends a week at the cabin with family mem-
bers. Corey works on maintenance of the cabin 
3 or 4 hours each day during the week and 
spends the rest of the time fishing, hiking, and 
relaxing. Corey's family members, however, 
work substantially full time on the cabin each 
day during the week. The main purpose of be-
ing at the cabin that week is to do maintenance 
work. Therefore, the use of the cabin during the 
week by Corey and his family won’t be consid-
ered personal use by Corey.
Days used as a main home before or af-
ter renting.  For purposes of determining 
whether a dwelling unit was used as a home, 
you may not have to count days you used the 
property as your main home before or after rent-
ing it or offering it for rent as days of personal 
use. Don’t count them as days of personal use 
if:
• You rented or tried to rent the property for 
12 or more consecutive months, or
• You rented or tried to rent the property for 
a period of less than 12 consecutive 
months and the period ended because you 
sold or exchanged the property.
However, this special rule doesn’t apply when 
dividing expenses between rental and personal 
use. See Property Changed to Rental Use  in 
chapter 4.
Example 1.  On February 28, 2020, you 
moved out of the house you had lived in for 6 
years because you accepted a job in another 
town. You rented your house at a fair rental 
price from March 15, 2020, to May 14, 2021 (14 
months). On June 1, 2021, you moved back 
into your old house.
The days you used the house as your main 
home from January 1 to February 28, 2020, and 
from June 1 to December 31, 2021, aren’t coun-
ted as days of personal use. Therefore, you 
would use the rules in chapter 1  when figuring 
your rental income and expenses.
Example 2. On January 31, you moved out 
of the condominium where you had lived for 3 
years. You offered it for rent at a fair rental price 
beginning on February 1. You were unable to 
rent it until April. On September 15, you sold the 
condominium.
The days you used the condominium as 
your main home from January 1 to January 31 
aren’t counted as days of personal use when 
determining whether you used it as a home.
Examples. The following examples show how 
to determine whether you used your rental 
property as a home.
Example 1.  You converted the basement 
of your home into an apartment with a bedroom, 
a bathroom, and a small kitchen. You rented the 
basement apartment at a fair rental price to col-
lege students during the regular school year. 
You rented to them on a 9 -month lease (273 
days). You figured 10% of the total days rented 
to others at a fair rental price is 27 days.
During June (30 days), your brothers stayed 
with you and lived in the basement apartment 
rent free.
Your basement apartment was used as a 
home because you used it for personal purpo-
ses for 30 days. Rent -free use by your brothers 
is considered personal use. Your personal use 
(30 days) is more than the greater of 14 days or 
10% of the total days it was rented (27 days).
Example 2. You rented the guest bedroom 
in your home at a fair rental price during the lo-
cal college's homecoming, commencement, 
and football weekends (a total of 27 days). Your 
sister-in-law stayed in the room, rent free, for 
the last 3 weeks (21 days) in July. You figured 
10% of the total days rented to others at a fair 
rental price is 3 days.
Page 18 of 27  Fileid: … tions/p527/2021/a/xml/cycle04/source 10:59 - 19-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 18  Chapter 5 Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including Vacation Home)

The room was used as a home because you 
used it for personal purposes for 21 days. That 
is more than the greater of 14 days or 10% of 
the 27 days it was rented (3 days).
Example 3. You own a condominium apart-
ment in a resort area. You rented it at a fair 
rental price for a total of 170 days during the 
year. For 12 of these days, the tenant wasn’t 
able to use the apartment and allowed you to 
use it even though you didn’t refund any of the 
rent. Your family actually used the apartment for 
10 of those days. Therefore, the apartment is 
treated as having been rented for 160 (170 – 
10) days. You figured 10% of the total days ren-
ted to others at a fair rental price is 16 days. 
Your family also used the apartment for 7 other 
days during the year.
You used the apartment as a home because 
you used it for personal purposes for 17 days. 
That is more than the greater of 14 days or 10% 
of the 160 days it was rented (16 days).
Minimal rental use.  If you use the dwelling 
unit as a home and you rent it less than 15 days 
during the year, that period isn’t treated as 
rental activity. See Used as a home but rented 
less than 15 days, later, for more information.
Limit on deductions.  Renting a dwelling unit 
that is considered a home isn’t a passive activ-
ity. Instead, if your rental expenses are more 
than your rental income, some or all of the ex-
cess expenses can’t be used to offset income 
from other sources. The excess expenses that 
can’t be used to offset income from other sour-
ces are carried forward to the next year and 
treated as rental expenses for the same prop-
erty. Any expenses carried forward to the next 
year will be subject to any limits that apply for 
that year. This limitation will apply to expenses 
carried forward to another year even if you don’t 
use the property as your home for that subse-
quent year.
To figure your deductible rental expenses 
for this year and any carryover to next year, use 
Worksheet 5-1.
Reporting Income and 
Deductions
Property not used for personal purposes.  If 
you don’t use a dwelling unit for personal purpo-
ses, see chapter 3 for how to report your rental 
income and expenses.
Property used for personal purposes. If you 
do use a dwelling unit for personal purposes, 
then how you report your rental income and ex-
penses depends on whether you used the 
dwelling unit as a home.
Not used as a home.  If you use a dwelling 
unit for personal purposes, but not as a home, 
report all the rental income in your income. Be-
cause you used the dwelling unit for personal 
purposes, you must divide your expenses be-
tween the rental use and the personal use as 
described earlier in this chapter under Dividing 
Expenses. The expenses for personal use 
aren’t deductible as rental expenses.
Your deductible rental expenses can be 
more than your gross rental income; however, 
see Limits on Rental Losses in chapter 3.
Used as a home but rented less than 15 
days. If you use a dwelling unit as a home and 
you rent it less than 15 days during the year, its 
primary function isn’t considered to be rental 
and it shouldn’t be reported on Schedule E 
(Form 1040). You aren’t required to report the 
rental income and rental expenses from this ac-
tivity. Any expenses related to the home, such 
as mortgage interest, property taxes, and any 
qualified casualty loss, will be reported as nor-
mally allowed on Schedule A (Form 1040). See 
the Instructions for Schedule A for more infor-
mation on deducting these expenses.
Used as a home and rented 15 days or 
more. If you use a dwelling unit as a home and 
rent it 15 days or more during the year, include 
all your rental income in your income. Because 
you used the dwelling unit for personal purpo-
ses, you must divide your expenses between 
the rental use and the personal use as descri-
bed earlier in this chapter under Dividing Ex-
penses. The expenses for personal use aren’t 
deductible as rental expenses.
If you had a net profit from renting the dwell-
ing unit for the year (that is, if your rental income 
is more than the total of your rental expenses, 
including depreciation), deduct all of your rental 
expenses. You don’t need to use Worksheet 
5-1.
However, if you had a net loss from renting 
the dwelling unit for the year, your deduction for 
certain rental expenses is limited. To figure your 
deductible rental expenses and any carryover 
to next year, use Worksheet 5-1.
Page 19 of 27  Fileid: … tions/p527/2021/a/xml/cycle04/source 10:59 - 19-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 5 Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including Vacation Home)  Page 19

Worksheet for Figuring Rental 
Deductions for a Dwelling Unit Used as 
a Home
Worksheet 5-1.
Keep for Your Records
Use this worksheet only if you answer “Yes” to all of the following questions.
• Did you use the dwelling unit as a home this year? (See Dwelling Unit Used as a Home.)
• Did you rent the dwelling unit at a fair rental price 15 days or more this year?
• Is the total of your rental expenses and depreciation more than your rental income?
PART I. Rental Use Percentage
A. Total days available for rent at fair rental price ..................................... A.  
B. Total days available for rent (line A) but not rented ................................. B.  
C. Total days of rental use. Subtract line B from line A ............................... C.  
D. Total days of personal use (including days rented at less than fair rental price) ......... D.  
E. Total days of rental and personal use. Add lines C and D ......................... E.  
F. Percentage of expenses allowed for rental. Divide line C by line E .................................. F.    .      
PART II. Allowable Rental Expenses
1. Enter rents received ......................................................................... 1.  
2a. Enter the rental portion of deductible home mortgage interest and qualified mortgage 
insurance premiums. See instructions ........................................... 2a.  
 b. Enter the rental portion of deductible real estate taxes. See instructions ................. b.  
 c. Enter the rental portion of deductible casualty and theft losses. See instructions .......... c.  
 d. Enter direct rental expenses. See instructions ..................................... d.  
 e. Fully deductible rental expenses. Add lines 2a–2d. Enter here and 
on the appropriate lines on Schedule E. See instructions ............................................ 2e.  
3. Subtract line 2e from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0- ................................................ 3.  
4a. Enter the rental portion of expenses directly related to operating or maintaining 
the dwelling unit (such as repairs, insurance, and utilities) ........................... 4a.  
 b. Enter the rental portion of excess mortgage interest and qualified mortgage insurance 
premiums. See instructions ................................................... b.  
c. Enter the rental portion of excess real estate taxes. See instructions ................... c.  
 d. Carryover of operating expenses from 2020 worksheet .............................. d.  
 e. Add lines 4a–4d ............................................................ e.  
 f. Allowable expenses. Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 4e. See instructions ............................ 4f.  
5. Subtract line 4f from line 3. If zero or less, enter -0- ................................................. 5.  
6a. Enter the rental portion of excess casualty and theft losses. See instructions ............. 6a.  
 b. Enter the rental portion of depreciation of the dwelling unit ........................... b.  
 c. Carryover of excess casualty and theft losses and depreciation from 2020 worksheet ...... c.  
 d. Add lines 6a–6c ............................................................ d.  
 e. Allowable excess casualty and theft losses and depreciation. Enter the smaller of 
line 5 or line 6d. See instructions ............................................................... 6e.  
PART III. Carryover of Unallowed Expenses to Next Year
7a. Operating expenses to be carried over to next year. Subtract line 4f from line 4e ...................... 7a.  
 b. Excess casualty and theft losses and depreciation to be carried over to next year.
Subtract line 6e from line 6d .................................................................. b.  
Page 20 of 27  Fileid: … tions/p527/2021/a/xml/cycle04/source 10:59 - 19-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 20  Chapter 5 Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including Vacation Home)

Worksheet for Figuring Rental Deductions for a 
Dwelling Unit Used as a Home
Worksheet 5-1 Instructions.
Keep for Your Records
Caution. Use the percentage determined in Part I, line F, to figure the rental portions to enter on lines 2a–2c, 4a–4c, and 6a–6b of Part II.
Line 2a. If you are claiming the standard deduction, do not report an amount on line 2a; instead, report the rental portion of your 
mortgage interest and mortgage insurance premiums on line 4b.
If you are itemizing your deductions on Schedule A, figure the amount of mortgage interest to include on line 2a by using the 
following steps. 
Step 1. Treat all the mortgage interest you paid for mortgages secured by your home(s) as a personal expense and figure the 
amount that would be deductible as an itemized expense on Schedule A. See Pub. 936 for more information about figuring the 
home mortgage interest deduction and the limits that may apply. 
Step 2. Include on line 2a the rental portion of deductible mortgage interest figured in Step 1 that is attributable to the home you 
are renting. 
 Note. Be sure to claim only the personal portion of your deductible mortgage interest on Schedule A. The personal portion of 
mortgage interest on the dwelling unit doesn't include the rental portion you reported on line 2a of this Worksheet 5-1 or any 
portion that you deducted on other forms, such as Schedule C or F. 
If you are itemizing your deductions on Schedule A, figure the amount of qualified mortgage insurance premiums to include on 
line 2a by using the following steps.
Step 1. Treat all the mortgage insurance premiums you paid under a mortgage insurance contract issued after December 31, 
2006, and secured by your home(s) as a personal expense and complete a separate Mortgage Insurance Premiums Deduction 
Worksheet in the Instructions for Schedule A for Worksheet 5-1. When completing line 2 of this worksheet for Worksheet 5-1, 
enter your adjusted gross income excluding the gross income and deductions attributable to the rental or business use of the 
home.
Step 2. Include on line 2a the rental portion of deductible mortgage insurance premiums figured in Step 1 that are attributable to 
the home you are renting.
 Note. Be sure to use only the personal portion of your mortgage insurance premiums when completing the Mortgage 
Insurance Premiums Deduction Worksheet for line 8d of Schedule A. The personal portion of mortgage insurance premiums on 
the dwelling unit doesn’t include the rental portion or business portion of mortgage insurance premiums attributable to the home 
in which you conducted rental or business activities.
Line 2b. If you are claiming the standard deduction, do not report an amount on line 2b; instead, report the rental portion of your real 
estate taxes on line 4c.
If you are itemizing your deductions on Schedule A, figure the amount to report on line 2b by using the following steps.
Step 1. If the total of your state and local income (or, if elected on your Schedule A, general sales) taxes, real estate taxes, and 
personal property taxes is not more than $10,000 ($5,000 if married filing separately), enter the rental portion of the real estate 
taxes attributable to the dwelling unit you are renting on line 2b.
Step 2. If you do not meet the condition of Step 1, use the following worksheet to figure the amount to include on line 2b.
Line 2b Worksheet
1. Enter your state and local income taxes (or, if you elect on Schedule A, your state and 
local general sales taxes) that are personal expenses ..........................  
2. Enter all the state and local real estate taxes you paid on the dwelling unit you are 
renting ...............................................................  
3. Enter any other state and local real estate taxes you paid that are a personal expense 
and not included on line 2 ................................................  
4. Enter your state and local personal property taxes that are a personal expense .......  
5. Add lines 1 through 4 ....................................................  
6. Multiply line 2 by the percentage of expenses allowed for rental (Part I, line F) ........  
7. Subtract line 6 from line 5 .................................................  
8. Subtract line 7 from $10,000 ($5,000 if married filing separately). If zero or less, 
enter -0- ..............................................................  
9. Real estate taxes reported on line 2b. Enter the smaller of line 6 or line 8 here and 
on line 2b .............................................................  
10. Excess real estate taxes reported on line 4c. Subtract line 9 from line 6 ..........  
 Note. Be sure to report only the personal portion of your real estate taxes on line 5b of Schedule A. The personal 
portion of real estate taxes on the dwelling unit doesn't include the rental portion you reported on line 2b of this 
Worksheet 5-1 or any portion that you deducted on other forms, such as Schedule C or F. 
Line 2c. If you are claiming the standard deduction and you are not increasing your standard deduction by a net qualified disaster loss, 
do not report an amount on line 2c; instead, report the rental portion of your casualty losses on line 6a.
If you are itemizing your deductions on Schedule A or filing a Schedule A to increase your standard deduction by a net qualified 
disaster loss, figure the amount to report on line 2c by using the following steps.
Step 1. Complete a worksheet version of Section A of Form 4684 treating all your casualty losses (and gains) as personal 
expenses. If you are itemizing your deductions, when completing line 17 of this worksheet version of Form 4684, enter 10% of 
your adjusted gross income figured without your rental income and expenses from the dwelling unit. Don't file this worksheet 
version of Form 4684; instead, keep it for your records. You will complete a separate Form 4684 to attach to your return using 
only the personal portion of your casualty losses (and gains) for Section A.
Step 2. Include on line 2c the rental portion of the loss amounts from lines 15 and 18 of this worksheet version of Form 4684 
that are the result of a federally declared disaster. If you are claiming an increased standard deduction instead of itemizing your 
deductions, only use the rental portion of a net qualified disaster loss on line 15 of the worksheet version of Form 4684 for this 
Step 2.
Note. Be sure to use only the personal portion of your casualty losses (and gains) when completing Section A of the separate 
Form 4684 you attach to your return. The separate Form 4684 you attach to your return is used to figure the casualty losses you 
can include on line 15 of Schedule A and the net qualified disaster losses you can include on line 16 of Schedule A. You will 
report casualty and theft losses attributable to your rental activity in Section B of the separate Form 4684 you attach to your 
return.
Page 21 of 27  Fileid: … tions/p527/2021/a/xml/cycle04/source 10:59 - 19-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 5 Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including Vacation Home)  Page 21

Worksheet 5-1 Instructions—Continued
Line 2d. Enter the total of your rental expenses that are directly related only to the rental activity. These include interest on loans used for 
rental activities other than to buy, build, or improve the dwelling unit. Also, include rental agency fees, advertising, office 
supplies, and depreciation on office equipment used in your rental activity.
Line 2e. You can deduct the amounts on lines 2a, 2b, 2c, and 2d as rental expenses even if your rental expenses are more than your 
rental income. Enter the amounts on lines 2a, 2b, and 2d on the appropriate lines of Schedule E. Include the amount from 
line 2c with the casualty loss from line 6e, if any, in Section B of Form 4684, on line 27, and enter “see attached statement” 
above line 27. Attach a statement to your tax return showing how you calculated the deductible loss (you can use the worksheet 
as your attachment).
Line 4b. If you are claiming the standard deduction, enter the rental portion of all the home mortgage interest and qualified mortgage 
insurance premiums paid for loans used to buy, build, or substantially improve the dwelling unit you are renting on line 4b. Do 
not include mortgage interest or qualified mortgage insurance premiums on a loan that did not benefit the dwelling unit (for 
example, a home equity loan used to pay off credit card bills, to buy a car, or to pay tuition costs).
If you are itemizing your deductions and the amount you figured in either Step 1 under Line 2a was less than the full amount of 
interest or insurance premiums you paid because of the limits on deducting home mortgage interest and qualified mortgage 
insurance premiums as a personal expense, include on line 4b the rental portion of the excess attributable to the loans used to 
buy, build, or substantially improve the dwelling unit you rented.
Line 4c. If you are claiming the standard deduction, enter the rental portion of all the real estate taxes paid on the dwelling unit you 
rented.
If you are itemizing your deductions and you used the Line 2b Worksheet to figure the amount to include on line 2b, then include 
the amount from line 10 of the Line 2b Worksheet on line 4c; otherwise, do not enter an amount on line 4c.
Line 4f. You can deduct the amounts on lines 4a, 4b, 4c, and 4d as rental expenses on Schedule E only to the extent they aren’t more 
than the amount on line 4f.*
Line 6a. If you are claiming the standard deduction and not increasing it by a net qualified disaster loss, enter the rental portion of all 
casualty losses attributable to the dwelling unit you rented.
If you are itemizing your deductions on Schedule A or filing a Schedule A to increase your standard deduction by a net qualified 
disaster loss, enter the rental portion of the casualty losses attributable to the dwelling unit you rented that are in excess of the 
amount you figured on lines 15 and 18 of your worksheet version of Form 4684.
Line 6e. You can deduct the amounts on lines 6a, 6b, and 6c as rental expenses only to the extent they aren’t more than the amount on 
line 6e.* Include the depreciation from line 6e, if any, on the appropriate line of Schedule E. Include the casualty loss from 
line 6e, if any, with the casualty loss from line 2c in Section B of Form 4684, on line 27, and enter “see attached statement” 
above line 27. Attach a statement to your tax return showing how you calculated the deductible loss (you can use the worksheet 
as your attachment).
* Allocating the limited deduction. If you can’t deduct all of the amount on line 4e or 6d this year, you can allocate the allowable deduction in any way you wish 
among the expenses included on line 4e or 6d. Enter the amount you allocate to each expense on the appropriate line of Schedule E, Part I, or if a casualty loss, as 
instructed earlier on Form 4684, line 27.
Page 22 of 27  Fileid: … tions/p527/2021/a/xml/cycle04/source 10:59 - 19-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 22  Chapter 5 Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including Vacation Home)

6.
How To Get Tax 
Help
If you have questions about a tax issue; need 
help preparing your tax return; or want to down-
load free publications, forms, or instructions, go 
to IRS.gov to find resources that can help you 
right away.
Preparing and filing your tax return.  After 
receiving all your wage and earnings state-
ments (Forms W-2, W-2G, 1099-R, 1099-MISC, 
1099-NEC, etc.); unemployment compensation 
statements (by mail or in a digital format) or 
other government payment statements (Form 
1099-G); and interest, dividend, and retirement 
statements from banks and investment firms 
(Forms 1099), you have several options to 
choose from to prepare and file your tax return. 
You can prepare the tax return yourself, see if 
you qualify for free tax preparation, or hire a tax 
professional to prepare your return.
For 2021, if you received an Economic 
Impact Payment (EIP), refer to your 
Notice 1444 -C, Your 2021 Economic 
Impact Payment. If you received Advance Child 
Tax Credit payments, refer to your Letter 6419.
Free options for tax preparation.  Go to 
IRS.gov to see your options for preparing and 
filing your return online or in your local commun-
ity, if you qualify, which include the following.
• Free File. This program lets you prepare 
and file your federal individual income tax 
return for free using brand-name tax-prep-
aration-and-filing software or Free File filla-
ble forms. However, state tax preparation 
may not be available through Free File. Go 
to IRS.gov/FreeFile to see if you qualify for 
free online federal tax preparation, e-filing, 
and direct deposit or payment options.
• VITA. The Volunteer Income Tax Assis-
tance (VITA) program offers free tax help 
to people with low-to-moderate incomes, 
persons with disabilities, and limited-Eng-
lish-speaking taxpayers who need help 
preparing their own tax returns. Go to 
IRS.gov/VITA, download the free IRS2Go 
app, or call 800-906-9887 for information 
on free tax return preparation.
• TCE. The Tax Counseling for the Elderly 
(TCE) program offers free tax help for all 
taxpayers, particularly those who are 60 
years of age and older. TCE volunteers 
specialize in answering questions about 
pensions and retirement-related issues 
unique to seniors. Go to IRS.gov/TCE, 
download the free IRS2Go app, or call 
888-227-7669 for information on free tax 
return preparation.
• MilTax. Members of the U.S. Armed 
Forces and qualified veterans may use Mil-
Tax, a free tax service offered by the De-
partment of Defense through Military One-
Source. For more information go to 
CAUTION
!
MilitaryOneSource (MilitaryOneSource.mil/
Tax).
Also, the IRS offers Free Fillable 
Forms, which can be completed online and 
then filed electronically regardless of in-
come.
Using online tools to help prepare your re-
turn.  Go to IRS.gov/Tools for the following.
• The Earned Income Tax Credit Assistant 
(IRS.gov/EITCAssistant) determines if 
you’re eligible for the earned income credit 
(EIC).
• The Online EIN Application (IRS.gov/EIN) 
helps you get an employer identification 
number (EIN) at no cost.
• The Tax Withholding Estimator (IRS.gov/
W4app) makes it easier for everyone to 
pay the correct amount of tax during the 
year. The tool is a convenient, online way 
to check and tailor your withholding. It’s 
more user-friendly for taxpayers, including 
retirees and self-employed individuals. The 
features include the following.
▶ Easy to understand language.
▶ The ability to switch between 
screens, correct previous entries, and skip 
screens that don’t apply.
▶ Tips and links to help you determine 
if you qualify for tax credits and deduc-
tions.
▶ A progress tracker.
▶ A self-employment tax feature.
▶ Automatic calculation of taxable so-
cial security benefits.
• The First-Time Homebuyer Credit Account 
Look-up (IRS.gov/HomeBuyer) tool pro-
vides information on your repayments and 
account balance.
• The Sales Tax Deduction Calculator 
(IRS.gov/SalesTax) figures the amount you 
can claim if you itemize deductions on 
Schedule A (Form 1040).
Getting answers to your tax ques-
tions. On IRS.gov, you can get 
up-to-date information on current 
events and changes in tax law.
• IRS.gov/Help: A variety of tools to help you 
get answers to some of the most common 
tax questions.
• IRS.gov/ITA: The Interactive Tax Assistant, 
a tool that will ask you questions and, 
based on your input, provide answers on a 
number of tax law topics.
• IRS.gov/Forms: Find forms, instructions, 
and publications. You will find details on 
2021 tax changes and hundreds of interac-
tive links to help you find answers to your 
questions.
• You may also be able to access tax law in-
formation in your electronic filing software.
Need someone to prepare your tax return? 
There are various types of tax return preparers, 
including tax preparers, enrolled agents, certi-
fied public accountants (CPAs), attorneys, and 
many others who don’t have professional cre-
dentials. If you choose to have someone pre-
pare your tax return, choose that preparer 
wisely. A paid tax preparer is:
• Primarily responsible for the overall sub-
stantive accuracy of your return,
• Required to sign the return, and
• Required to include their preparer tax iden-
tification number (PTIN).
Although the tax preparer always signs the re-
turn, you're ultimately responsible for providing 
all the information required for the preparer to 
accurately prepare your return. Anyone paid to 
prepare tax returns for others should have a 
thorough understanding of tax matters. For 
more information on how to choose a tax pre-
parer, go to Tips for Choosing a Tax Preparer 
on IRS.gov.
Advance child tax credit payments.  From 
July through December 2021, advance pay-
ments were sent automatically to taxpayers with 
qualifying children who met certain criteria. The 
advance child tax credit payments were early 
payments of up to 50% of the estimated child 
tax credit that taxpayers may properly claim on 
their 2021 returns. Go to IRS.gov/AdvCTC for 
more information about these payments and 
how they can affect your taxes.
Coronavirus. Go to IRS.gov/Coronavirus for 
links to information on the impact of the corona-
virus, as well as tax relief available for individu-
als and families, small and large businesses, 
and tax-exempt organizations.
Employers can register to use Business 
Services Online. The Social Security Adminis-
tration (SSA) offers online service at SSA.gov/
employer for fast, free, and secure online W -2 
filing options to CPAs, accountants, enrolled 
agents, and individuals who process Form W -2, 
Wage and Tax Statement, and Form W -2c, 
Corrected Wage and Tax Statement.
IRS social media.  Go to IRS.gov/SocialMedia 
to see the various social media tools the IRS 
uses to share the latest information on tax 
changes, scam alerts, initiatives, products, and 
services. At the IRS, privacy and security are 
our highest priority. We use these tools to share 
public information with you. Don’t post your so-
cial security number (SSN) or other confidential 
information on social media sites. Always pro-
tect your identity when using any social net-
working site.
The following IRS YouTube channels pro-
vide short, informative videos on various tax -re-
lated topics in English, Spanish, and ASL.
• Youtube.com/irsvideos.
• Youtube.com/irsvideosmultilingua.
• Youtube.com/irsvideosASL.
Watching IRS videos.  The IRS Video portal 
(IRSVideos.gov) contains video and audio pre-
sentations for individuals, small businesses, 
and tax professionals.
Online tax information in other languages. 
You can find information on IRS.gov/
MyLanguage if English isn’t your native lan-
guage.
Free Over-the-Phone Interpreter (OPI) Serv-
ice. The IRS is committed to serving our multi-
lingual customers by offering OPI services. The 
OPI service is a federally funded program and 
is available at Taxpayer Assistance Centers 
(TACs), other IRS offices, and every VITA/TCE 
Page 23 of 27  Fileid: … tions/p527/2021/a/xml/cycle04/source 10:59 - 19-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 6 How To Get Tax Help  Page 23

return site. OPI service is accessible in more 
than 350 languages.
Accessibility Helpline available for taxpay-
ers with disabilities.  Taxpayers who need in-
formation about accessibility services can call 
833-690-0598. The Accessibility Helpline can 
answer questions related to current and future 
accessibility products and services available in 
alternative media formats (for example, braille, 
large print, audio, etc.).
Getting tax forms and publications.  Go to 
IRS.gov/Forms to view, download, or print all of 
the forms, instructions, and publications you 
may need. Or, you can go to IRS.gov/
OrderForms to place an order.
Getting tax publications and instructions in 
eBook format.  You can also download and 
view popular tax publications and instructions 
(including the Instructions for Form 1040) on 
mobile devices as eBooks at IRS.gov/eBooks.
Note. IRS eBooks have been tested using 
Apple's iBooks for iPad. Our eBooks haven’t 
been tested on other dedicated eBook readers, 
and eBook functionality may not operate as in-
tended.
Access your online account (individual tax-
payers only).  Go to IRS.gov/Account to se-
curely access information about your federal tax 
account.
• View the amount you owe and a break-
down by tax year.
• See payment plan details or apply for a 
new payment plan.
• Make a payment or view 5 years of pay-
ment history and any pending or sched-
uled payments.
• Access your tax records, including key 
data from your most recent tax return, your 
EIP amounts, and transcripts.
• View digital copies of select notices from 
the IRS.
• Approve or reject authorization requests 
from tax professionals.
• View your address on file or manage your 
communication preferences.
Tax Pro Account.  This tool lets your tax pro-
fessional submit an authorization request to ac-
cess your individual taxpayer IRS online 
account. For more information, go to IRS.gov/
TaxProAccount.
Using direct deposit.  The fastest way to re-
ceive a tax refund is to file electronically and 
choose direct deposit, which securely and elec-
tronically transfers your refund directly into your 
financial account. Direct deposit also avoids the 
possibility that your check could be lost, stolen, 
or returned undeliverable to the IRS. Eight in 10 
taxpayers use direct deposit to receive their re-
funds. If you don’t have a bank account, go to 
IRS.gov/DirectDeposit for more information on 
where to find a bank or credit union that can 
open an account online.
Getting a transcript of your return.  The 
quickest way to get a copy of your tax transcript 
is to go to IRS.gov/Transcripts. Click on either 
“Get Transcript Online” or “Get Transcript by 
Mail” to order a free copy of your transcript. If 
you prefer, you can order your transcript by call-
ing 800-908-9946.
Reporting and resolving your tax -related 
identity theft issues. 
• Tax-related identity theft happens when 
someone steals your personal information 
to commit tax fraud. Your taxes can be af-
fected if your SSN is used to file a fraudu-
lent return or to claim a refund or credit.
• The IRS doesn’t initiate contact with tax-
payers by email, text messages, telephone 
calls, or social media channels to request 
personal or financial information. This in-
cludes requests for personal identification 
numbers (PINs), passwords, or similar in-
formation for credit cards, banks, or other 
financial accounts.
• Go to IRS.gov/IdentityTheft, the IRS Iden-
tity Theft Central webpage, for information 
on identity theft and data security protec-
tion for taxpayers, tax professionals, and 
businesses. If your SSN has been lost or 
stolen or you suspect you’re a victim of 
tax-related identity theft, you can learn 
what steps you should take.
• Get an Identity Protection PIN (IP PIN). IP 
PINs are six-digit numbers assigned to tax-
payers to help prevent the misuse of their 
SSNs on fraudulent federal income tax re-
turns. When you have an IP PIN, it pre-
vents someone else from filing a tax return 
with your SSN. To learn more, go to 
IRS.gov/IPPIN.
Ways to check on the status of your refund. 
• Go to IRS.gov/Refunds.
• Download the official IRS2Go app to your 
mobile device to check your refund status.
• Call the automated refund hotline at 
800-829-1954.
Note. The IRS can’t issue refunds before 
mid-February 2022 for returns that claimed the 
EIC or the additional child tax credit (ACTC). 
This applies to the entire refund, not just the 
portion associated with these credits.
Making a tax payment.  Go to IRS.gov/
Payments for information on how to make a 
payment using any of the following options.
• IRS Direct Pay: Pay your individual tax bill 
or estimated tax payment directly from 
your checking or savings account at no 
cost to you.
• Debit or Credit Card: Choose an approved 
payment processor to pay online or by 
phone.
• Electronic Funds Withdrawal: Schedule a 
payment when filing your federal taxes us-
ing tax return preparation software or 
through a tax professional.
• Electronic Federal Tax Payment System: 
Best option for businesses. Enrollment is 
required.
• Check or Money Order: Mail your payment 
to the address listed on the notice or in-
structions.
• Cash: You may be able to pay your taxes 
with cash at a participating retail store.
• Same-Day Wire: You may be able to do 
same-day wire from your financial institu-
tion. Contact your financial institution for 
availability, cost, and time frames.
Note. The IRS uses the latest encryption 
technology to ensure that the electronic pay-
ments you make online, by phone, or from a 
mobile device using the IRS2Go app are safe 
and secure. Paying electronically is quick, easy, 
and faster than mailing in a check or money or-
der.
What if I can’t pay now?  Go to IRS.gov/
Payments for more information about your op-
tions.
• Apply for an online payment agreement 
(IRS.gov/OPA) to meet your tax obligation 
in monthly installments if you can’t pay 
your taxes in full today. Once you complete 
the online process, you will receive imme-
diate notification of whether your agree-
ment has been approved.
• Use the Offer in Compromise Pre-Qualifier 
to see if you can settle your tax debt for 
less than the full amount you owe. For 
more information on the Offer in Compro-
mise program, go to IRS.gov/OIC.
Filing an amended return.  You can now file 
Form 1040 -X electronically with tax filing soft-
ware to amend 2019 or 2020 Forms 1040 and 
1040-SR. To do so, you must have e -filed your 
original 2019 or 2020 return. Amended returns 
for all prior years must be mailed. Go to 
IRS.gov/Form1040X for information and up-
dates.
Checking the status of your amended re-
turn. Go to IRS.gov/WMAR to track the status 
of Form 1040-X amended returns.
Note. It can take up to 3 weeks from the 
date you filed your amended return for it to 
show up in our system, and processing it can 
take up to 16 weeks.
Understanding an IRS notice or letter 
you’ve received.  Go to IRS.gov/Notices to 
find additional information about responding to 
an IRS notice or letter.
You can use Schedule LEP, Request for 
Change in Language Preference, to state a 
preference to receive notices, letters, or other 
written communications from the IRS in an al-
ternative language, when these are available. 
Once your Schedule LEP is processed, the IRS 
will determine your translation needs and pro-
vide you translations when available. If you 
have a disability requiring notices in an accessi-
ble format, see Form 9000.
Contacting your local IRS office.  Keep in 
mind, many questions can be answered on 
IRS.gov without visiting an IRS TAC. Go to 
IRS.gov/LetUsHelp for the topics people ask 
about most. If you still need help, IRS TACs 
provide tax help when a tax issue can’t be han-
dled online or by phone. All TACs now provide 
service by appointment, so you’ll know in ad-
vance that you can get the service you need 
without long wait times. Before you visit, go to 
IRS.gov/TACLocator to find the nearest TAC 
Page 24 of 27  Fileid: … tions/p527/2021/a/xml/cycle04/source 10:59 - 19-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 24  Chapter 6 How To Get Tax Help

and to check hours, available services, and ap-
pointment options. Or, on the IRS2Go app, un-
der the Stay Connected tab, choose the Con-
tact Us option and click on “Local Offices.”
The Taxpayer Advocate 
Service (TAS) Is Here To 
Help You
What Is TAS?
TAS is an independent organization within the 
IRS that helps taxpayers and protects taxpayer 
rights. Their job is to ensure that every taxpayer 
is treated fairly and that you know and under-
stand your rights under the Taxpayer Bill of 
Rights.
How Can You Learn About Your 
Taxpayer Rights?
The Taxpayer Bill of Rights describes 10 basic 
rights that all taxpayers have when dealing with 
the IRS. Go to TaxpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov to 
help you understand what these rights mean to 
you and how they apply. These are your rights. 
Know them. Use them.
What Can TAS Do for You?
TAS can help you resolve problems that you 
can’t resolve with the IRS. And their service is 
free. If you qualify for their assistance, you will 
be assigned to one advocate who will work with 
you throughout the process and will do every-
thing possible to resolve your issue. TAS can 
help you if:
• Your problem is causing financial difficulty 
for you, your family, or your business;
• You face (or your business is facing) an 
immediate threat of adverse action; or
• You’ve tried repeatedly to contact the IRS 
but no one has responded, or the IRS 
hasn’t responded by the date promised.
How Can You Reach TAS?
TAS has offices in every state, the District of 
Columbia, and Puerto Rico . Your local advo-
cate’s number is in your local directory and at 
TaxpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov/Contact-Us. You 
can also call them at 877-777-4778.
How Else Does TAS Help 
Taxpayers?
TAS works to resolve large -scale problems that 
affect many taxpayers. If you know of one of 
these broad issues, report it to them at IRS.gov/
SAMS.
TAS for Tax Professionals
TAS can provide a variety of information for tax 
professionals, including tax law updates and 
guidance, TAS programs, and ways to let TAS 
know about systemic problems you’ve seen in 
your practice.
Low Income Taxpayer 
Clinics (LITCs)
LITCs are independent from the IRS. LITCs 
represent individuals whose income is below a 
certain level and need to resolve tax problems 
with the IRS, such as audits, appeals, and tax 
collection disputes. In addition, LITCs can pro-
vide information about taxpayer rights and re-
sponsibilities in different languages for individu-
als who speak English as a second language. 
Services are offered for free or a small fee for 
eligible taxpayers. To find an LITC near you, go 
to TaxpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov/about-us/Low-
Income-Taxpayer-Clinics-LITC or see IRS Pub. 
4134, Low Income Taxpayer Clinic List.
Page 25 of 27  Fileid: … tions/p527/2021/a/xml/cycle04/source 10:59 - 19-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 527 (2021)   Page 25

To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.
See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Index
 
A
Accelerated Cost Recovery 
System (ACRS) 8
 (See also Modified Accelerated 
Cost Recovery System 
(MACRS))
Effective date 7
Accounting methods:
Accrual method 3
Cash method 3
Constructive receipt of income 3
Accrual method taxpayers 3
ACRS (Accelerated Cost 
Recovery System):
Effective date 7
Active participation 13
Activities not for profit 16
Additions to property 10
 (See also Improvements)
Basis 8
MACRS recovery period 10
Adjusted basis:
MACRS depreciation 8
Adjusted gross income (AGI):
Modified (See Modified adjusted 
gross income (MAGI))
Advance rent 3
Security deposits 3
Advertising 4
Allocation of expenses:
Change of property to rental 
use 15
How to divide expenses 17
Part of property rented 16
Personal use of rental 
property 3, 17
Alternative Depreciation System 
(ADS):
Election of 9
MACRS 8, 11
Alternative minimum tax (AMT):
Accelerated depreciation 
methods 6
Apartments:
Basement apartments 18
Dwelling units 17
Appraisal fees 7
Assessments, local (See Local 
assessments)
Assessments for maintenance 8
Assistance (See Tax help)
Assumption of mortgage 8
Attorneys' fees 7, 8
Automobiles:
MACRS recovery periods 9
B
Basis:
Adjusted basis 8
Assessments for local 
improvements 8
Basis other than cost 8
Cost basis 7
Decreases to 8
Deductions:
Capitalization of costs vs. 8
Not greater than basis 7
Fair market value 15
Increases to 8
MACRS depreciable basis 7
Property changed to rental 
use 15
C
Capital expenditures:
Deductions vs. effect on basis 8
Local benefit taxes 4
Mortgages, payments to 
obtain 4
Cars:
MACRS recovery periods 9
Cash method taxpayers 3
Casualty losses 14
Charitable contributions:
Use of property 18
Cleaning and maintenance 4
Closing costs 7
Commissions 4
Computers:
MACRS recovery periods 9
Condominiums 15, 17
Constructive receipt of income 3
Cooperative housing 6, 15, 17
Cost basis 7
Credit reports 7
Credits:
Residential energy credits 8
D
Days of personal use 18
Days used for repairs and 
maintenance 18
Deductions:
Capitalizing costs vs. effect on 
basis 8
Depreciation (See Depreciation)
Limitations on 12
Passive activity 
losses (See Passive activity)
Depreciation 6
Alternative Depreciation System 
(ADS) (See Modified 
Accelerated Cost Recovery 
System (MACRS))
Basis (See Basis)
Change of property to rental 
use 15
Claiming correct amount of 12
Declining balance method 7
Duration of property expected to 
last more than one year 6
Eligible property 6
First-year expensing 6
MACRS (See Modified 
Accelerated Cost Recovery 
System (MACRS))
Methods 7, 10
Ownership of property 6
Rental expense 4
Rented property 6
Section 179 deduction 6
Special depreciation 
allowances 8
Straight line method 7
Useful life 6
Vacant rental property 4
Discount, bonds and notes 
issued at (See Original issue 
discount (OID))
Dividing of 
expenses (See Allocation of 
expenses)
Dwelling units:
Definition 17
Fair rental price 17
Personal use of 17, 18
E
Easements 8
Equipment rental expense 4
F
Fair market value (FMV) 15
Fair rental price 17
Fees:
Loan origination fees 4, 7
Points (See Points)
Settlement fees and other 
costs 7
Tax return preparation fees 4
First-year expensing 6
Form 1040 or 1040-SR:
Not rented for profit income 16
Part of property rented 16
Rental income and expenses 12
Schedule E 12
Form 1098:
Mortgage interest 4
Form 4684:
Casualties and thefts 14
Form 4797:
Sales of business property 14
Form 8582:
Passive activity losses 13, 14
G
Gains and losses:
At-risk rules 13
Casualty and theft losses 14
Limits on rental losses 12
Passive activity losses 13
Rental real estate activities 13
Sale of rental property 2, 14
General depreciation system 
(GDS) (See Modified 
Accelerated Cost Recovery 
System (MACRS))
H
Home:
Main home 18
Use as rental property (See Use 
of home)
I
Improvements 5
 (See also Repairs)
Assessments for local 
improvements 8
Basis 8
Depreciation of rented 
property 6
MACRS recovery period 10
Insurance 4
Casualty or theft loss 
payments 8
Change of property to rental 
use 15
Fire insurance premiums, cost 
basis 7
Part of property rented 16
Premiums paid in advance 4
Title insurance, cost basis 7
Interest payments 4
 (See also Mortgages)
Loan origination fees 4
Rental expenses 4
L
Land:
Cost basis 8
Depreciation 6
Leases:
Cancellation payments 3
Equipment leasing 4
Limits:
Passive activity losses and 
credits 13
Rental losses 12
Loans:
Assumption fees 7
Charges connected with getting 
or refinancing, cost basis 7
Low or no interest 7
Origination fees 4
Local assessments 8
Losses (See Gains and losses)
M
Missing children, photographs 
of 2
Modified Accelerated Cost 
Recovery System 
(MACRS) 8–12
Additions or improvements to 
property 10
Adjusted basis 8
Alternative Depreciation System 
(ADS) 8, 11
Basis other than cost 8
Conventions 10
Cost basis 7
Depreciable basis 7
Effective date 7
Excluded property 9
General Depreciation System 
(GDS) 8–10
Nonresidential rental property 9
Property used in rental activities 
(Table 2-1) 9
Recovery periods 9, 10
Residential rental property 9, 10
Special depreciation 
allowances 8
Modified adjusted gross income 
(MAGI) 14
Mortgages 4
Assumption of, cost basis 8
Change of property to rental 
use 15
End of, OID 5
Interest 4, 15, 16
Mortgage insurance 
premiums 7
Part of property rented 16
N
Nonresidential real property 9
Not-for-profit activities 16
O
Original issue discount (OID) 4, 
5
P
Part interest:
Expenses 3
Income 3
Passive activity:
Maximum special allowance 14
Personal property:
Rental income from 3
Personal use of rental 
property 15, 17
 (See also Property changed to 
rental use)
Placed-in-service date 6
Points 4, 7
Pre-rental expenses 4
Principal residence (See Home)
Profit, property not rented for 16
Property changed to rental 
use 15
Basis 15
Publications (See Tax help)
R
Real estate professionals 13
Page 26 of 27  Fileid: … tions/p527/2021/a/xml/cycle04/source 10:59 - 19-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 26 Publication 527 (2021)

Real estate taxes 7
Real property trades or 
businesses 13
Recordkeeping requirements:
Travel and transportation 
expenses 4
Recovery periods 9
Rent 7
Advance rent 3
Fair price 17
Rental expenses 3
Advertising 4
Allocation between rental and 
personal uses 17
Change of property to rental 
use 15
Cleaning and maintenance 4
Commissions 4
Depreciation 4
Dwelling unit used as home 18
Equipment rental 4
Home, property also used as 3
Improvements 5
Insurance 4
Interest payments 4
Local transportation expenses 4
Part of property rented 16
Points 4
Pre-rental expenses 4
Rental payments 4
Repairs 4, 5
Sale of property 4
Taxes 4
Tax return preparation fees 4
Tenant, paid by 3
Travel expenses 4
Utilities 4
Vacant rental property 4
Rental income:
Advance rent 3
Cancellation of lease 
payments 3
Dwelling unit used as home 18
Lease with option to buy 3
Not rented for profit 16
Part interest 3
Property received from tenant 3
Reporting 3, 12
Security deposit 3
Services received from tenant 3
Uncollected rent 4
Used as home 3
Rental losses 13
 (See also Gains and losses)
 (See also Passive activity)
Repairs 4, 5
 (See also Improvements)
Assessments for maintenance 8
Personal use of rental property 
exception for days used for 
repairs and maintenance 18
S
Sale of property:
Expenses 4
Gain or loss 2, 14
Main home 2
Section 179 deductions 6
Security deposits 3
Settlement fees 7
Shared equity financing 
agreements 18
Special depreciation 
allowances 8
Spouse:
Material participation 13
Standard mileage rates 4
Surveys 7
T
Tables and figures:
Improvements, examples of 
(Table 1-1) 5
MACRS optional tables 
(Table 2-2d) 11
MACRS optional tables (Tables 
2-2a, 2-2b, and 2-2c) 11
MACRS recovery periods for 
property used in rental 
activities (Table 2-1) 9
Tax credits:
Residential energy credits, effect 
on basis 8
Taxes:
Deduction of 4
Local benefit taxes 4
Real estate taxes 7
Transfer taxes 7
Tax help 23
Tax return preparation fees 4
Theft losses 14
Title insurance 7
Transfer taxes 7
Travel and transportation 
expenses:
Local transportation expenses 4
Recordkeeping 4
Rental expenses 4
Standard mileage rate 4
U
Uncollected rent:
Income 4
Use of home:
Before or after renting 18
Change to rental use 15
Days of personal use 18
Fair rental price 17
Passive activity rules 
exception 13
Personal use as dwelling unit 17
Utilities 4, 8
V
Vacant rental property 4
Vacation homes:
Dwelling unit 17
Fair rental price 17
Personal use of 17
Valuation:
Fair market value 15
Page 27 of 27  Fileid: … tions/p527/2021/a/xml/cycle04/source 10:59 - 19-Jan-2022
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 527 (2021)   Page 27