Userid: RGBLAC00 DTD tipx Leadpct: 0% Pt. size: 8 ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: T:\Pub 17\2009_P17_flatfile-04-01-2010.xml (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17
Your Federal Catalog Number 10311G
Income Tax
Department For use inFor Individualsof the
Treasury preparing
Internal
2009Revenue
Service Returns
Get forms and other information faster and easier by:
Internet www.irs.gov
Nov 24, 2009

Page 2 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Your Federal
Income Tax
Department For Individualsof the
Treasury
Internal
ContentsRevenue
Service
What's New for 2009 ................... . 1 Part Five. Standard Deduction and Itemized
Deductions
What's New for 2010 ................... . 2 20 Standard Deduction ............... . 141
21 Medical and Dental Expenses ........ . 145
Reminders .......................... . 3 22 Taxes ........................ . 150
23 Interest Expense ................. . 156Introduction ......................... . 5 24 Contributions ................... . 163
25 Nonbusiness Casualty and TheftPart One. The Income Tax Return Losses ....................... . 1711 Filing Information ................... . 6 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee2 Filing Status ..................... . 21 Business Expenses .............. . 1783 Personal Exemptions and Dependents ... . 26 27 Tax Benefits for Work-Related4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax ..... . 38 Education ..................... . 197
28 Miscellaneous Deductions .......... . 201Part Two. Income
29 Limit on Itemized Deductions ........ . 2075 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings .... . 47
6 Tip Income ...................... . 55 Part Six. Figuring Your Taxes and Credits7 Interest Income ................... . 57 30 How To Figure Your Tax ........... . 2098 Dividends and Other Corporate 31 Tax on Investment Income of CertainDistributions ................... . 65 Children ...................... . 2129 Rental Income and Expenses ......... . 68 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit ...... . 22010 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and 33 Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled ... . 229Annuities ..................... . 76 34 Child Tax Credit ................. . 23311 Social Security and Equivalent 35 Education Credits ................ . 238Railroad Retirement Benefits ........ . 82 36 Earned Income Credit (EIC) ......... . 24212 Other Income .................... . 86 37 Other Credits ................... . 257
Part Three. Gains and Losses 2009 Tax Table ....................... . 26413 Basis of Property ................. . 96
14 Sale of Property ................. . 100 2009 Tax Computation Worksheet ......... . 27615 Selling Your Home ............... . 107
16 Reporting Gains and Losses ......... . 113 2009 Tax Rate Schedules ............... . 277
Part Four. Adjustments to Income Your Rights as a Taxpayer .............. . 278
17 Individual Retirement Arrangements
(IRAs) ....................... . 121 How To Get Tax Help .................. . 279
18 Alimony ....................... . 133
19 Education-Related Adjustments ....... . 136 Index .............................. . 280
Order Form 
(Inside back cover)
All material in this The explanations and examples in this publication reflect This publication covers some subjects on which a
publication may be the interpretation by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) court may have made a decision more favorable to tax-
reprinted freely. A of: payers than the interpretation by the IRS. Until thesecitation to Your Federal differing interpretations are resolved by higher court deci-Income Tax (2009) • Tax laws enacted by Congress, sions or in some other way, this publication will continuewould be appropriate. • Treasury regulations, and to present the interpretations by the IRS.
All taxpayers have important rights when working with• Court decisions. the IRS. These rights are described in Your Rights as a
Taxpayer in the back of this publication.However, the information given does not cover every
situation and is not intended to replace the law or change
its meaning.

Page 3 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
What's New for 2009
the definition of a qualifying child without it being subject to tax at the deduction if you were covered by aThis section summarizes important parent's rate has increased to retirement plan and your modifiedapply.tax changes that took effect in $1,900. See chapter 31. AGI is less than $65,000• Your qualifying child must be2009. Most of these changes are ($109,000, if you are married filingyounger than you unless thediscussed in more detail through- Personal casualty and theft loss jointly or a qualifying widow(er). Ifchild is permanently and to-out this publication. limit. Generally, a personal casu- your spouse was covered by a re-tally disabled. alty or theft loss must be more thanChanges are also discussed at tirement plan, but you were not,$500 to be allowed. This is in addi-www.irs.gov, click on Forms and you may be able to take an IRA• A child cannot be your quali- tion to the 10% of AGI limit thatPublications, and then on What's deduction if your modified AGI isfying child if he or she files a generally applies to the net loss.Hot in forms and publications. less than $176,000. See chapterjoint return, unless the return
17.was filed only as a claim for First-time homebuyer credit.Economic recovery payment. Roth IRA income limit.  Yourefund. The credit increases to as much asAny economic recovery payment may be able to make a Roth IRA$8,000 ($4,000 if married filing sep-• If the parents of a child canyou received is not taxable for fed- contribution if your modified AGI isarately) for homes bought afterclaim the child as a qualifyingeral income tax purposes, but it less than $120,000 ($176,000, if2008 and before May 1, 2010child but no parent so claimsreduces any making work pay you are married filing jointly or a(before July 1, 2010, if you enteredthe child, no one else cancredit or government retiree credit. qualifying widow(er). See chapterinto a written binding contractclaim the child as a qualifying 17.Making work pay credit. If you before May 1, 2010). You canchild unless that person's ad- Retirement savings contribu-have earned income from work, choose to claim the credit on yourjusted gross income (AGI) is tions credit.  The AGI limit foryou may be able to take this credit. 2009 return for a home you boughthigher than the highest AGI of claiming this credit is increased toIt is 6.2% of your earned income in 2010 that qualifies for the credit.any parent of the child who $27,750 ($41,625 if head of house-but cannot be more than $400 You generally must repay anycan claim the child. hold; $55,500 if married filing($800 if married filing jointly). See credit you claimed on your 2008 jointly). See chapter 37.• Your child is a qualifying childchapter 37. return if you sold your home in Military differential pay.  Forfor purposes of the child tax 2009 or the home stopped being IRA purposes, your compensationGovernment retiree credit. You credit only if you can and do your main home during 2009. includes any military differentialmay be able to take this credit if you claim an exemption for him or For more information on these pay you receive from your em-get a government pension or annu- her. changes and other changes to the ployer while you are serving on ac-ity, but it reduces any making work homebuyer credit, see chapter 37.See chapters 3, 21, 34, and 36. tive duty for a period of more thanpay credit. See chapter 37.
30 days.Alternative minimum tax (AMT)Earned income credit (EIC).U.S. Savings Bonds. You can Elective salary deferrals. Theexemption amount increased.The EIC has increased for peoplenow use your refund to buy up to maximum amount you can deferThe AMT exemption amount is in-with three or more children and for$5,000 in U.S. Series I savings under all plans is generally limitedcreased to $46,700 ($70,950 ifsome married couples filing jointly.bonds in multiples of $50. For more to $16,500 ($11,500 if you havemarried filing jointly or a qualifyingYou may be able to take the EIC if:information, see Form 8888, Direct only SIMPLE plans; $19,500 forwidow(er); $35,475 if married filing
• Three or more children livedDeposit of Refund to More Than section 403(b) plans if you qualifyseparately). See chapter 30.
with you and you earned lessOne Account. for the 15-year rule). The catch-up
Standard mileage rates. Forthan $43,279 ($48,279 if mar- contribution limit for individuals ageCash for clunkers. A $3,500 or 2009, the standard mileage rate forried filing jointly), 50 or older at the end of the year is$4,500 voucher or payment made the cost of operating your car for increased to $5,500 (except for• Two children lived with youfor such a voucher under the CARS business use is 55 cents per mile. section 401(k)(11) plans andand you earned less thanªcash for clunkersº program to buy See chapter 26. SIMPLE plans, for which this limit$40,295 ($45,295 if marriedor lease a new fuel-efficient auto- For 2009, the standard mileage remains unchanged).filing jointly),mobile is not taxable for federal in- rate for the cost of operating your Temporary waiver of requiredcome tax purposes. car for medical reasons is 24 cents• One child lived with you and minimum distribution rules.  Noper mile. See chapter 21.you earned less than $35,463 minimum distribution is requiredUnemployment compensation. For 2009, the standard mileage($40,463 if married filing from your IRA or most defined con-You do not have to pay tax on un- rate for the cost of operating yourjointly), or tribution retirement plans for 2009.employment compensation up to car for determining moving ex- See chapter 10 or, for IRAs, chap-• A child did not live with you$2,400 per person for the year. penses is 24 cents per mile. See ter 17.and you earned less thanAmounts over $2,400 are still tax- Publication 521, Moving Expenses.$13,440 ($18,440 if marriedable. See chapter 12. Certain amounts increased.filing jointly). Electric vehicle credits. You Some tax items that are indexed forAmerican opportunity education may be able to take a credit for: inflation increased for 2009.credit. The maximum Hope edu- The maximum AGI you can have Standard deduction.  The• A plug-in electric drive motorcation credit is increased to $2,500. and still get the credit also has in- standard deduction for taxpayersvehicle placed in service inThe increased credit has been creased. You may be able to take who do not itemize deductions on2009 (see chapter 37),renamed the American opportunity the credit if your AGI is less than Schedule A (Form 1040) has in-credit and part of it is refundable. the amount in the above list that • A plug-in electric vehicle creased. The amount depends onSee chapter 35. applies to you. The maximum in- bought after February 17, your filing status. See chapter 20.vestment income you can have and 2009 (see chapter 37), or Exemption amount.  You areDeduction for motor vehicle still get the credit has increased to allowed a $3,650 deduction for• Conversion of a vehicle to ataxes. If you bought a new motor $3,100. See chapter 36. each exemption to which you areplug-in electric drive motorvehicle in 2009 after February 16,
entitled. However, you will lose partvehicle placed in service afteryou may be able to deduct any Divorced or separated parents. of your exemption amount if youFebruary 17, 2009 (see chap-state or local sales or excise taxes A noncustodial parent claiming an have high income. See chapter 3.ter 37).on the purchase. In states without a exemption for a child can no longer Limit on itemized deductions.sales tax, you may be able to de- attach certain pages from a divorce Some of your itemized deductionsduct certain other taxes or fees in- decree or separation agreement in- Credit for nonbusiness energy may be limited if your adjustedstead. Take the deduction on stead of Form 8332 if the decree or property. You may be able to gross income is more thanSchedule A (Form 1040) if you are agreement went into effect after take this credit for qualifying energy $166,800 ($83,400 if you are mar-itemizing deductions and are not 2008. The noncustodial parent saving items for your home placed ried filing separately). See chapterelecting to deduct state and local must attach Form 8332 or a similar in service in 2009. See chapter 37. 29.general sales taxes. If you are not statement signed by the custodial Retirement savings plans.  The Tax benefits for adoption.itemizing deductions, these taxes parent and whose only purpose is following paragraphs highlight The maximum adoption credit andincrease your standard deduction to release a claim to exemption. changes that affect individual re- the maximum exclusion from in-as figured on Schedule L (Form See chapter 3. tirement arrangements (IRAs) and come of benefits under an em-1040A or 1040). See chapter 20.
Tax on child's investment in- pension plans. ployer's adoption assistance
Qualifying child definition re- come. The amount of taxable in- Traditional IRA income limits. program are increased to $12,150.
vised. The following changes to vestment income a child can have You may be able to take an IRA See Adoption Credit in chapter 37.
Publication 17 (2009) Page 1

Page 4 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Education credits income • Residential energy efficient Limit on exclusion of gain on changed the filing location for sev-
sale of main home. Generally, eral areas. If you received an en-property credit. See chapterlimits increased.  The amount of
gain from the sale of your main velope with your tax package,37.income you can have and still claim
home is no longer excludable from please use it. Otherwise, seean education credit has increased. • COBRA subsidy. The 65% income if it is allocable to periods Where To File near the end of thisSee chapter 35. subsidy for payment of CO- after 2008 when neither you nor publication for a list of IRS ad-Social security and Medicare BRA health care coverage your spouse (or your former dresses.taxes. The maximum wages sub- continuation premiums is not spouse) used the property as aject to social security tax (6.2%) taxable. See chapter 21. main home. See chapter 15.increased to $106,800. All wages • Home mortgage principalare subject to Medicare tax Recovery rebate credit expired.reductions. Any Pay-for-(1.45%). This credit has expired and doesPerformance Success Pay- not apply for 2009.Credits increased. The follow- ments that reduce the princi-ing credits have increased for pal balance of your home Mailing your return. If you aresome people. mortgage under the Home Af- filing a paper return, you may be
• Additional child tax credit. fordable Modification Pro- mailing your return to a different
See chapter 34. gram are not taxable. address because the IRS has
■
What's New for 2010
This section summarizes the im- Decrease in personal casualty  Roth IRA income limit. You • The exclusion from income of
and theft loss limit. Each per- up to $2,400 in unemploy-portant changes that take effect in may be able to make a Roth IRA
sonal casualty or theft loss is lim- ment compensation.2010 that could affect your esti- contribution if your modified AGI is
ited to the excess of the loss overmated tax payments for 2010. less than $120,000 ($177,000 if • The exclusion from income of$100 (instead of $500). This is inMore information on these and you are married filing jointly). qualified charitable distribu-addition to the 10% of AGI limit thatother changes can be found at tions made from IRA ac-generally applies to the net loss. Conversions to Roth IRAs. Be-Forms and Publications . Click on counts.ginning in 2010, the modified AGIForms and Publications, then on Disaster losses. The special • Government retiree credit.and filing status requirements forWhat's Hot in forms and publica- rules that were in effect in 2008 and conversions to Roth IRAs are elimi-tions. • District of Columbia first-time2009 for losses of personal use nated. homebuyer credit (for homesproperty attributable to federallyEarned income credit (EIC). purchased after 2009).Also, for any conversions indeclared disasters do not apply toYou may be able to take the EIC if: 2010, any amounts that would belosses occurring in 2010 and later • Extra $3,000 IRA deduction• Three or more children lived years. included as income will be included for employees of bankrupt
with you and you earned less in income in equal amounts in 2011 companies.Alternative minimum tax (AMT)than $43,352 ($48,362 if mar- and 2012. You can choose to in- • Certain tax benefits for Mid-exemption amount decreased.ried filing jointly), clude the entire amount in income western disaster areas, in-The AMT exemption amount is in 2010.• Two children lived with you cluding the additionalscheduled to decrease to $33,750
and you earned less than exemption amount if you pro-($45,000 if married filing jointly or a Expiring tax benefits. The fol-$40,363 ($45,373 if married vided housing for a personqualifying widow(er); $22,500 if lowing benefits are scheduled to displaced by the Midwesternfiling jointly), married filing separately). expire and will not be available for storms, tornadoes, or flood-2010.• One child lived with you and Recapture of first-time ing.you earned less than $35,535 homebuyer credit. If you • Deduction for educator ex-($40,545 if married filing claimed the first-time homebuyer penses in figuring AGI. Personal exemption and item-jointly), or credit for a home you bought in ized deduction phaseouts en-• Tuition and fees deduction in2008, you must begin repaying the• A child did not live with you ded. For 2010, taxpayers withfiguring AGI.credit in 2010.and you earned less than AGI above a certain amount will no
• Increased standard deduction$13,460 ($18,470 if married longer lose part of their deductionIRA deduction expanded. You for real estate taxes or net for personal exemptions and item-filing jointly). may be able to take an IRA deduc- disaster loss. ized deductions.tion if you were covered by a retire-The maximum AGI you can have ment plan and your 2010 modified • Itemized deduction or in-and still get the credit also has in- AGI is less than $66,000 ($109,000 creased standard deductioncreased. You may be able to take if married filing jointly or qualifying for state or local sales or ex-the credit if your AGI is less than widow(er)). If your spouse was cov- cise taxes on the purchase ofthe amount in the above list that ered by a retirement plan, but you a new motor vehicle.applies to you. The maximum in- were not, you may be able to take
• Deduction for state and localvestment income you can have and an IRA deduction if your 2010 mod-
sales taxes.still get the credit is still $3,100. ified AGI is less than $177,000.
■
Page 2 Publication 17 (2009)

Page 5 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Reminders
Listed below are important remind- most common form is the act of Taxpayers in the Midwestern Dis- of waiting until you file your tax re-
ers and other items that may help sending an email to a user falsely turn. See chapter 36.aster Areas, for more details.
you file your 2009 tax return. Many claiming to be an established legiti-
Tax Computation Worksheet. IfMortgage insurance premiums.of these items are explained in mate enterprise in an attempt to
your taxable income is $100,000 orYou may be able to treat mortgagemore detail later in this publication. scam the user into surrendering
more, figure your tax using the Taxinsurance premiums paid in con-private information that will be used
Write in your social security Computation Worksheet. The Taxnection with home acquisition debtfor identity theft.
number. To protect your privacy, Computation Worksheet is foundas home mortgage interest. SeeThe IRS does not initiate con-
social security numbers (SSNs) are near the end of this publication im-chapter 23.tacts with taxpayers via emails.
not printed on the peel-off label that mediately following the Tax Tables.Also, the IRS does not request de- Qualified joint venture. A quali-comes in the mail with your tax in- tailed personal information through Joint return responsibility.fied joint venture conducted by youstruction booklet. This means you email or ask taxpayers for the PIN Generally, both spouses are re-and your spouse may not bemust enter your SSN in the space numbers, passwords, or similar se- sponsible for the tax and any inter-treated as a partnership if you file aprovided on your tax form. If you cret access information for their est or penalties on a joint tax return.joint return for the tax year. Seefiled a joint return for 2008 and are credit card, bank, or other financial In some cases, one spouse may bechapter 12.filing a joint return for 2009 with the accounts. relieved of that responsibility forsame spouse, enter your names If you receive an unsolicited Recordkeeping requirements for items of the other spouse that wereand SSNs in the same order as on email claiming to be from the IRS, cash contributions. You cannot incorrectly reported on the joint re-your 2008 return. See chapter 1. forward the message to: phish- deduct a cash contribution, regard- turn. See chapter 2.ing@irs.gov. You may also reportSecure your tax records from less of the amount, unless youmisuse of the IRS name, logo, Include your phone number onidentity theft. Identity theft oc- keep as a record of the contributionforms or other IRS property to the your return. To promptly resolvecurs when someone uses your per- a bank record (such as a canceledTreasury Inspector General for Tax any questions we have in process-sonal information such as your check, a blank copy of a canceledAdministration toll-free at ing your tax return, we would like toname, SSN, or other identifying in- check, or a bank statement con-1-800-366-4484. You can forward be able to call you. Please enterformation, without your permission, taining the name of the charity, thesuspicious emails to the Federal your daytime telephone number onto commit fraud or other crimes. An date, and amount) or a written com-Trade Commission at: spam@uce. your tax form next to your signa-identity thief may use your SSN to munication from the charity. Thegov or contact them at www.ftc. ture.get a job or may file a tax return written communication must in-gov/idtheft  or 1-877-IDTHEFTusing your SSN to receive a refund. clude the name of the charity, date(1-877-438-4338). Third-party designee. You canTo reduce your risk: of the contribution, and amount ofVisit the IRS website at www. check the ªYesº box in the ªThird
the contribution. See chapter 24.irs.gov to learn more about identity Party Designeeº area of your return• Protect your SSN,
theft and how to reduce your risk. to authorize the IRS to discuss yourForeign source income. If you• Ensure your employer is pro- return with your preparer, a friend,are a U.S. citizen with income fromtecting your SSN, and Taxpayer identification num- a family member, or any other per-sources outside the United Statesbers. You must provide the tax- son you choose. This allows the• Be careful when choosing a (foreign income), you must reportpayer identification number for IRS to call the person you identifiedtax preparer. all such income on your tax returneach person for whom you claim as your designee to answer anyunless it is exempt by U.S. law.certain tax benefits. This applies questions that may arise during theIf your tax records are affected This is true whether you reside in-even if the person was born in processing of your return. It alsoby identity theft and you receive a side or outside the United States2009. Generally, this number is the allows your designee to performnotice from the IRS, respond right and whether or not you receive aperson's social security number certain actions. See chapter 1.away to the name and phone num- Form W-2 or Form 1099 from the(SSN). See chapter 1.ber printed on the IRS notice or foreign payer. This applies to Payment of taxes. Make yourletter. Combat pay is earned income earned income (such as wages check or money order payable toIf your tax records are not cur- for IRA deductions.  For pur- and tips) as well as unearned in- ªUnited States Treasury.º You canrently affected by identity theft but poses of taking an IRA deduction, pay your taxes by credit or debitcome (such as interest, dividends,you think you are at risk due to a earned income includes any non- card, using the Electronic Federalcapital gains, pensions, rents andlost or stolen purse or wallet, ques- taxable combat pay received by a Tax Payment System (EFTPS), or,royalties).tionable credit card activity or credit member of the U.S. Armed Forces. if you file electronically, by elec-If you reside outside the Unitedreport, etc., contact the IRS Identity tronic funds withdrawal. See chap-States, you may be able to excludeRollovers to Roth IRAs. YouTheft Hotline at 1-800-908-4490 or ter 1.part or all of your foreign sourcecan roll over distributions from asubmit Form 14039.
earned income. For details, seequalified retirement plan into aFor more information, see Pub- Faster ways to file your return.Publication 54, Tax Guide for U.S.Roth IRA. The rollover is notlication 4535, Identity Theft Pre- The IRS offers fast, accurate waysCitizens and Resident Alienstax-free. See chapter 17.vention and Victim Assistance. to file your tax return informationAbroad. without filing a paper tax return. Victims of identity theft who are Tax relief for Kansas disaster You can use IRS e-file (electronicexperiencing economic harm or a Automatic six month extensionarea. Temporary tax relief was filing). See chapter 1.systemic problem, or are seeking to file tax return. You can useenacted as a result of the May 4,help in resolving tax problems that Form 4868, Application for Auto-2007, storms and tornadoes affect- Free electronic filing.  You mayhave not been resolved through matic Extension of Time To Fileing the Kansas disaster area. See be able to file your 2009 taxes on-normal channels, may be eligible U.S. Individual Income Tax Return,Publication 4492-A, Information for line for free thanks to an electronicfor Taxpayer Advocate Service to obtain an automatic 6-month ex-Taxpayers Affected by the May 4, filing agreement. See chapter 1.(TAS) assistance. You can reach tension of time to file your tax re-2007, Kansas Storms and Torna-TAS by calling the TAS toll-free turn. See chapter 1.does, for more details. Change of address. If youcase intake line at 1-877-777-4778 change your address, you shouldor TTY/TDD 1-800-829-4059. Advance earned income credit.Tax relief for Midwestern disas- notify the IRS. See Change of Ad-If a qualifying child lives with youProtect yourself from suspi- ter areas. Temporary tax relief dress, under What Happens After I
and you expect to qualify for thecious emails or phishing was enacted as a result of the se- File, in chapter 1.
earned income credit in 2010, youschemes. Phishing is the creation vere storms, tornadoes, and flood-
may be able to get part of the creditand use of email and websites de- ing affecting the Midwestern Private delivery services. You
paid to you in advance throughoutsigned to mimic legitimate busi- disaster areas. See Publication may be able to use a designated
the year (by your employer) insteadness emails and websites. The 4492-B, Information for Affected private delivery service to mail your
Publication 17 (2009) Page 3

Page 6 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
tax returns and payments. See the $5,000 penalty will apply to whether your response is volun- employee, you can call
chapter 1. other specified frivolous submis- tary, required to obtain a benefit, or 1-800-366-4484 (1-800-877-8339
sions. See chapter 1. mandatory under the law. A com- for TTY/TDD users). You can re-Refund on a late filed return. If plete statement on this subject can main anonymous.you were due a refund but you did Filing erroneous claim for refund be found in your tax form instruc-not file a return, you generally must or credit. You may have to pay a Photographs of missing chil-tion booklet.file your return within 3 years from penalty if you file an erroneous dren. The Internal Revenue
the date the return was due (includ- claim for refund or credit. See Customer service for taxpayers. Service is a proud partner with the
ing extensions) to get that refund. chapter 1. The Internal Revenue Service has National Center for Missing and
See chapter 1. expanded customer service for tax- Exploited Children. Photographs of
Privacy Act and paperwork re- payers. You can set up a personal missing children selected by theSplit refunds. If you choose di- duction information. The IRS appointment at the most conve- Center may appear in this publica-rect deposit of your refund, you Restructuring and Reform Act of nient Taxpayer Assistance Center, tion on pages that would otherwisemay be able to split the refund into 1998, the Privacy Act of 1974, and on the most convenient business be blank. You can help bring thesetwo or three accounts. See chapter the Paperwork Reduction Act of day. See How To Get Tax Help  in children home by looking at the1. 1980 require that when we ask you the back of this publication. photographs and callingfor information we must first tell youFrivolous tax submissions. 1-800-THE-LOSTwhat our legal right is to ask for the Treasury Inspector General forThe IRS has published a list of po- (1-800-843-5678) if you recognizeinformation, why we are asking for Tax Administration. If you wantsitions that are identified as frivo- a child.it, how it will be used, what could to confidentially report misconduct,lous. The penalty for filing a
frivolous tax return is $5,000. Also, happen if we do not receive it, and waste, fraud, or abuse by an IRS ■
Page 4 Publication 17 (2009)

Page 7 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Introduction
This publication covers the general explain the standard deduction, the If you operate your own business the area code, in your correspond-
rules for filing a federal income tax ence.or have other self-employment in-kinds of expenses you may be able
return. It supplements the informa- You can email us atcome, such as from babysitting orto deduct, and the various kinds of
tion contained in your tax form in- *taxforms@irs.gov. (The asteriskselling crafts, see the followingcredits you may be able to take to
struction booklet. It explains the tax must be included in the address.)publications for more information.reduce your tax.law to make sure you pay only the Please put ªPublications Com-• Publication 334, Tax GuideThroughout the publication aretax you owe and no more. mentº on the subject line. Althoughfor Small Business (For Indi-examples showing how the tax law we cannot respond individually to
viduals Who Use Schedule C each email, we do appreciate yourapplies in typical situations. Sam-How this publication is ar- or C-EZ). feedback and will consider yourple forms and schedules show youranged. This publication closely
comments as we revise our tax• Publication 535, Business Ex-follows Form 1040, U.S. Individual how to report certain items on your
products.penses.Income Tax Return. It is divided return. Also throughout the publica-
into six parts which cover different tion are flowcharts and tables that Ordering forms and publica-• Publication 587, Businesssections of Form 1040. Each part is tions. Visit www.irs.gov/form-present tax information in an Use of Your Home (Includingfurther divided into chapters which spubs to download forms andeasy-to-understand manner. Use by Daycare Providers).generally discuss one line of the publications, call 1-800-829-3676,Many of the subjects discussedform. Do not worry if you file Form or write to the address below and
in this publication are discussed in1040A or Form 1040EZ. Anything Help from the IRS. There are receive a response within 10 days
included on a line of either of these many ways you can get help fromgreater detail in other IRS publica- after your request is received.
forms is also included on Form the IRS. These are explainedtions. References to those other
1040. under How To Get Tax Help in thepublications are provided for your Internal Revenue Serviceback of this publication.information.The table of contents inside the 1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorwayfront cover and the index in the Bloomington, IL 61705-6613Icons. Small graphic symbols, Comments and suggestions.back of the publication are useful or icons, are used to draw your We welcome your comments abouttools to help you find the informa- attention to special information. Tax questions. If you have athis publication and your sugges-tion you need.
See Table 1, Legend of Icons, be- tax question, check the informationtions for future editions.
low, for an explanation of each icon available on www.irs.gov or callYou can write to us at the fol-What is in this publication. The 1-800-829-1040. We cannot an-used in this publication. lowing address:publication begins with the rules for swer tax questions sent to either offiling a tax return. It explains: the above addresses.
Internal Revenue ServiceWhat is not covered in this publi-1. Who must file a return, IRS mission. Provide America'sIndividual Forms andcation. Some material that you taxpayers top quality service by2. Which tax form to use, Publications Branchmay find helpful is not included in helping them understand and meetSE:W:CAR:MP:T:I3. When the return is due, this publication but can be found in their tax responsibilities and by ap-1111 Constitution Ave. NW,your tax form instruction booklet. plying the tax law with integrity and4. How to e-file your return, and IR-6526This includes lists of: fairness to all.Washington, DC 202245. Other general information.
• Where to report certain items
It will help you identify which filing shown on information docu- We respond to many letters bystatus you qualify for, whether you ments, and telephone. Therefore, it would becan claim any dependents, and
• Recorded tax information top- helpful if you would include yourwhether the income you receive is
daytime phone number, includingics (TeleTax).taxable. The publication goes on to
Table 1. Legend of Icons
Icon Explanation
Items that may cause you particular problems, or an alert about pending legislation that may be enacted after
CAUTION
!
this publication goes to print.
An Internet site or an email address.
An address you may need.
Items you should keep in your personal records.
RECORDS
Items you may need to figure or a worksheet you may need to complete.
An important phone number.
Helpful information you may need.
TIP
■
Publication 17 (2009) Page 5

Page 8 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Part One.
The four chapters in this part provide basic information on the tax system.The Income Tax They take you through the first steps of filling out a tax returnÐsuch as
deciding what your filing status is, how many exemptions you can take, andReturn what form to file. They also discuss recordkeeping requirements, IRS e-file
(electronic filing), certain penalties, and the two methods used to pay tax
during the year: withholding and estimated tax.
Installment agreement. If you cannot pay the For more information, see Social Security Num-
full amount due with your return, you may ask to ber, later.
make monthly installment payments. See In-
Taxpayer identification number for aliens.1. stallment Agreement, later, under Amount You
If you or your dependent is a nonresident orOwe. You may be able to apply online for a
resident alien who does not have and is notpayment agreement if you owe federal tax, inter-
eligible to get a social security number, file Formest, and penalties.
Filing W-7, Application for IRS Individual Taxpayer
Automatic 6-month extension. You can get Identification Number, with the IRS. For more
an automatic 6-month extension to file your tax information, see Social Security Number, later.Information return if, no later than the date your return is due,
you file Form 4868, Application for Automatic Frivolous tax submissions. The IRS has
Extension of Time To File U.S. Individual In- published a list of positions that are identified as
come Tax Return. See Automatic Extension , frivolous. The penalty for filing a frivolous taxWhat's New later. return is $5,000. Also, the $5,000 penalty will
apply to other specified frivolous submissions.Service in combat zone. You are allowed ex-Who must file. Generally, the amount of in- For more information, see Civil Penalties, later.tra time to take care of your tax matters if you arecome you can receive before you must file a
a member of the Armed Forces who served in areturn has been increased. See Table 1-1,  Ta-
combat zone, or if you served in the combatble 1-2, and Table 1-3 for the specific amounts.
zone in support of the Armed Forces. See Indi-
Mailing your return. You may be mailing your viduals Serving in Combat Zone , later, under Introduction
return to a different address this year because When Do I Have To File.
This chapter discusses the following topics.the IRS has changed the filing location for sev-
Adoption taxpayer identification number. Iferal areas. If you received an envelope with your • Whether you have to file a return.a child has been placed in your home for pur-tax package, please use it. Otherwise, see
poses of legal adoption and you will not be able • Which form to use.Where Do I File, later in this chapter.
to get a social security number for the child in • How to file electronically.time to file your return, you may be able to get an
adoption taxpayer identification number (ATIN). • When, how, and where to file your return.
Reminders Table 1-1. 2009 Filing Requirements for Most Taxpayers
THEN file a return if Alternative filing methods. Rather than filing
AND at the end of 2009 you your gross income a return on paper, you may be able to file elec-
IF your filing status is... were...* was at least...**tronically using IRS e-file. Create your own per-
sonal identification number (PIN) and file a single under 65 $ 9,350completely paperless tax return. For more infor-
65 or older $10,750mation, see Does My Return Have To Be on
Paper, later. married filing jointly*** under 65 (both spouses) $18,700
Change of address. If you change your ad- 65 or older (one spouse) $19,800dress, you should notify the IRS. See Change of
65 or older (both spouses) $20,900Address, later, under What Happens After I File.
married filing separately any age $ 3,650Enter your social security number. You
must enter your social security number (SSN) in head of household under 65 $12,000the spaces provided on your tax return. If you file
65 or older $13,400a joint return, enter the SSNs in the same order
as the names. qualifying widow(er) with under 65 $15,050
Direct deposit of refund. Instead of getting a dependent child 65 or older $16,150paper check, you may be able to have your
* If you were born on January 1, 1945, you are considered to be age 65 at the end of 2009.refund deposited directly into your account at a
** Gross income means all income you received in the form of money, goods, property, and services that is notbank or other financial institution. See Direct exempt from tax, including any income from sources outside the United States or from the sale of your mainDeposit under Refunds, later. If you choose di- home (even if you may exclude part or all of it). Do not include any social security benefits unless (a) you are
rect deposit of your refund, you may be able to married filing a separate return and you lived with your spouse at any time during 2009 or (b) one-half of your
social security benefits plus your other gross income and any tax- exempt interest is more than $25,000split the refund among two or three accounts.
($32,000 if married filing jointly). If (a) or (b) applies, see the instructions for Form 1040 or 1040A or
Publication 915 to figure the taxable part of social security benefits you must include in gross income.Alternative payment methods. If you owe
*** If you did not live with your spouse at the end of 2009 (or on the date your spouse died) and your grossadditional tax, you may be able to pay electroni-
income was at least $3,650, you must file a return regardless of your age.cally. See How To Pay, later.
Page 6 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 9 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• What happens if you pay too little or too 1. You were married, filing a separate return, U.S. Citizens and Residents Living
much tax. and you lived with your spouse at any time Outside the United States
during 2009; or• What records you should keep and how If you are a U.S. citizen or resident living outsidelong you should keep them. 2. Half of your social security benefits plus the United States, you must file a return if youyour other gross income and any• How you can change a return you have meet the filing requirements. For information ontax-exempt interest is more than $25,000already filed. special tax rules that may apply to you, see
($32,000 if married filing jointly). Publication 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and
Resident Aliens Abroad. It is available at mostIf either (1) or (2) applies, see the instructions for
U.S. embassies and consulates. Also see HowForm 1040 or 1040A, or Publication 915, Social
To Get Tax Help in the back of this publication.Security and Equivalent Railroad RetirementDo I Have To 
Benefits, to figure the social security benefits
you must include in gross income.File a Return? Residents of Puerto Rico
Common types of income are discussed in
You must file a federal income tax return if you Generally, if you are a U.S. citizen and a resi-Part Two of this publication.
are a citizen or resident of the United States or a dent of Puerto Rico, you must file a U.S. incomeCommunity income. If you are married andresident of Puerto Rico and you meet the filing tax return if you meet the filing requirements.your permanent home is in a community prop-requirements for any of the following categories This is in addition to any legal requirement youerty state, half of any income described by statethat apply to you. may have to file an income tax return for Puerto
law as community income may be considered Rico.1. Individuals in general. (There are special yours. This affects your federal taxes, including If you are a resident of Puerto Rico for therules for surviving spouses, executors, ad- whether you must file if you do not file a joint entire year, gross income does not include in-ministrators, legal representatives, U.S. cit- return with your spouse. See Publication 555, come from sources within Puerto Rico, exceptizens and residents living outside the Community Property, for more information. for amounts received as an employee of theUnited States, residents of Puerto Rico,
United States or a U.S. agency. If you receiveand individuals with income from U.S. pos- Self-employed individuals. If you are
income from Puerto Rican sources that is notsessions.) self-employed, your gross income includes the subject to U.S. tax, you must reduce your stan-amount on line 7 of Schedule C (Form 1040),2. Dependents. dard deduction. As a result, the amount of in-Profit or Loss From Business; line 1 of Schedule come you must have before you are required to3. Certain children under age 19 or full-time C-EZ (Form 1040), Net Profit From Business; file a U.S. income tax return is lower than thestudents. and line 11 of Schedule F (Form 1040), Profit or applicable amount in Table 1-1 or Table 1-2. For4. Self-employed persons. Loss From Farming. See Self-Employed Per- more information, see Publication 570, Tax
sons, later, for more information about your filing Guide for Individuals With Income From U.S.5. Aliens.
requirements. Possessions.The filing requirements for each category are
If you do not report all of yourexplained in this chapter.
self-employment income, your socialThe filing requirements apply even if you do Individuals With Income From security benefits may be lower when
CAUTION
!not owe tax. U.S. Possessionsyou retire.
Even if you do not have to file a return,
If you had income from Guam, the Common-it may be to your advantage to do so.
wealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, Ameri-Filing status. Your filing status depends onSee Who Should File, later.
TIP
can Samoa, or the U.S. Virgin Islands, specialwhether you are single or married and on your
File only one federal income tax return rules may apply when determining whether youfamily situation. Your filing status is determined
for the year regardless of how many must file a U.S. federal income tax return. Inon the last day of your tax year, which is Decem-
jobs you had, how many Forms W-2 addition, you may have to file a return with the
CAUTION
!ber 31 for most taxpayers. See chapter 2 for an
you received, or how many states you lived in individual island government. See Publicationexplanation of each filing status.during the year. Do not file more than one origi- 570 for more information.
nal return for the same year, even if you have
Age. If you are 65 or older at the end of thenot gotten your refund or have not heard from Dependentsyear, you generally can have a higher amount ofthe IRS since you filed.
gross income than other taxpayers before you If you are a dependent (one who meets the
must file. See Table 1-1. You are considered 65 dependency tests in chapter 3), see Table 1-2 toIndividualsÐIn General on the day before your 65th birthday. For exam- find whether you must file a return. You also
ple, if your 65th birthday is on January 1, 2010, must file if your situation is described in TableIf you are a U.S. citizen or resident, whether you
you are considered 65 for 2009. 1-3.must file a return depends on three factors:
1. Your gross income, Responsibility of parent. Generally, a child
is responsible for filing his or her own tax returnSurviving Spouses, 2. Your filing status, and
and for paying any tax on the return. But if aExecutors, Administrators, 3. Your age. dependent child who must file an income taxand Legal Representatives return cannot file it for any reason, such as age,To find out whether you must file, see Table
then a parent, guardian, or other legally respon-1-1, Table 1-2, and Table 1-3. Even if no table You must file a final return for a decedent (a
sible person must file it for the child. If the childshows that you must file, you may need to file to person who died) if both of the following are true.
cannot sign the return, the parent or guardianget money back. (See Who Should File, later.)
• You are the surviving spouse, executor, must sign the child's name followed by the
administrator, or legal representative. words ªBy (your signature), parent for minorGross income. This includes all income you child.º• The decedent met the filing requirementsreceive in the form of money, goods, property,
at the date of death. Child's earnings. Amounts a child earns byand services that is not exempt from tax. It also
performing services are his or her gross income.includes income from sources outside the
For more information on rules for filing a dece- This is true even if under local law the child'sUnited States or from the sale of your main
dent's final return, see Publication 559, Survi- parents have the right to the earnings and mayhome (even if you can exclude all or part of it).
vors, Executors, and Administrators. actually have received them. If the child does notInclude part of your social security benefits if:
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 7

Page 10 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Use Schedule SE (Form 1040) to figure yourTable 1-2. 2009 Filing Requirements for Dependents
self-employment tax. Self-employment tax isSee chapter 3 to find out if someone can claim you as a dependent. comparable to the social security and Medicare
tax withheld from an employee's wages. ForIf your parents (or someone else) can claim you as a dependent, and any of the situations more information about this tax, see Publicationbelow apply to you, you must file a return. (See Table 1-3 for other situations when you must 334, Tax Guide for Small Business.file.)
In this table, earned income includes salaries, wages, tips, and professional fees. It also Employees of foreign governments or in-
includes taxable scholarship and fellowship grants. (See Scholarships and fellowships in ternational organizations. If you are a U.S.
chapter 12.) Unearned income includes investment-type income such as taxable interest, citizen who works in the United States for an
ordinary dividends, and capital gain distributions. It also includes unemployment compensation, international organization, a foreign govern-
taxable social security benefits, pensions, annuities, cancellation of debt, and distributions of ment, or a wholly owned instrumentality of aunearned income from a trust. Gross income is the total of your earned and unearned income. foreign government, and your employer is not
required to withhold social security and Medi-
care taxes from your wages, you must includeSingle dependentsÐWere you either age 65 or older or blind?
your earnings from services performed in the
M No. You must file a return if any of the following apply. United States when figuring your net earnings
• Your unearned income was more than $950. from self-employment.
• Your earned income was more than $5,700. Ministers. You must include income from• Your gross income was more than the larger of: services you performed as a minister when fig-• $950, or uring your net earnings from self-employment,• Your earned income (up to $5,400) plus $300. unless you have an exemption from
M Yes. You must file a return if any of the following apply. self-employment tax. This also applies to Chris-
• Your unearned income was more than $2,350 ($3,750 if 65 or older and blind). tian Science practitioners and members of a
religious order who have not taken a vow of• Your earned income was more than $7,100 ($8,500 if 65 or older and blind).
poverty. For more information, see Publication• Your gross income was more than the larger of:
517, Social Security and Other Information for• $2,350 ($3,750 if 65 or older and blind), or
Members of the Clergy and Religious Workers.• Your earned income (up to $5,400) plus $1,700 ($3,100 if 65 or older and blind).
Married dependentsÐWere you either age 65 or older or blind?
Aliens
M No. You must file a return if any of the following apply.
• Your unearned income was more than $950. Your status as an alienÐresident, nonresident,
• Your earned income was more than $5,700. or dual-status Ðdetermines whether and how
• Your gross income was at least $5 and your spouse files a separate return and you must file an income tax return.
itemizes deductions. The rules used to determine your alien status
• Your gross income was more than the larger of: are discussed in Publication 519, U.S. Tax
• $950, or Guide for Aliens.
• Your earned income (up to $5,400) plus $300. Resident alien. If you are a resident alien for
M Yes. You must file a return if any of the following apply. the entire year, you must file a tax return follow-
• Your unearned income was more than $2,050 ($3,150 if 65 or older and blind). ing the same rules that apply to U.S. citizens.
• Your earned income was more than $6,800 ($7,900 if 65 or older and blind). Use the forms discussed in this publication.
• Your gross income was at least $5 and your spouse files a separate return and Nonresident alien. If you are a nonresidentitemizes deductions.
alien, the rules and tax forms that apply to you• Your gross income was more than the larger of:
are different from those that apply to U.S. citi-• $2,050 ($3,150 if 65 or older and blind), or zens and resident aliens. See Publication 519 to• Your earned income (up to $5,400) plus $1,400 ($2,500 if 65 or older and blind). find out if U.S. income tax laws apply to you and
which forms you should file.
pay the tax due on this income, the parent is • Carry on a trade or business as a sole Dual-status taxpayer. If you are a resident
proprietor,liable for the tax. alien for part of the tax year and a nonresident
alien for the rest of the year, you are a• Are an independent contractor, dual-status taxpayer. Different rules apply forCertain Children Under • Are a member of a partnership, or each part of the year. For information on
Age 19 or Full-Time dual-status taxpayers, see Publication 519.• Are in business for yourself in any other
way.Students Who Should File
Self-employment can include work in additionIf a child's only income is interest and dividends
to your regular full-time business activities, such Even if you do not have to file, you should file a(including capital gain distributions and Alaska
as certain part-time work you do at home or in federal income tax return to get money back ifPermanent Fund dividends), the child was under
addition to your regular job. any of the following conditions apply.age 19 at the end of 2009 or was a full-time
You must file a return if your gross income isstudent under age 24 at the end of 2009, and 1. You had federal income tax withheld fromat least as much as the filing requirementcertain other conditions are met, a parent can your pay or made estimated tax payments.amount for your filing status and age (shown inelect to include the child's income on the par- Table 1-1). Also, you must file Form 1040 and 2. You qualify for the earned income credit.ent's return. If this election is made, the child Schedule SE (Form 1040), Self-Employment See chapter 36 for more information. does not have to file a return. See Parent's Tax, if:
3. You qualify for the additional child taxElection To Report Child's Interest and Divi-
1. Your net earnings from self-employment credit. See chapter 34 for more informa-dends in chapter 31.
(excluding church employee income) were tion.
$400 or more, or 4. You qualify for the health coverage taxSelf-Employed Persons
2. You had church employee income of credit. See chapter 37 for more informa-
You are self-employed if you: $108.28 or more. (See Table 1-3.) tion.
Page 8 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 11 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 1-3. Other Situations When You Must File a 2009 Return
If any of the four conditions listed below applies, you must file a return, even if your income is less than the amount shown in Table 1-1 or Table
1-2.
1. You owe any special taxes, including any of the following.
• Social security or Medicare tax on tips you did not report to your employer. (See chapter 6.)
• Social security or Medicare tax on wages you received from an employer who did not withhold these taxes.
• Uncollected social security, Medicare, or railroad retirement tax on tips you reported to your employer. (See chapter 6.)
• Uncollected social security, Medicare, or railroad retirement tax on your group-term life insurance. This amount should be shown in
box 12 of your Form W-2.
• Alternative minimum tax. (See chapter 30.)
• Additional tax on a qualified retirement plan, including an individual retirement arrangement (IRA). (See chapter 17.)
• Additional tax on an Archer MSA or health savings account. (See Publication 969, Health Savings Accounts and Other Tax-Favored
Health Plans.)
• Additional tax on a Coverdell ESA or qualified tuition program. (See Publication 970, Tax Benefits for Education.)
• Recapture of an investment credit or a low-income housing credit. (See the Instructions for Form 4255, Recapture of Investment
Credit, or Form 8611, Recapture of Low-Income Housing Credit.)
• Recapture tax on the disposition of a home purchased with a federally subsidized mortgage. (See chapter 15.)
• Recapture of the qualified electric vehicle credit. (See chapter 37.)
• Recapture of an education credit. (See chapter 35.)
• Recapture of the Indian employment credit. (See the Instructions for Form 8845, Indian Employment Credit.)
• Recapture of the new markets credit. (See Form 8874, New Markets Credit.)
• Recapture of alternative motor vehicle credit. (See Form 8910, Alternative Motor Vehicle Credit.)
• Household employment taxes. (See Schedule H (Form 1040), Household Employment Taxes.)
2. You received any advance earned income credit (EIC) payments from your employer. This amount should be shown in box 9 of your Form
W-2. (See chapter 36.)
3. You had net earnings from self-employment of at least $400. (See Self-Employed Persons earlier in this chapter.)
4. You had wages of $108.28 or more from a church or qualified church-controlled organization that is exempt from employer social security and
Medicare taxes. (See Publication 334.)
5. You qualify for the refundable credit for any time in 2009, your filing status must be Figuring tax. On Form 1040EZ, you can use
prior year minimum tax. only the tax table to figure your tax. You cannotmarried filing jointly.
use Form 1040EZ to report any other tax.6. You qualify for the making work pay credit. 2. You (and your spouse if married filing aSee chapter 37 for more information. joint return) were under age 65 and not Form 1040A7. You qualify for the government retiree blind at the end of 2009. If you were born
credit. See chapter 37 for more informa- on January 1, 1945, you are considered to If you do not qualify to use Form 1040EZ, yoution. may be able to use Form 1040A.be age 65 at the end of 2009.
8. You qualify for the first-time homebuyer You can use Form 1040A if all of the follow-3. You do not claim any dependents.credit. See chapter 37 for more informa- ing apply.tion. 4. Your taxable income is less than
1. Your income is only from wages, salaries,$100,000.9. You qualify for the refundable American tips, IRA distributions, pensions and annui-opportunity credit. See chapter 35 for more ties, taxable social security and railroad re-5. Your income is only from wages, salaries,information. tirement benefits, taxable scholarship andtips, unemployment compensation, Alaska fellowship grants, interest, ordinary divi-Permanent Fund dividends, taxable schol- dends (including Alaska Permanent Fundarship and fellowship grants, and taxable dividends), capital gain distributions, andinterest of $1,500 or less. unemployment compensation.Which Form 
2. Your taxable income is less than6. You did not receive any advance earned
$100,000.Should I Use? income credit (EIC) payments.
3. Your adjustments to income are for onlyYou must use one of three forms to file your 7. You do not claim any adjustments to in- the following items.return: Form 1040EZ, Form 1040A, or Form come, such as a deduction for IRA contri-
1040. (But also see Does My Return Have To Be a. Educator expenses.butions or student loan interest.
on Paper, later.) b. IRA deduction. 8. You do not claim any credits other than theSee the discussion under Form 1040 c. Student loan interest deduction. earned income credit or the making workfor when you must use that form.
pay credit. d. Tuition and fees deduction.
TIP
9. You do not owe any household employ-
4. You do not itemize your deductions. ment taxes on wages you paid to a house-
hold employee. 5. Your taxes are from only the followingForm 1040EZ items.10. You are not claiming the additional stan-
Form 1040EZ is the simplest form to use. dard deduction for real estate taxes, taxes a. Tax Table.
on the purchase of a new motor vehicle, or
b. Alternative minimum tax. (See chapterYou can use Form 1040EZ if all of the follow- disaster losses. 30.) ing apply. You must meet all of these requirements to
use Form 1040EZ. If you do not, you must use1. Your filing status is single or married filing
jointly. If you were a nonresident alien at Form 1040A or Form 1040.
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 9

Page 12 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
c. Advance earned income credit (EIC) You must use Form 1040 if any of the follow-
payments, if you received any. (See ing apply. Does My Return Have
chapter 36.) 
1. Your taxable income is $100,000 or more. To Be on Paper?d. Recapture of an education credit. (See
chapter 35.) 2. You itemize your deductions.
You may be able to file a paperless return using
e. Form 8615, Tax for Certain Children IRS e-file (electronic filing). If your 2009 ad-3. You had income that cannot be reported
Who Have Investment Income of More justed gross income (AGI) is $57,000 or less,on Form 1040EZ or Form 1040A, includingThan $1,900. you are eligible for Free File. If you do not qualifytax-exempt interest from private activity
for Free File, then you should check out www.irs.bonds issued after August 7, 1986.f. Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain
gov for low-cost e-file options or Free File Fil-Tax Worksheet. 
lable Forms.4. You claim any adjustments to gross in-
come other than the adjustments listed6. You claim only the following tax credits.
earlier under Form 1040A. IRS e-filea. The credit for child and dependent care
5. Your Form W-2, box 12, shows uncol-expenses. (See chapter 32.) 
Table 1-4 lists the benefitslected employee tax (social security andb. The credit for the elderly or the dis-
 of IRS e-file . IRS e-fileMedicare tax) on tips (see chapter 6) orabled. (See chapter 33.) uses automation to replace most of the manualgroup-term life insurance (see chapter 5). steps needed to process paper returns. As ac. The child tax credit. (See chapter 34.) 
result, the processing of e-file returns is faster6. You received $20 or more in tips in any 1d. The additional child tax credit. (See and more accurate than the processing of papermonth and did not report all of them tochapter 34.) returns. However, as with a paper return, youyour employer. (See chapter 6.)
are responsible for making sure your return con-e. The education credits, including the re-
tains accurate information and is filed on time.7. You were a bona fide resident of Puertofundable American opportunity credit.
Using e-file does not affect your chances of anRico and exclude income from sources in(See chapter 35.) IRS examination of your return.Puerto Rico.f. The retirement savings contributions
Free File Fillable Forms. If you do not need8. You claim any credits other than the cred-credit. (See chapter 37.)
the help of a tax preparer, then Free File Fillableits listed earlier under Form 1040A.g. The earned income credit. (See chapter Forms may be for you. These forms:
36.) 9. You owe the excise tax on insider stock • Do not have an income requirement socompensation from an expatriated corpo-h. The making work pay credit. (See chap- everyone is eligible,ration.ter 37.) • Are easy to use,10. Your Form W-2 shows an amount in boxi. The government retiree credit. (See • Perform basic math calculations,12 with a code Z.chapter 37.)
• Are available only at www.irs.gov, and11. You had a qualified health savings account7. You did not have an alternative minimum funding distribution from your IRA. • Apply only to a federal tax return.tax adjustment on stock you acquired from
12. You are an employee and your employerthe exercise of an incentive stock option.
did not withhold social security and Medi- Electronic return signatures. To file your re-(See Publication 525, Taxable and Nontax-
care tax. turn electronically, you must sign the return elec-able Income.) 
tronically using a personal identification number13. You have to file other forms with your re-You must meet all of the above requirements (PIN). If you are filing online using software, youturn to report certain exclusions, taxes, orto use Form 1040A. If you do not, you must use must use a Self-Select PIN. If you are filingtransactions.Form 1040. electronically using a tax practitioner, you can
If you meet the above requirements, you can use a Self-Select PIN or a Practitioner PIN.14. You are a debtor in a bankruptcy case fileduse Form 1040A even if you received em- after October 16, 2005. Self-Select PIN. The Self-Select PIN methodployer-provided dependent care benefits or
allows you to create your own PIN. If you areclaim the additional standard deduction for real 15. You have a net disaster loss attributable to married filing jointly, you and your spouse willestate taxes paid or for taxes paid on the a federally declared disaster, even if you each need to create a PIN and enter these PINspurchase of a new motor vehicle. are claiming the standard deduction. as your electronic signatures.
If you receive a capital gain distribution
that includes unrecaptured section Table 1-4 Benefits of IRS e-file
1250 gain, section 1202 gain, or col-
CAUTION
!
lectibles (28%) gain, you cannot use Form • Free File allows qualified taxpayers to prepare and e-file their own tax returns for free.1040A. You must use Form 1040.
• Free File is available in English and Spanish.
• Free File is available online 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.Form 1040
• Get your refund faster than paper filers do, in as little as 10 days with Direct Deposit.If you cannot use Form 1040EZ or Form 1040A,
• Sign electronically with a secure self-selected PIN number and file a completely paperlessyou must use Form 1040. You can use Form
return.1040 to report all types of income, deductions,
and credits. • Receive an e-mailed proof of receipt within 48 hours after the IRS receives your return.
You may have received Form 1040A or Form • If you owe, you can e-file and authorize an electronic funds withdrawal or pay by credit card.1040EZ in the mail because of the return you You can also file a return early and pay the amount you owe later.filed last year. If your situation has changed this
year, it may be to your advantage to file Form • Save time by preparing and e-filing federal and state returns together.
1040 instead. You may pay less tax by filing • IRS computers quickly and automatically check for errors or other missing information.Form 1040 because you can take itemized de-
• Help the environment, use less paper, and save taxpayer money Ðit costs less to processductions, some adjustments to income, and
an e-filed return than a paper return.credits you cannot take on Form 1040A or Form
1040EZ.
Page 10 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 13 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
A PIN is any combination of five digits you acknowledges receipt of your e-filed return, see Using a Tax Professional
choose except five zeros. If you use a PIN, there Refund Information, later.
Many tax professionals electronically file tax re-is nothing to sign and nothing to mailÐnot even Amount you owe. To avoid late-payment turns for their clients. You may personally enteryour Forms W-2. penalties and interest, pay your taxes in full byTo verify your identity, you will be prompted your PIN or complete Form 8879, IRS e-fileApril 15, 2010. You can make your paymentto enter your adjusted gross income (AGI) from Signature Authorization, to authorize the taxelectronically by credit or debit card or by sched-your originally filed 2008 federal income tax re- professional to enter your PIN on your return.uling an electronic funds withdrawal from yourturn, if applicable. Do not use your AGI from an checking or savings account.amended return (Form 1040X) or a math error Note. Tax professionals may charge a feeSee How To Pay , later, for information oncorrection made by the IRS. AGI is the amount for IRS e-file. Fees can vary depending on thehow to pay the amount you owe.shown on your 2008 Form 1040, line 38; Form professional and the specific services rendered.
1040A, line 22; or Form 1040EZ, line 4. If you do
not have your 2008 income tax return, call the Using Your Personal ComputerIRS at 1-800-829-1040 to get a free transcript of
your return. (If you filed electronically last year, When Do I You can file your tax return in a fast,you may use your prior year PIN to verify your
easy, and convenient way using youridentity instead of your prior year AGI. The prior Have To File?personal computer. A computer withyear PIN is the five digit PIN you used to elec-
Internet access and tax preparation software aretronically sign your 2008 return.) You will also be April 15, 2010, is the due date for filing yourall you need. Best of all, you can e-file from theprompted to enter your date of birth (DOB). 2009 income tax return if you use the calendarcomfort of your home 24 hours a day, 7 days aMake sure your DOB is accurate and matches
year. For a quick view of due dates for filing aweek.the information on record with the Social Secur-
return with or without an extension of time to fileity Administration by checking your annual so- IRS approved tax preparation software is (discussed later), see Table 1-5.cial security statement. available for online use on the Internet, for
If you use a fiscal year (a year ending on thedownload from the Internet, and in retail stores.You cannot use the Self-Select PIN For information, visit our website at last day of any month except December, or amethod if you are a first-time filer under www.irs.gov/efile. 52-53-week year), your income tax return is dueage 16 at the end of 2009.
CAUTION
! by the 15th day of the 4th month after the close
of your fiscal year.Practitioner PIN. The Practitioner PIN Through Employers and Financial When the due date for doing any act for taxmethod allows you to authorize your tax practi-
Institutions purposesÐfiling a return, paying taxes, etc. Ðtioner to enter or generate your PIN. The practi-
falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, thetioner can provide you with details. Some businesses offer free e-file to their em- due date is delayed until the next business day.Form 8453. You must send in a paper Form ployees, members, or customers. Others offer it
8453 if you are attaching or filing Appendix A of for a fee. Ask your employer or financial institu- Filing on time. Your paper return is filed onRevenue Procedure 2009-20, Forms 1098-C, tion if they offer IRS e-file as an employee, time if it is mailed in an envelope that is properly2848 (for an electronic return signed by an member, or customer benefit. addressed, has enough postage, and is post-agent), 3115, 3468 (if attachments are re- marked by the due date. If you send your returnquired), 4136 (if certificate or statement re- by registered mail, the date of the registration isquired), 5713, 8283 (if a statement is required Free Help With Your Return the postmark date. The registration is evidencefor Section A or if Section B is completed), 8332 that the return was delivered. If you send aFree help in preparing your return is available(or certain pages from a decree or agreement return by certified mail and have your receiptnationwide from IRS-trained volunteers. Thethat went into effect after 1984 and before 2009), postmarked by a postal employee, the date onVolunteer Income Tax Assistance (VITA) pro-8858, 8864 (if certification or statement re-
the receipt is the postmark date. The post-gram is designed to help low to moderate in-quired), 8885, Schedule D-1 (Form 1040) (if you
marked certified mail receipt is evidence that thecome taxpayers and the Tax Counseling for theelect not to include your transactions on the
return was delivered.Elderly (TCE) program is designed to assist tax-electronic STCGL or LTCGL records).
payers age 60 or older with their tax returns.For more details, visit www.irs.gov/efile and Private delivery services. If you use a pri-Many VITA sites offer free electronic filing andclick on ªIndividual Taxpayers.º vate delivery service designated by the IRS toall volunteers will let you know about the credits send your return, the postmark date generally isPower of attorney. If an agent is signing your and deductions you may be entitled to claim. To the date the private delivery service records inreturn for you, a power of attorney (POA) must find a site near you, call 1-800-829-1040. Or to its database or marks on the mailing label. Thebe filed. Attach the POA to Form 8453 and file it find the nearest AARP TaxAide site, visit private delivery service can tell you how to getusing that form's instructions. See Signatures, AARP's website at www.aarp.org/taxaide or call written proof of this date.later for more information on POAs. 1-888-227-7669. For more information on these The following are designated private deliveryprograms, go to www.irs.gov and enter keywordState returns. In most states, you can file an services.ªVITAº in the upper right-hand corner.electronic state return simultaneously with your
federal return. For more information, check with • DHL Express (DHL): Same Day Service.
your local IRS office, state tax agency, tax pro- • Federal Express (FedEx): FedEx Priorityfessional, or the IRS website at Overnight, FedEx Standard Overnight,www.irs.gov/efile. FedEx 2Day, FedEx International Priority,
Refunds. You can have a refund check mailed and FedEx International First.
to you, or you can have your refund deposited
directly to your checking or savings account or Table 1-5.  When To File Your 2009 Return
split among two or three accounts. With e-file, For U.S. citizens and residents who file returns on a calendar year.your refund will be issued faster than if you filed
on paper. For Certain TaxpayersAs with a paper return, you may not get all of For Most Taxpayers Outside the U.S.your refund if you owe certain past-due
amounts, such as federal tax, state tax, a stu- No extension requested April 15, 2010 June 15, 2010
dent loan, or child support. See Offset against Automatic extension October 15, 2010 October 15, 2010debts under Refunds, later. Form 4868 filed, or credit 
card payment madeRefund inquiries. You can go online to check
the status of your refund 72 hours after the IRS
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 11

Page 14 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• United Parcel Service (UPS): UPS Next Automatic Extension Individuals Outside the 
Day Air, UPS Next Day Air Saver, UPS United StatesIf you cannot file your 2009 return by the due2nd Day Air, UPS 2nd Day Air A.M., UPS
date, you may be able to get an automaticWorldwide Express Plus, and UPS World- You are allowed an automatic 2-month exten-
6-month extension of time to file.wide Express. sion (until June 15, 2010, if you use the calendar
year) to file your 2009 return and pay any federal
Example. If your return is due on April 15, income tax due if:Private delivery services cannot deliver 2010, you will have until October 15, 2010, toitems to P.O. boxes. You must use the 1. You are a U.S. citizen or resident, andfile.U.S. Postal Service to mail any item to
CAUTION
!
2. On the due date of your return:If you do not pay the tax due by thean IRS P.O. box address.
regular due date (generally, April 15), a. You are living outside the United Statesyou will owe interest. You may also be
CAUTION
!Electronically filed returns. If you use IRS and Puerto Rico, and your main placecharged penalties, discussed later.e-file, your return is considered filed on time if of business or post of duty is outside
the authorized electronic return transmitter post- the United States and Puerto Rico, or
marks the transmission by the due date. An How to get the automatic extension. You b. You are in military or naval service onauthorized electronic return transmitter is a par- can get the automatic extension by: duty outside the United States and ticipant in the IRS e-file program that transmits Puerto Rico.electronic tax return information directly to the 1. Using IRS e-file (electronic filing), or
IRS. However, if you pay the tax due after the2. Filing a paper form.The electronic postmark is a record of when regular due date (generally, April 15), interest
the authorized electronic return transmitter re- will be charged from that date until the date the
ceived the transmission of your electronically tax is paid.E-file options. There are two ways you canfiled return on its host system. The date and time If you served in a combat zone or qualifieduse e-file to get an extension of time to file.in your time zone controls whether your elec- hazardous duty area, you may be eligible for aComplete Form 4868, Application for Automatictronically filed return is timely. longer extension of time to file. See IndividualsExtension of Time To File U.S. Individual In- Serving in Combat Zone, later, for special rulescome Tax Return, to use as a worksheet. If you that apply to you.Filing late. If you do not file your return by the think you may owe tax when you file your return,
due date, you may have to pay a failure-to-file use Part II of the form to estimate your balance
penalty and interest. For more information, see Married taxpayers. If you file a joint return,due. If you e-file Form 4868 to the IRS, do not
Penalties, later. Also see Interest under Amount only one spouse has to qualify for this automaticalso send a paper Form 4868.
You Owe. extension. If you and your spouse file separate
E-file using your personal computer or a returns, this automatic extension applies only toIf you were due a refund but you did not file a tax professional.  You can use a tax software the spouse who qualifies.return, you generally must file within 3 years package with your personal computer or a taxfrom the date the return was due (including ex- professional to file Form 4868 electronically. How to get the extension. To use this auto-tensions) to get that refund. You will need to provide certain information from matic extension, you must attach a statement toyour tax return for 2008. If you wish to make a your return explaining what situation qualifiedNonresident alien.  If you are a nonresident payment by electronic funds withdrawal, see you for the extension. (See the situations listedalien and earn wages subject to U.S. income tax Electronic payment options, under How To Pay, under (2), earlier.)withholding, your 2009 U.S. income tax return later in this chapter.
(Form 1040NR or Form 1040NR-EZ) is due by: Extensions beyond 2 months. If you cannotE-file and pay by credit or debit card. You
• April 15, 2010, if you use a calendar year, file your return within the automatic 2-monthcan get an extension by paying part or all of your
or extension period, you may be able to get anestimate of tax due by using a credit or debit
additional 4-month extension, for a total of 6card. You can do this by phone or over the• The 15th day of the 4th month after the
months. File Form 4868 and check the box onInternet. You do not file Form 4868. See Creditend of your fiscal year if you use a fiscal
line 8.or debit card , under How To Pay , later in thisyear.
This additional 4-month extension of time tochapter.
file is not a further extension of time to pay. YouIf you do not earn wages subject to U.S. in-
can use a credit or debit card to pay your esti-come tax withholding, your return is due by: Filing a paper Form 4868. You can get an mate of tax due. See How To Pay, later in thisextension of time to file by filing a paper Form• June 15, 2010, if you use a calendar year, chapter.4868. Mail it to the address shown in the formor
instructions. No further extension. An extension of more• The 15th day of the 6th month after the If you want to make a payment with the form, than 6 months will generally not be granted.end of your fiscal year, if you use a fiscal make your check or money order payable to the However, if you are outside the United Statesyear. ªUnited States Treasury.º Write your SSN, day- and meet certain tests, you may be granted aSee Publication 519 for more filing information. time phone number, and ª2009 Form 4868º on longer extension. For more information, see
your check or money order. When To File and Pay in Publication 54.Filing for a decedent. If you must file a final
income tax return for a taxpayer who died during
When to file. You must request the automaticthe year (a decedent), the return is due by the Individuals Serving in extension by the due date for your return. You15th day of the 4th month after the end of the Combat Zonecan file your return any time before the 6-monthdecedent's normal tax year. See Publication
extension period ends.559. The deadline for filing your tax return, paying
any tax you may owe, and filing a claim for
When you file your return. Enter any pay- refund is automatically extended if you serve in aExtensions of Time To File
ment you made related to the extension of time combat zone. This applies to members of the
to file on Form 1040, line 68. If you file Form Armed Forces, as well as merchant marinesYou may be able to get an extension of time to
1040EZ or Form 1040A, include that payment in serving aboard vessels under the operationalfile your return. Special rules apply for those who
your total payments on Form 1040EZ, line 10, or control of the Department of Defense, Redwere:
Form 1040A, line 44. Also enter ªForm 4868º Cross personnel, accredited correspondents,• Outside the United States, or and the amount paid in the space to the left of and civilians under the direction of the Armed
line 10 or line 44.• Serving in a combat zone. Forces in support of the Armed Forces.
Page 12 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 15 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Combat zone. For purposes of the automatic Table 1-6. Six Steps for Preparing Accounting Periods
extension, the term ªcombat zoneº includes the Your Return Most individual tax returns cover a calendarfollowing areas. 
yearÐthe 12 months from January 1 through1 Ð Get your records together for income1. The Persian Gulf area, effective January December 31. If you do not use a calendar year,and expenses.17, 1991. your accounting period is a fiscal year. A regular
2 Ð Get the forms, schedules, and fiscal year is a 12-month period that ends on the2. The qualified hazardous duty area of the publications you need. last day of any month except December. AFederal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia/ 52-53-week fiscal year varies from 52 to 533 Ð Fill in your return.Montenegro), Albania, the Adriatic Sea, weeks and always ends on the same day of theand the Ionian Sea north of the 39th paral- 4 Ð Check your return to make sure it is week.lel, effective March 24, 1999. correct. You choose your accounting period (tax
3. Afghanistan, effective September 19, year) when you file your first income tax return. It5 Ð Sign and date your return.2001. cannot be longer than 12 months.
6 Ð Attach all required forms andSee Publication 3, Armed Forces' Tax More information. For more information onschedules.
Guide, for information about other tax benefits accounting periods, including how to change
available to military personnel serving in a com- your accounting period, see Publication 538,
bat zone. Accounting Periods and Methods.
Substitute tax forms. You cannot use your
Extension period. The deadline for filing your own version of a tax form unless it meets the
return, paying any tax due, and filing a claim for Accounting Methodsrequirements explained in Publication 1167,
refund is extended for at least 180 days after the General Rules and Specifications for Substitute Your accounting method is the way you accountlater of: Forms and Schedules. for your income and expenses. Most taxpayers
1. The last day you are in a combat zone or use either the cash method or an accrual
the last day the area qualifies as a combat method. You choose a method when you fileForm W-2. If you are an employee, you should
zone, or your first income tax return. If you want toreceive Form W-2 from your employer. You will
change your accounting method after that, youneed the information from this form to prepare2. The last day of any continuous qualified generally must get IRS approval.your return. See Form W-2  under Credit forhospitalization for injury from service in the
Withholding and Estimated Tax in chapter 4.combat zone. Cash method. If you use this method, report
Your employer is required to provide or send all items of income in the year in which youIn addition to the 180 days, your deadline is actually or constructively receive them. Gener-Form W-2 to you no later than February 1, 2010.also extended by the number of days you had ally, you deduct all expenses in the year youIf it is mailed, you should allow adequate time toleft to take action with the IRS when you entered actually pay them. This is the method most indi-receive it before contacting your employer. Ifthe combat zone. For example, you have 3 1/2
vidual taxpayers use.you still do not get the form by February 15, themonths (January 1 ± April 15) to file your tax
IRS can help you by requesting the form fromreturn. Any days left in this period when you Constructive receipt. Generally, you con-
your employer. When you request IRS help, beentered the combat zone (or the entire 3 1/2 structively receive income when it is credited to
prepared to provide the following information. your account or set apart in any way that makesmonths if you entered it before the beginning of
it available to you. You do not need to havethe year) are added to the 180 days. See Exten- • Your name, address (including ZIP code), physical possession of it. For example, interestsion of Deadlines in Publication 3 for more infor- and phone number. credited to your bank account on December 31,mation.
• Your SSN. 2009, is taxable income to you in 2009 if youThe above rules on the extension for filing
could have withdrawn it in 2009 (even if theyour return also apply when you are deployed • Your dates of employment. amount is not entered in your passbook or with-outside the United States (away from your per- • Your employer's name, address (including drawn until 2010).manent duty station) while participating in a des-
ZIP code), and phone number.ignated contingency operation. Garnisheed wages. If your employer uses
your wages to pay your debts, or if your wages
Form 1099. If you received certain types of are attached or garnisheed, the full amount is
constructively received by you. You must in-income, you may receive a Form 1099. For
clude these wages in income for the year youexample, if you received taxable interest of $10How Do I Prepare would have received them.or more, the payer is required to provide or send
Form 1099 to you no later than February 1, 2010My Return? Debts paid for you. If another person
(or by February 16, 2010, if furnished by a bro- cancels or pays your debts (but not as a gift or
This section explains how to get ready to fill in ker). If it is mailed, you should allow adequate loan), you have constructively received the
your tax return and when to report your income time to receive it before contacting the payer. If amount and generally must include it in your
and expenses. It also explains how to complete gross income for the year. See Canceled Debtsyou still do not get the form by February 15 (or by
certain sections of the form. You may find Table in chapter 12 for more information.March 4, 2010, if furnished by a broker), call the
1-6 helpful when you prepare your return. IRS for help. Payment to third party. If a third party isIn most cases, based on the paper return you paid income from property you own, you havefiled last year, the IRS will mail you Form 1040, constructively received the income. It is theWhen Do I Report My Form 1040A, or Form 1040EZ with related in- same as if you had actually received the incomeIncome and Expenses?structions. Before you fill in the form, look at the and paid it to the third party.
form instructions to see if you need, or would
Payment to an agent. Income an agent re-You must figure your taxable income on thebenefit from filing, a different form this year. Also
ceives for you is income you constructively re-basis of a tax year. A ªtax yearº is an annualsee if you need any additional forms or sched-
ceived in the year the agent receives it. If youaccounting period used for keeping records andules. You may also want to read Does My Re-
indicate in a contract that your income is to bereporting income and expenses. You must ac-turn Have To Be on Paper, earlier.
paid to another person, you must include thecount for your income and expenses in a wayIf you do not receive a tax return package in amount in your gross income when the otherthat clearly shows your taxable income. The waythe mail, or if you need other forms, you can person receives it.you do this is called an accounting method. Thisorder them or print them from the Internet. See
section explains which accounting periods andHow To Get Tax Help in the back of this publica- Check received or available. A valid check
tion. methods you can use. that was made available to you before the end of
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 13

Page 16 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the tax year is constructively received by you in 1040 or 1040A) and attach a copy of the child's also applies to an alien spouse or dependent. To
that year. A check that was ªmade available to birth certificate, death certificate, or hospital rec- apply for an ITIN, file Form W-7 with the IRS. It
youº includes a check you have already re- ords. usually takes about 6 weeks to get an ITIN.
ceived, but not cashed or deposited. It also in- Enter the ITIN on your tax return wherever an
No social security number. File Form SS-5,cludes, for example, your last paycheck of the SSN is requested.
Application for a Social Security Card, with youryear that your employer made available for you If you are applying for an ITIN for your-local SSA office to get an SSN for yourself orto pick up at the office before the end of the year. self, your spouse, or a dependent inyour dependent. It usually takes about 2 weeksIt is constructively received by you in that year order to file your tax return, attach yourto get an SSN. If you or your dependent is not
TIPwhether or not you pick it up before the end of completed tax return to your Form W-7. See theeligible for an SSN, see Individual taxpayerthe year or wait to receive it by mail after the end Form W-7 instructions for how and where to file.identification number (ITIN), later.of the year.
If you are a U.S. citizen or resident alien, you An ITIN is for tax use only. It does notNo constructive receipt. There may be must show proof of age, identity, and citizenship entitle you or your dependent to socialfacts to show that you did not constructively or alien status with your Form SS-5. If you are 12 security benefits or change the em-
CAUTION
!receive income. or older and have never been assigned an SSN, ployment or immigration status of either of youyou must appear in person with this proof at an under U.S. law.Example. Alice Johnson, a teacher, agreed SSA office.
to her school board's condition that, in her ab- Form SS-5 is available at any SSA office, on Penalty for not providing social securitysence, she would receive only the difference the Internet at www.socialsecurity.gov, or by number. If you do not include your SSN or thebetween her regular salary and the salary of a calling 1-800-772-1213. If you have any ques- SSN of your spouse or dependent as required,substitute teacher hired by the school board. tions about which documents you can use as you may have to pay a penalty. See the discus-Therefore, Alice did not constructively receive proof of age, identity, or citizenship, contact your sion on Penalties, later, for more information.the amount by which her salary was reduced to SSA office.
pay the substitute teacher. If your dependent does not have an SSN by SSN on correspondence. If you write to the
the time your return is due, you may want to ask IRS about your tax account, be sure to includeAccrual method. If you use an accrual for an extension of time to file, as explained your SSN (and the name and SSN of yourmethod, you generally report income when you earlier under When Do I Have To File. spouse, if you filed a joint return) in your corre-earn it, rather than when you receive it. You If you do not provide a required SSN or if you spondence. Because your SSN is used to iden-generally deduct your expenses when you incur provide an incorrect SSN, your tax may be in- tify your account, this helps the IRS respond tothem, rather than when you pay them. creased and any refund may be reduced. your correspondence promptly.
Income paid in advance. An advance pay-
Adoption taxpayer identification numberment of income is generally included in gross Presidential Election (ATIN). If you are in the process of adopting aincome in the year you receive it. Your method
child who is a U.S. citizen or resident and cannotof accounting does not matter as long as the Campaign Fund
get an SSN for the child until the adoption isincome is available to you. An advance payment
final, you can apply for an ATIN to use instead of This fund helps pay for Presidential electionmay include rent or interest you receive in ad-
an SSN. campaigns. The fund reduces candidates' de-vance and pay for services you will perform
File Form W-7A, Application for Taxpayer pendence on large contributions from individu-later.
Identification Number for Pending U.S. Adop- als and groups and places candidates on anA limited deferral until the next tax year may
tions, with the IRS to get an ATIN if all of the equal financial footing in the general election. Ifbe allowed for certain advance payments. See
following are true. you want $3 to go to this fund, check the box. IfPublication 538 for specific information.
you are filing a joint return, your spouse can also• You have a child living with you who wasAdditional information. For more information have $3 go to the fund. If you check a box, yourplaced in your home for legal adoption.on accounting methods, including how to tax or refund will not change.change your accounting method, see Publica- • You cannot get the child's existing SSN
tion 538. even though you have made a reasonable Computationsattempt to get it from the birth parents, the
placement agency, and other persons.Social Security Number The following information on entering numbers
on your tax return may be useful in making the• You cannot get an SSN for the child fromYou must enter your social security number return easier to complete.the SSA because, for example, the adop-(SSN) in the space provided on your return. Be tion is not final.sure the SSN on your return is the same as the Rounding off dollars. You may round off
• You are eligible to claim the child as aSSN on your social security card. If you are cents to whole dollars on your return and sched-
dependent on your tax return.married, enter the SSNs for both you and your ules. If you do round to whole dollars, you must
spouse, whether you file jointly or separately. round all amounts. To round, drop amountsAfter the adoption is final, you must apply for anIf you are filing a joint return, write the SSNs under 50 cents and increase amounts from 50 toSSN for the child. You cannot continue using thein the same order as the names. Use this same 99 cents to the next dollar. For example, $1.39ATIN.order in submitting other forms and documents becomes $1 and $2.50 becomes $3.
See Form W-7A for more information.to the IRS. If you have to add two or more amounts to
figure the amount to enter on a line, includeName change. If you changed your name be- Nonresident alien spouse. If your spouse is cents when adding the amounts and round offcause of marriage, divorce, etc., be sure to re- a nonresident alien, your spouse must have only the total.port the change to your local Social Security either an SSN or an ITIN if:
Administration (SSA) office before filing your Example. You receive two Forms W-2: one• You file a joint return,return. This prevents delays in processing your showing wages of $5,000.55 and one showingreturn and issuing refunds. It also safeguards • You file a separate return and claim an wages of $18,500.73. On Form 1040, line 7, youyour future social security benefits. exemption for your spouse, or would enter $23,501 ($5,000.55 + $18,500.73 =
$23,501.28), not $23,502 ($5,001 + $18,501).Dependent's social security number. You • Your spouse is filing a separate return.
must provide the SSN of each dependent you If your spouse is not eligible for an SSN, see the Equal amounts. If you are asked to enter theclaim, regardless of the dependent's age. This next discussion. smaller or larger of two equal amounts, enterrequirement applies to all dependents (not just that amount.your children) claimed on your tax return. Individual taxpayer identification number
Exception. If your child was born and died (ITIN). The IRS will issue you an ITIN if you are Example. Line 1 is $500. Line 3 is $500.
in 2009 and you do not have an SSN for the a nonresident or resident alien and you do not Line 5 asks you to enter the smaller of line 1 or 3.
child, enter ªDIEDº in column (2) of line 6c (Form have and are not eligible to get an SSN. This Enter $500 on line 5.
Page 14 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 17 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Negative amounts. If you need to enter a c. Receive copies of notices or transcripts can be anything that clearly indicates the tax-
negative amount, put the amount in parentheses payer's intent to sign. For example, the tax-related to your return, upon request,
rather than using a minus sign. To combine payer's ªXº with the signatures of two witnessesand
positive and negative amounts, add all the posi- might be considered a valid signature under ad. Respond to certain IRS notices abouttive amounts together and then subtract the state's law.math errors, offsets (see Refunds,negative amounts. later), and return preparation. Spouse unable to sign. If your spouse is una-
ble to sign for any reason, see Signing a jointAttachments The authorization will automatically end no return in chapter 2.
later than the due date (without any extensions)Depending on the form you file and the items for filing your 2010 tax return. This is April 15, Child's return. If a child has to file a tax returnreported on your return, you may have to com- 2011, for most people. but cannot sign the return, the child's parent,plete additional schedules and forms and attach guardian, or another legally responsible personSee your form instructions for more informa-them to your return. must sign the child's name, followed by thetion.
You may be able to file a paperless words ªBy (your signature), parent for minorIf the designee is the paid preparerreturn using IRS e-file. There's nothing child.ºwho signed your return, enter the nameto sign, attach, or mail, not even your
TIP of the individual preparer (not the com-
CAUTION
!Forms W-2. Paid Preparerpany name) in the space for the designee's
name and enter the preparer's phone numberForm W-2. Form W-2 is a statement from your Generally, anyone you pay to prepare, assist inand a 5-digit PIN.employer of wages and other compensation preparing, or review your tax return must sign it
paid to you and taxes withheld from your pay. and fill in the other blanks in the paid preparer's
You should have a Form W-2 from each em- area of your return.Signaturesployer. Be sure to attach a copy of Form W-2 in A paid preparer can sign the return manuallythe place indicated on the front page of your You must sign and date your return. If you file a or use a rubber stamp, mechanical device, orreturn. Attach it only to the front page of your joint return, both you and your spouse must sign computer software program. The preparer isreturn, not to any attachments. For more infor- the return, even if only one of you had income. personally responsible for affixing his or her sig-mation, see Form W-2 in chapter 4. nature to the return.If you file a joint return, both spousesIf you received a Form 1099-R, Distributions If the preparer is self-employed (that is, notare generally liable for the tax, and theFrom Pensions, Annuities, Retirement or employed by any person or business to prepareentire tax liability may be assessedProfit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insurance Con-
CAUTION
! the return), he or she should check theagainst either spouse. See chapter 2.tracts, etc., showing federal income tax with- self-employed box in the Paid Preparer's Useheld, attach a copy of that form in the place If you e-file your return, you can use an Only space on the return.indicated on the front page of your return. electronic signature to sign your return. The preparer must give you a copy of your
See Does My Return Have To Be on return in addition to the copy filed with the IRS.
TIPForm 1040EZ. There are no additional sched-
Paper, earlier. If you prepare your own return, leave thisules to file with Form 1040EZ.
If you are due a refund, it cannot be issued area blank. If another person prepares your re-
Form 1040A. Attach any forms and schedules turn and does not charge you, that personunless you have signed your return.
behind Form 1040A in order of the ªAttachment should not sign your return.Enter your occupation in the space providedSequence Numberº shown in the upper right If you have questions about whether ain the signature section. If you file a joint return,corner of the form or schedule. Then arrange all preparer must sign your return, contact any IRSenter both your occupation and your spouse'sother statements or attachments in the same office.occupation. Entering your daytime phone num-order as the forms and schedules they relate to ber may help speed the processing of your re-and attach them last. Do not attach items unless turn. Refundsrequired to do so.
When you complete your return, you will deter-When someone can sign for you. You canForm 1040. Attach any forms and schedules
mine if you paid more income tax than youappoint an agent to sign your return if you are:behind Form 1040 in order of the ªAttachment
owed. If so, you can get a refund of the amountSequence Numberº shown in the upper right 1. Unable to sign the return because of dis- you overpaid or, if you file Form 1040 or Formcorner of the form or schedule. Then arrange all ease or injury, 1040A, you can choose to apply all or part of theother statements or attachments in the same
overpayment to your next year's (2010) esti-order as the forms and schedules they relate to 2. Absent from the United States for a contin-
mated tax. You cannot have your overpaymentand attach them last. Do not attach items unless uous period of at least 60 days before the applied to your 2010 estimated tax if you filerequired to do so. due date for filing your return, or Form 1040EZ.
3. Given permission to do so by the IRS of- If you choose to have a 2009 overpay-Third Party Designee fice in your area. ment applied to your 2010 estimated
tax, you cannot change your mind andYou can authorize the IRS to discuss your return
CAUTION
! Power of attorney. A return signed by an have any of it refunded to you after the due datewith a friend, family member, or any other per- agent in any of these cases must have a power (without extensions) of your 2009 return.son you choose. If you check the ªYesº box in of attorney (POA) attached that authorizes thethe Third party designee area of your 2009 tax Follow the form instructions to complete theagent to sign for you. You can use a POA thatreturn and provide the information required, you entries to claim your refund and/or to apply yourstates that the agent is granted authority to signare authorizing: overpayment to your 2010 estimated tax.the return, or you can use Form 2848, Power of
Attorney and Declaration of Representative. If your refund for 2009 is large, you1. The IRS to call the designee to answer any
Part I of Form 2848 must state that the agent is may want to decrease the amount ofquestions that arise during the processing
granted authority to sign the return. income tax withheld from your pay inof your return, and
TIP
2010. See chapter 4 for more information.Unable to sign. If the taxpayer is mentally2. The designee to
incompetent and cannot sign the return, it must Instead of getting a pa-a. Give information that is missing from be signed by a court-appointed representative
Simple. Safe. Secure.
DIRECT DEPOSIT per check, you may beyour return to the IRS, who can act for the taxpayer. able to have your refund deposited directly into
If the taxpayer is mentally competent butb. Call the IRS for information about the your checking or savings account, including an
physically unable to sign the return or POA, aprocessing of your return or the status individual retirement arrangement. Follow the
valid ªsignatureº is defined under state law. Itof your refund or payments, form instructions to request direct deposit.
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 15

Page 18 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If the direct deposit cannot be done, the IRS Note. If the injured spouse's residence was Check or money order. If you pay by check or
will send a check instead. in a community property state at any time during money order, make it out to the ªUnited States
the tax year, then the injured spouse must only Treasury.º Show your correct name, address,
meet (1) above. SSN, daytime phone number, and the tax yearSplit refunds. If you choose direct deposit, and form number on the front of your check oryou may be able to split the refund and have it If you have not filed your joint return and you money order. If you are filing a joint return, enterdeposited among two or three accounts. If you know that your joint refund will be offset, file the SSN shown first on your tax return. want to split your refund, check the box on the Form 8379 with your return. You should receive For example, if you file Form 1040 for 2009line for the amount you want refunded to you. your refund within 14 weeks from the date the and you owe additional tax, show your name,Then, complete Form 8888, Direct Deposit of paper return is filed or within 11 weeks from the address, SSN, daytime phone number, andRefund to More Than One Account, and attach it date the return is filed electronically. ª2009 Form 1040º on the front of your check orto your return. money order. If you file an amended returnIf you filed your joint return and your joint (Form 1040X) for 2008 and you owe tax, showrefund was offset, file Form 8379 by itself. When your name, address, SSN, daytime phone num-Overpayment less than one dollar. If your filed after offset, it can take up to 8 weeks to ber, and ª2008 Form 1040Xº on the front of youroverpayment is less than one dollar, you will not receive your refund. Do not attach the previously check or money order. get a refund unless you ask for it in writing. filed tax return, but do include copies of all Enclose your payment with your return, butForms W-2 and W-2G for both spouses and any do not attach it to the form. If you filed Form 1040Forms 1099 that show income tax withheld. TheCashing your refund check. Cash your tax or Form 1040A, complete Form 1040-V, Pay-processing of Form 8379 may be delayed ifrefund check soon after you receive it. Checks ment Voucher, and enclose it with your paymentthese forms are not attached, or if the form isnot cashed within 12 months of the date they are and return. Although you do not have to useincomplete when filed.issued will be canceled and the proceeds re- Form 1040-V doing so allows us to process yourturned to the IRS. payment more accurately and efficiently. FollowA separate Form 8379 must be filed for each
the instructions that come with the form.tax year to be considered.If your check has been canceled, you can Do not mail cash with your return. If you payapply to the IRS to have it reissued. An injured spouse claim is different cash at an IRS office, keep the receipt as part of
from an innocent spouse relief request. your records.
An injured spouse uses Form 8379 toRefund more or less than expected. If you
CAUTION
! Payment not honored. If your check orrequest the division of the tax overpayment at-receive a check for a refund you are not entitled money order is not honored by your bank (ortributed to each spouse. An innocent spouseto, or for an overpayment that should have been other financial institution) and the IRS does notuses Form 8857, Request for Innocent Spousecredited to estimated tax, do not cash the check. receive the funds, you still owe the tax. In addi-Relief, to request relief from joint liability for tax,Call the IRS. tion, you may be subject to a dishonored checkinterest, and penalties on a joint return for items
penalty.If you receive a check for more than the of the other spouse (or former spouse) that were
refund you claimed, do not cash the check until incorrectly reported on the joint return. For infor- Electronic payment options. Electronic pay-you receive a notice explaining the difference. mation on innocent spouses, see Relief from ment options are convenient, safe, and secure
joint liability under Filing a Joint Return in chap- methods for paying individual income taxes.If your refund check is for less than you ter 2. There's no check to write, money order to buy,claimed, it should be accompanied by a notice or voucher to mail. Payments can be made 24explaining the difference. Cashing the check hours a day, 7 days a week.does not stop you from claiming an additional Amount You Owe
amount of refund. Credit or debit card. To pay by credit or
When you complete your return, you will deter- debit card, call toll-free or visit the website of oneIf you did not receive a notice and you have mine if you have paid the full amount of tax that of the service providers listed later and follow theany questions about the amount of your refund, you owe. If you owe additional tax, you should instructions. you should wait 2 weeks. If you still have not pay it with your return. A convenience fee will be charged by thereceived a notice, call the IRS. service provider. This fee is deductible as aIf the IRS figures your tax for you, you will miscellaneous itemized deduction subject to thereceive a bill for any tax that is due. You should 2% of AGI limit on your 2010 income tax return.Offset against debts. If you are due a refund pay this bill within 30 days (or by the due date of Fees may vary among the providers. You will bebut have not paid certain amounts you owe, all your return, if later). See Tax Figured by IRS in told what the fee is during the transaction andor part of your refund may be used to pay all or chapter 30. you will have the option to either continue orpart of the past-due amount. This includes
cancel the transaction. You can also find outIf you do not pay your tax when due,past-due federal income tax, other federal debts
what the fee will be by calling the provider'syou may have to pay a failure-to-pay(such as student loans), state income tax, and
toll-free automated customer service number orpenalty. See Penalties, later. For morechild and spousal support payments. You will be
CAUTION
!
visiting the provider's website.information about your balance due, see Publi-notified if the refund you claimed has been offset
cation 594, The IRS Collection Process.against your debts. Do not add the convenience fee to your
tax payment.Joint return and injured spouse. When a If the amount you owe for 2009 is large,
joint return is filed and only one spouse owes a
CAUTION
! you may want to increase the amount
past-due amount, the other spouse can be con- of income tax withheld from your pay or
TIP
sidered an injured spouse. An injured spouse make estimated tax payments for 2010. See
should file Form 8379, Injured Spouse Alloca- chapter 4 for more information.
tion, if both of the following apply and the spouse
wants a refund of his or her share of the over-
payment shown on the joint return. How To Pay
If you have an amount due on your tax return,1. You are not legally obligated to pay the
you can pay by check, money order, credit orpast-due amount.
debit card. If you filed electronically, you also
2. You made and reported tax payments may be able to make your payment electroni-
(such as federal income tax withheld from cally.
your wages or estimated tax payments), or
You do not have to pay if the amountclaimed a refundable tax credit (see the
you owe is less than $1.credits listed under Who Should File, ear-
lier).
TIP
Page 16 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 19 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1-800-555-4477 (business). TTY/TDD help is before requesting an installment agreement,Service Providers
available by calling 1-800-733-4829. you should consider other less costly alterna-
Link2Gov Corporation tives, such as a bank loan. Estimated tax payments. Do not include any
To ask for an installment agreement, use2010 estimated tax payment in the payment forTo make a
Form 9465, Installment Agreement Request.payment, call ... . 1-888-PAY-1040TM your 2009 income tax return. See chapter 4 for
You should receive a response to your requestor .......... . 1-888-729-1040 information on how to pay estimated tax.
within 30 days. But if you file your return afterFor Customer March 31, it may take longer for a reply. Service ....... . 1-888-658-5465
Interest In addition to paying by check or moneyWeb Address ... . www.PAY1040.com order, you can use a credit or debit card orInterest is charged on tax you do not pay by the EFTPS to make installment agreement pay-due date of your return. Interest is charged evenRBS WorldPay, Inc. ments. See Credit or debit card  and Electronicif you get an extension of time for filing. Federal Tax Payment System (EFTPS) , under
To make a How To Pay, earlier.If the IRS figures your tax for you, inter-payment, call ... . 1-888-9-PAY-TAXTM
est cannot start earlier than the 31stor .......... . 1-888-972-9829 day after the IRS sends you a bill. For
TIP Guaranteed availability of installment agree-For Customer information, see Tax Figured by IRS in chapter ment. The IRS must agree to accept the fullService ....... . 1-877-517-4881 30. payment of your tax liability in installments if, asWeb Address ... . www.payUSAtax.com of the date you offer to enter into the agreement:Interest on penalties. Interest is charged on
the failure-to-file penalty, the accuracy-related 1. Your total taxes (not counting interest,Official Payments Corporation penalty, and the fraud penalty from the due date penalties, additions to the tax, or additionalof the return (including extensions) to the date of amounts) do not exceed $10,000,To make a payment. Interest on other penalties starts onpayment, call ... . 1-888-UPAY-TAXTM
2. In the last 5 years, you (and your spouse ifthe date of notice and demand, but is notor .......... . 1-888-872-9829 the liability relates to a joint return) havecharged on penalties paid within 21 calendar
For Customer not:days from the date of the notice (or within 10
Service ....... . 1-877-754-4413 business days if the notice is for $100,000 or
a. Failed to file any required income taxmore).Web Address ... . www.officialpayments.com return,
Interest due to IRS error or delay. All or part b. Failed to pay any tax shown on anyof any interest you were charged can be forgivenElectronic funds withdrawal. You can such return, orif the interest is due to an unreasonable error ore-file and pay in a single step by authorizing an delay by an officer or employee of the IRS in c. Entered into an installment agreementelectronic funds withdrawal from your checking performing a ministerial or managerial act. for the payment of any income tax,or savings account. If you select this payment A ministerial act is a procedural or mechani-option, you will need to have your account num- cal act that occurs during the processing of your 3. You show you cannot pay your income taxber, your financial institution's routing transit case. A managerial act includes personnel in full when due,number, and account type (checking or sav- transfers and extended personnel training. A 4. The tax will be paid in full in 3 years orings). You can schedule the payment for any decision concerning the proper application of less, andfuture date up to and including the return due federal tax law is not a ministerial or managerial
date. act. 5. You agree to comply with the tax laws
The interest can be forgiven only if you are while your agreement is in effect.Be sure to check with your financial
not responsible in any important way for theinstitution to make sure that an elec-
error or delay and the IRS has notified you intronic funds withdrawal is allowed and
CAUTION
!
writing of the deficiency or payment. For more Online payment agreement (OPA) applica-to get the correct routing and account numbers.
information, see Publication 556, Examination tion. You may be able to apply online for a
Electronic Federal Tax Payment System of Returns, Appeal Rights, and Claims for Re- payment agreement if you owe federal tax, inter-
fund.(EFTPS). EFTPS is a free tax payment system est, and penalties. If you have received a bal-
Interest and certain penalties may also bethat all individual and business taxpayers can ance due notice from the IRS and you cannot
suspended for a limited period if you filed youruse. You can make payments online or by pay in full, you may request a payment agree-
return by the due date (including extensions)phone. ment. The OPA application allows you, or your
and the IRS does not provide you with a notice authorized representative, to self-qualify for andHere are just a few of the benefits of this specifically stating your liability and the basis for apply for a payment agreement, receive notifica-easy-to-use system. it before the close of the 36-month period begin- tion of approval, and arrange a payment sched-• Convenient and flexible. You can use it to ning on the later of: ule.schedule payments in advance. For exam- • The date the return is filed, or To use the OPA application, you must haveple, you can schedule estimated tax pay-
filed all required tax returns. You should also• The due date of the return without regardments (Form 1040-ES) or installment
have the following information available:to extensions.agreement payments weekly, monthly, or
quarterly. • Balance due notice from the IRS.For more information, see Publication 556.
• Fast and accurate. You can make a tax • Social security number or individual tax-
payment in minutes. Because there are Installment Agreement payer identification number.
verification steps along the way, you can • Personal identification number, which canIf you cannot pay the full amount due with yourcheck and review your information before be established online using the caller iden-return, you can ask to make monthly installmentsending it. tification number from the balance due no-payments for the full or a partial amount. How-
• Safe and secure. It offers the highest tice.ever, you will be charged interest and may be
available levels of security. Every transac- charged a late payment penalty on the tax not
 For more information, go to www.irs.gov, usetion receives an immediate confirmation. paid by the date your return is due, even if your
the pull-down menu under ªI need to...º andrequest to pay in installments is granted. If your
For more information or details on enrolling, select ªSet Up a Payment Plan.º If you just wantrequest is granted, you must also pay a fee. To
visit www.eftps.gov or call EFTPS Customer to go to the OPA application, click on it under thelimit the interest and penalty charges, pay as
section on Online Services.Service at 1-800-316-6541 (individual) or much of the tax as possible with your return. But
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 17

Page 20 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1. City, You may need to keep records relating to theGift To Reduce Debt basis of property longer than the period of limita-2. Province or state, andHeld by the Public tions. Keep those records as long as they are
3. Name of foreign country. (Do not abbrevi- important in figuring the basis of the original or
ate the name of the country.) replacement property. Generally, this means forYou can make a contribution (gift) to
as long as you own the property and, after youreduce debt held by the public. If you Follow the country's practice for entering the dispose of it, for the period of limitations thatwish to do so, make a separate check postal code.
 applies to you. See chapter 13 for information onpayable to ªBureau of the Public Debt.º
basis.Send your check to:
Note.  If you receive a Form W-2, keep Copy
Where Do I File? C until you begin receiving social security bene-Bureau of the Public Debt fits. This will help protect your benefits in caseDepartment G After you complete your return, you must send it there is a question about your work record orP.O. Box 2188 to the IRS. You can mail it or you may be able to earnings in a particular year. Review the infor-Parkersburg, WV 26106-2188. file it electronically. See Does My Return Have mation shown on your annual (for workers over
To Be on Paper, earlier. age 25) Social Security Statement.Or, enclose your separate check in the
envelope with your income tax return. Do not Mailing your return. If an addressed envel- Copies of returns. You should keep copies of
add this gift to any tax you owe. ope came with your tax forms package, you tax returns you have filed and the tax forms
should mail your return in that envelope. package as part of your records. They may beYou can deduct this gift as a charitable con-
If you do not have an addressed envelope or helpful in amending filed returns or preparingtribution on next year's tax return if you itemize
if you moved during the year, mail your return to future ones.your deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040).
the address shown at the end of this publication If you need a copy of a prior year tax return,
for the area where you now live. you can get it from the IRS. Use Form 4506,Peel-Off Address Label Request for Copy of Tax Return. There is a
charge for a copy of a return, which you mustAfter you have completed your return, peel off pay with Form 4506. It may take up to 60 calen-the label with your name and address from the dar days to process your request.What Happens After back of your tax return package and place it in
the appropriate area of the Form 1040, Form If your main home, principal place of
I File?1040A, or Form 1040EZ you send to the IRS. If business, or tax records are located in
you have someone prepare your return, give a federally declared disaster area, the
TIP
After you send your return to the IRS, you maythat person your label to use on your tax return. charge will be waived.
have some questions. This section discussesIf you file electronically and you are required
Transcript of tax return. If you just need in-concerns you may have about recordkeeping,to attach or file certain forms or worksheets use
formation from your return, you can order ayour refund, and what to do if you move.the label on Form 8453. (More information on
transcript by calling 1-800-829-1040, or usingelectronic filing is found earlier in this chapter.)
Form 4506-T, Request for Transcript of Tax Re-The label helps the IRS to correctly identify What Records Should turn. There is no fee for a transcript.your account. It also saves processing costs and
You can request the following items.I Keep?speeds up processing so that refunds can be
issued sooner. Return transcript. This includes most of
You must keep records so that you can the line items of a tax return as filed with the IRS.You must write your SSN in the spaces
prepare a complete and accurate in- Return transcripts are available for the currentprovided on your tax return.
come tax return. The law does not re- year and returns processed during the prior 3
RECORDS
CAUTION
!
quire any special form of records. However, you processing years. Most requests will be
should keep all receipts, canceled checks or processed within 10 business days.
other proof of payment, and any other records toCorrecting the label. Make necessary name Account transcript. This contains informa-support any deductions or credits you claim.and address changes on the label. If you have tion on the financial status of the account, such
If you file a claim for refund, you must be ablean apartment number that is not shown on the as payments made on the account, penalty as-
to prove by your records that you have overpaidlabel, please write it in. If you changed your sessments, and adjustments made by you or the
your tax.name, see the discussion under Social Security IRS after the return was filed. Return information
Number, earlier. is limited to items such as tax liability and esti-How long to keep records. You must keep mated tax payments. Account transcripts areNo label. If you did not receive a tax return your records for as long as they are important for available for most returns. Most requests will bepackage with a label, print or type your name the federal tax law. processed within 30 calendar days.and address in the spaces provided at the top of Keep records that support an item of income
Form 1040 or Form 1040A. If you are married or a deduction appearing on a return until the Record of account. This is a combination
filing a separate return, do not enter your period of limitations for the return runs out. (A of line item information and later adjustments to
spouse's name in the space at the top. Instead, period of limitations is the period of time after the account. This information is available for the
enter his or her name in the space provided on which no legal action can be brought.) For as- current year and 3 prior tax years. Most requests
line 3. sessment of tax you owe, this generally is 3 will be processed within 30 calendar days.
If you file Form 1040EZ and you do not have years from the date you filed the return. For filing More information. For more information ona label, print or type this information in the a claim for credit or refund, this generally is 3 recordkeeping, see Publication 552, Record-spaces provided. years from the date you filed the original return, keeping for Individuals.or 2 years from the date you paid the tax, which-P.O. box. If your post office does not deliver ever is later. Returns filed before the due datemail to your street address and you have a P.O. are treated as filed on the due date. Refund Informationbox, print your P.O. box number on the line for If you did not report income that you shouldyour present home address instead of your have reported on your return, and it is more than You can go online to check the status of yourstreet address. 25% of the income shown on the return, the 2009 refund 72 hours after IRS acknowledges
Foreign address. If your address is outside period of limitations does not run out until 6 receipt of your e-filed return, or 3 to 4 weeks
the United States or its possessions or territo- years after you filed the return. If a return is false after you mail a paper return. If you filed Form
ries, enter the information on the line for ªCity, or fraudulent with intent to evade tax, or if no 8379 with your return, allow 14 weeks (11 weeks
town or post office, state, and ZIP codeº in the return is filed, an action can generally be brought if you filed electronically) before checking your
following order: at any time. refund status. Be sure to have a copy of your
Page 18 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 21 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2009 tax return available because you will need Time for filing a claim for refund. Generally,
you must file your claim for a credit or refundto know the filing status, the first SSN shown on What If I Made within 3 years after the date you filed your origi-the return, and the exact whole-dollar amount of
nal return or within 2 years after the date youthe refund. To check on your refund, do one of a Mistake? paid the tax, whichever is later. Returns filedthe following.
before the due date (without regard to exten-Errors may delay your refund or result in notices• Go to www.irs.gov, and click on ªwhere's sions) are considered filed on the due datebeing sent to you. If you discover an error, youmy refund.º (even if the due date was a Saturday, Sunday, orcan file an amended return or claim for refund. legal holiday). These time periods are sus-• Call 1-800-829-4477 24 hours a day, 7
pended while you are financially disabled, dis-days a week for automated refund infor-
Amended Returns and cussed later.mation.
If the last day for claiming a credit or refund isClaims for Refund• Call 1-800-829-1954 during the hours a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, you canshown in your form instructions. file the claim on the next business day.You should correct your return if, after you have If you do not file a claim within this period,filed it, you find that: you may not be entitled to a credit or a refund.Interest on Refunds 1. You did not report some income, Protective claim for refund. Generally, a
If you are due a refund, you may get interest on protective claim is a formal claim or amended2. You claimed deductions or credits you
it. The interest rates are adjusted quarterly. return for credit or refund normally based onshould not have claimed,
current litigation or expected changes in tax lawIf the refund is made within 45 days after the
3. You did not claim deductions or credits you or other legislation. You file a protective claimdue date of your return, no interest will be paid. If
could have claimed, or when your right to a refund is contingent onyou file your return after the due date (including
future events and may not be determinable untilextensions), no interest will be paid if the refund 4. You should have claimed a different filing
after the statute of limitations expires. A validis made within 45 days after the date you filed. If status. (Once you file a joint return, you
protective claim does not have to list a particularthe refund is not made within this 45-day period, cannot choose to file separate returns for
dollar amount or demand an immediate refund.interest will be paid from the due date of the that year after the due date of the return.
However, a valid protective claim must:return or from the date you filed, whichever is However, an executor may be able to
later. make this change for a deceased spouse.) • Be in writing and signed,
Accepting a refund check does not change If you need a copy of your return, see Copies of • Include your name, address, SSN or ITIN,your right to claim an additional refund and inter- returns under What Records Should I Keep , and other contact information,est. File your claim within the period of time that earlier in this chapter. • Identify and describe the contingencies af-applies. See Amended Returns and Claims for
fecting the claim,Refund, later. If you do not accept a refund Form 1040X. Use Form 1040X, Amendedcheck, no more interest will be paid on the over- U.S. Individual Income Tax Return, to correct a • Clearly alert the IRS to the essential na-payment included in the check. return you have already filed. An amended tax ture of the claim, and
return cannot be filed electronically under the • Identify the specific year(s) for which a re-Interest on erroneous refund. All or part of e-file system. fund is sought.any interest you were charged on an erroneous Completing Form 1040X. On Form 1040X,refund generally will be forgiven. Any interest Mail your protective claim for refund to the ad-enter your income, deductions, and credits ascharged for the period before demand for repay- dress listed in the instructions for Form 1040X,you originally reported them on your return, thement was made will be forgiven unless: under Where To File.changes you are making, and the corrected
amounts. Then figure the tax on the corrected Generally, the IRS will delay action on the1. You, or a person related to you, caused
amount of taxable income and the amount you protective claim until the contingency is re-the erroneous refund in any way, or
owe or your refund. solved.2. The refund is more than $50,000. If you owe tax, pay the full amount with Form Limit on amount of refund. If you file yourFor example, if you claimed a refund of $100 1040X. The tax owed will not be subtracted from claim within 3 years after the date you filed yourany amount you had credited to your estimatedon your return, but the IRS made an error and return, the credit or refund cannot be more thantax.sent you $1,000, you would not be charged the part of the tax paid within the 3-year periodinterest for the time you held the $900 differ- If you cannot pay the full amount due with (plus any extension of time for filing your return)ence. You must, however, repay the $900 when your return, you can ask to make monthly install- immediately before you filed the claim. This timethe IRS asks. ment payments. See Installment Agreement , period is suspended while you are financiallyearlier. disabled, discussed later.
If you overpaid tax, you can have all or part ofChange of Address Tax paid. Payments, including estimatedthe overpayment refunded to you, or you can tax payments, made before the due date (with-apply all or part of it to your estimated tax. If youIf you have moved, file your return using your out regard to extensions) of the original returnchoose to get a refund, it will be sent separatelynew address. are considered paid on the due date. For exam-from any refund shown on your original return.If you move after you filed your return, you ple, income tax withheld during the year is con-should give the IRS clear and concise written Filing Form 1040X. After you finish your sidered paid on the due date of the return, Aprilnotification of your change of address. Send the Form 1040X, check it to be sure that it is com- 15 for most taxpayers.notification to the Internal Revenue Service plete. Do not forget to show the year of your
Center serving your old address. You can use original return and explain all changes you Example 1. You made estimated tax pay-
Form 8822, Change of Address. If you are ex- made. Be sure to attach any forms or schedules ments of $500 and got an automatic extension of
pecting a refund, also notify the post office serv- needed to explain your changes. Mail your Form time to October 15, 2007, to file your 2006 in-
ing your old address. This will help in forwarding 1040X to the Internal Revenue Service Center come tax return. When you filed your return on
your check to your new address (unless you serving the area where you now live (as shown that date, you paid an additional $200 tax. On
chose direct deposit of your refund). If you are in the instructions to the form). However, if you October 15, 2010, you filed an amended return
affected by a federally declared disaster, you are filing Form 1040X in response to a notice and claimed a refund of $700. Because you filed
may be able to change your address with the you received from the IRS, mail it to the address your claim within 3 years after you filed your
IRS orally. shown on the notice. Do not use the addresses original return, you can get a refund of up to
listed at the end of this publication.Be sure to include your SSN (and the name $700, the tax paid within the 3 years plus the
and SSN of your spouse, if you filed a joint File a separate form for each tax year in- 6-month extension period immediately before
return) in any correspondence with the IRS. volved. you filed the claim.
Chapter 1 Filing Information Page 19

Page 22 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example 2. The situation is the same as in matters during the period of disability (or Reduced refund. Your refund may be re-
Example 1, except you filed your return on Octo- the exact dates that a person was author- duced by an additional tax liability that has been
ber 30, 2007, 2 weeks after the extension period ized to act for you). assessed against you.
ended. You paid an additional $200 on that date. Also, your refund may be reduced by
On October 29, 2010, you filed an amended amounts you owe for past-due child support,Exceptions for special types of refunds. Ifreturn and claimed a refund of $700. Although debts to another federal agency, or for stateyou file a claim for one of the items listed below,you filed your claim within 3 years from the date income tax. If your spouse owes these debts,the dates and limits discussed earlier may notyou filed your original return, the refund was see Offset against debts , under Refunds, ear-apply. These items, and where to get more infor-limited to $200, the tax paid within the 3 years lier, for the correct refund procedures to follow.mation, are as follows.plus the 6-month extension period immediately
Effect on state tax liability. If your return is• Bad debt. (See Nonbusiness Bad Debts inbefore you filed the claim. The estimated tax of
changed for any reason, it may affect your statechapter 14.) $500 paid before that period cannot be refunded
income tax liability. This includes changes madeor credited. • Worthless security. (See Worthless securi- as a result of an examination of your return byties in chapter 14.) the IRS. Contact your state tax agency for moreIf you file a claim more than 3 years after
information.• Foreign tax paid or accrued. (See Publica-you file your return, the credit or refund cannot
tion 514, Foreign Tax Credit for Individu-be more than the tax you paid within the 2 years
als.) immediately before you file the claim. Penalties
• Net operating loss carryback. (See Publi-Example. You filed your 2006 tax return on The law provides penalties for failure to file re-cation 536, Net Operating Losses (NOLs)April 17, 2007. You paid taxes of $500. On turns or pay taxes as required.for Individuals, Estates, and Trusts.) November 5, 2008, after an examination of your
• Carryback of certain business tax credits.2006 return, you had to pay an additional tax of
(See Form 3800, General Business$200. On May 12, 2010, you file a claim for a Civil Penalties
Credit.) refund of $300. However, because you filed your
If you do not file your return and pay your tax byclaim more than 3 years after you filed your • Claim based on an agreement with the the due date, you may have to pay a penalty.return, your refund will be limited to the $200 you IRS extending the period for assessment You may also have to pay a penalty if youpaid during the 2 years immediately before you of tax. substantially understate your tax, understate afiled your claim.
reportable transaction, file an erroneous claimFinancially disabled. The time periods for Processing claims for refund. Claims are for refund or credit, file a frivolous tax submis-claiming a refund are suspended for the period usually processed 8-12 weeks after they are sion, or fail to supply your SSN or individualin which you are financially disabled. For a joint filed. Your claim may be accepted as filed, disal- taxpayer identification number. If you provideincome tax return, only one spouse has to be lowed, or subject to examination. If a claim is fraudulent information on your return, you mayfinancially disabled for the time period to be examined, the procedures are the same as in have to pay a civil fraud penalty.suspended. You are financially disabled if you the examination of a tax return.
are unable to manage your financial affairs be- Filing late. If you do not file your return by theIf your claim is disallowed, you will receive ancause of a medically determinable physical or due date (including extensions), you may haveexplanation of why it was disallowed.mental impairment which can be expected to to pay a failure-to-file penalty. The penalty is
result in death or which has lasted or can be usually 5% for each month or part of a monthTaking your claim to court. You can sue for a
expected to last for a continuous period of not that a return is late, but not more than 25%. Therefund in court, but you must first file a timely
less than 12 months. However, you are not penalty is based on the tax not paid by the dueclaim with the IRS. If the IRS disallows your
treated as financially disabled during any period date (without regard to extensions).claim or does not act on your claim within 6
your spouse or any other person is authorized to months after you file it, you can then take your Fraud. If your failure to file is due to fraud,act on your behalf in financial matters. claim to court. For information on the burden of the penalty is 15% for each month or part of aTo claim that you are financially disabled, proof in a court proceeding, see Publication 556. month that your return is late, up to a maximumyou must send in the following written state- The IRS provides a direct method to move of 75%.ments with your claim for refund. your claim to court if:
Return over 60 days late. If you file your1. A statement from your qualified physician • You are filing a claim for a credit or refund return more than 60 days after the due date orthat includes: based solely on contested income tax or extended due date, the minimum penalty is the
on estate tax or gift tax issues considered smaller of $135 or 100% of the unpaid tax.a. The name and a description of your in your previously examined returns, andphysical or mental impairment, Exception. You will not have to pay the
• You want to take your case to court in- penalty if you show that you failed to file on timeb. The physician's medical opinion that the stead of appealing it within the IRS. because of reasonable cause and not becauseimpairment prevented you from manag- of willful neglect.ing your financial affairs, When you file your claim with the IRS, you get
the direct method by requesting in writing that Paying tax late. You will have to pay a fail-c. The physician's medical opinion that the
your claim be immediately rejected. A notice of ure-to-pay penalty of 1/2 of 1% (.50%) of yourimpairment was or can be expected to
claim disallowance will be sent to you. unpaid taxes for each month, or part of a month,result in death, or that its duration has
after the due date that the tax is not paid. Thislasted, or can be expected to last, at You have 2 years from the date of mailing of
penalty does not apply during the automaticleast 12 months, the notice of claim disallowance to file a refund
6-month extension of time to file period if yousuit in the United States District Court havingd. The specific time period (to the best of paid at least 90% of your actual tax liability on orjurisdiction or in the United States Court of Fed-the physician's knowledge), and before the due date of your return and pay theeral Claims.
balance when you file the return.e. The following certification signed by the
Interest on refund. If you receive a refund The monthly rate of the failure-to-pay penaltyphysician: ªI hereby certify that, to the
because of your amended return, interest will be is half the usual rate (.25% instead of .50%) if anbest of my knowledge and belief, the
paid on it from the due date of your original installment agreement is in effect for that month.above representations are true, correct,
return or the date you filed your original return, You must have filed your return by the due dateand complete.º
whichever is later, to the date you filed the (including extensions) to qualify for this reduced
2. A statement made by the person signing amended return. However, if the refund is not penalty.
the claim for credit or refund that no per- made within 45 days after you file the amended If a notice of intent to levy is issued, the rate
son, including your spouse, was author- return, interest will be paid up to the date the will increase to 1% at the start of the first month
ized to act on your behalf in financial refund is paid. beginning at least 10 days after the day that the
Page 20 Chapter 1 Filing Information

Page 23 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
notice is issued. If a notice and demand for an item depends on the facts and circum- required on a return, statement, or other docu-
stances. Some of the items that may be consid- ment.immediate payment is issued, the rate will in-
ered are court opinions, Treasury regulations,crease to 1% at the start of the first month For example, if you have a bank account that
revenue rulings, revenue procedures, and no-beginning after the day that the notice and de- earns interest, you must give your SSN to the
tices and announcements issued by the IRS andmand is issued. bank. The number must be shown on the Form
published in the Internal Revenue Bulletin that 1099-INT or other statement the bank sendsThis penalty cannot be more than 25% of
involve the same or similar circumstances as you. If you do not give the bank your SSN, youyour unpaid tax. You will not have to pay the
yours. will be subject to the $50 penalty. (You also maypenalty if you can show that you had a good
be subject to ªbackupº withholding of incomereason for not paying your tax on time. Disclosure statement. To adequately dis- tax. See chapter 4.)close the relevant facts about your tax treatment
You will not have to pay the penalty if you areCombined penalties. If both the failure-to-file of an item, use Form 8275, Disclosure State-
able to show that the failure was due to reasona-penalty and the failure-to-pay penalty (dis- ment. You must also have a reasonable basis
ble cause and not willful neglect.cussed earlier) apply in any month, the 5% (or for treating the item the way you did.
15%) failure-to-file penalty is reduced by the In cases of substantial understatement only,
items that meet the requirements of Revenuefailure-to-pay penalty. However, if you file your
Criminal PenaltiesProcedure 2008-14 (or later update) are consid-return more than 60 days after the due date or
ered adequately disclosed on your return with-extended due date, the minimum penalty is the You may be subject to criminal prosecutionout filing Form 8275. smaller of $135 or 100% of the unpaid tax. (brought to trial) for actions such as:Use Form 8275-R, Regulation Disclosure
Statement, to disclose items or positions con-Accuracy-related penalty. You may have to 1. Tax evasion,
trary to regulations.pay an accuracy-related penalty if you underpay
2. Willful failure to file a return, supply infor-your tax because: Reasonable cause. You will not have to mation, or pay any tax due,pay a penalty if you show a good reason (rea-1. You show negligence or disregard of the sonable cause) for the way you treated an item. 3. Fraud and false statements, orrules or regulations, or You must also show that you acted in good faith. 4. Preparing and filing a fraudulent return.2. You substantially understate your income Filing erroneous claim for refund or credit.tax. You may have to pay a penalty if you file an
The penalty is equal to 20% of the underpay- erroneous claim for refund or credit. The penalty
ment. The penalty will not be figured on any part is equal to 20% of the disallowed amount of the
of an underpayment on which the fraud penalty claim, unless you can show a reasonable basis
(discussed later) is charged. for the way you treated an item. The penalty will
not be figured on any part of the disallowedNegligence or disregard. The term ªnegli- 2.amount of the claim that relates to the earnedgenceº includes a failure to make a reasonable income credit or on which the accuracy-relatedattempt to comply with the tax law or to exercise or fraud penalties are charged.ordinary and reasonable care in preparing a
return. Negligence also includes failure to keep Frivolous tax submission. You may have to Filing Status
adequate books and records. You will not have pay a penalty of $5,000 if you file a frivolous tax
to pay a negligence penalty if you have a rea- return or other frivolous submissions. A frivolous
sonable basis for a position you took. tax return is one that does not include enough
Introductioninformation to figure the correct tax or that con-The term ªdisregardº includes any careless,
tains information clearly showing that the taxreckless, or intentional disregard. This chapter helps you determine which filingyou reported is substantially incorrect. For more status to use. There are five filing statuses.Adequate disclosure. You can avoid the information on frivolous returns, frivolous sub-penalty for disregard of rules or regulations if • Single.missions, and a list of positions that are identi-you adequately disclose on your return a posi- fied as frivolous, see Notice 2008-14, 2008-4 • Married Filing Jointly.tion that has at least a reasonable basis. See I.R.B. 310, available at www.irs.gov/irb/Disclosure statement, later. • Married Filing Separately.2008-04_IRB/ar01.html.
This exception will not apply to an item that is You will have to pay the penalty if you filed • Head of Household.attributable to a tax shelter. In addition, it will not this kind of return or submission based on a
apply if you fail to keep adequate books and • Qualifying Widow(er) With Dependentfrivolous position or a desire to delay or interfere
records, or substantiate items properly. Child.with the administration of federal tax laws. This
includes altering or striking out the preprintedSubstantial understatement of income tax. language above the space provided for yourYou understate your tax if the tax shown on your If more than one filing status applies tosignature.return is less than the correct tax. The under- you, choose the one that will give youThis penalty is added to any other penalty the lowest tax.statement is substantial if it is more than the
TIP provided by law.larger of 10% of the correct tax or $5,000. How- You must determine your filing status beforeever, the amount of the understatement may be Fraud. If there is any underpayment of tax on you can determine your filing requirementsreduced to the extent the understatement is due your return due to fraud, a penalty of 75% of the (chapter 1 ), standard deduction ( chapter 20 ),to: underpayment due to fraud will be added to your and correct tax (chapter 30). You also use your
tax. filing status in determining whether you are eligi-1. Substantial authority, or
ble to claim certain deductions and credits.Joint return. The fraud penalty on a joint2. Adequate disclosure and a reasonable ba- return does not apply to a spouse unless somesis. part of the underpayment is due to the fraud of Useful Items
that spouse.If an item on your return is attributable to a tax You may want to see:
shelter, there is no reduction for an adequate Failure to supply social security number. Ifdisclosure. However, there is a reduction for a Publicationyou do not include your SSN or the SSN ofposition with substantial authority, but only if you another person where required on a return, ❏ 501 Exemptions, Standard Deduction,reasonably believed that your tax treatment was statement, or other document, you will be sub- and Filing Informationmore likely than not the proper treatment. ject to a penalty of $50 for each failure. You will ❏ 519 U.S. Tax Guide for AliensSubstantial authority. Whether there is or also be subject to a penalty of $50 if you do not
was substantial authority for the tax treatment of give your SSN to another person when it is ❏ 555 Community Property
Chapter 2 Filing Status Page 21

Page 24 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
married for the whole year for filing status pur- separately). Choose the method that gives the
poses. two of you the lower combined tax.    Marital Status If you did not remarry before the end of the
How to file. If you file as married filing jointly,tax year, you can file a joint return for yourselfIn general, your filing status depends on you can use Form 1040 or Form 1040A. If youand your deceased spouse. For the next 2whether you are considered unmarried or mar- have no dependents, are under 65 and not blind,years, you may be entitled to the special benefitsried. For federal tax purposes, a marriage and meet other requirements, you can file Formdescribed later under Qualifying Widow(er) Withmeans only a legal union between a man and a 1040EZ. If you file Form 1040 or Form 1040A,Dependent Child.woman as husband and wife. show this filing status by checking the box onIf you remarried before the end of the tax
line 2. Use the Married filing jointly column of theyear, you can file a joint return with your newUnmarried persons. You are considered un- Tax Table or Section B of the Tax Computationspouse. Your deceased spouse's filing status ismarried for the whole year if, on the last day of Worksheet to figure your tax.married filing separately for that year.your tax year, you are unmarried or legally sepa-
rated from your spouse under a divorce or sepa- Married persons living apart. If you live Spouse died during the year. If your spouse
rate maintenance decree. State law governs apart from your spouse and meet certain tests, died during the year, you are considered mar-
whether you are married or legally separated you may be considered unmarried. If this applies ried for the whole year and can choose married
under a divorce or separate maintenance de- to you, you can file as head of household even filing jointly as your filing status. See Spouse
cree. though you are not divorced or legally sepa- died during the year , earlier, for more informa-
rated. If you qualify to file as head of household tion.Divorced persons. If you are divorced instead of as married filing separately, yourunder a final decree by the last day of the year, Divorced persons. If you are divorced understandard deduction will be higher. Also, your taxyou are considered unmarried for the whole a final decree by the last day of the year, you aremay be lower, and you may be able to claim theyear. considered unmarried for the whole year andearned income credit. See Head of Household,
Divorce and remarriage. If you obtain a you cannot choose married filing jointly as yourlater.
divorce in one year for the sole purpose of filing filing status.
tax returns as unmarried individuals, and at the
time of divorce you intended to and did remarry Filing a Joint Returneach other in the next tax year, you and your Singlespouse must file as married individuals. Both you and your spouse must include all of
your income, exemptions, and deductions onAnnulled marriages. If you obtain a court Your filing status is single if, on the last day of
your joint return.decree of annulment, which holds that no valid the year, you are unmarried or legally separated
marriage ever existed, you are considered un- from your spouse under a divorce or separate Accounting period. Both of you must use themarried even if you filed joint returns for earlier maintenance decree, and you do not qualify for same accounting period, but you can use differ-years. You must file Form 1040X, Amended another filing status. To determine your marital ent accounting methods. See Accounting Peri-U.S. Individual Income Tax Return, claiming sin- status on the last day of the year, see Marital ods and Accounting Methods in chapter 1.gle or head of household status for each tax year Status, earlier.
affected by the annulment that is not closed by Joint responsibility. Both of you may be heldWidow(er). Your filing status may be single ifthe statute of limitations for filing a tax return. responsible, jointly and individually, for the taxyou were widowed before January 1, 2009, andThe statute of limitations generally does not end and any interest or penalty due on your jointdid not remarry before the end of 2009. How-until 3 years after your original return was filed. return. One spouse may be held responsible forever, you might be able to use another filing all the tax due even if all the income was earnedHead of household or qualifying widow(er) status that will give you a lower tax. See Head of by the other spouse.with dependent child. If you are considered Household and Qualifying Widow(er) With De-
unmarried, you may be able to file as a head of pendent Child, later, to see if you qualify.       Divorced taxpayer. You may be held jointly
household or as a qualifying widow(er) with a and individually responsible for any tax, interest,How to file. You can file Form 1040EZ (if youdependent child. See Head of Household  and and penalties due on a joint return filed beforehave no dependents, are under 65 and not blind,Qualifying Widow(er) With Dependent Child  to your divorce. This responsibility may apply evenand meet other requirements), Form 1040A, orsee if you qualify. if your divorce decree states that your formerForm 1040. If you file Form 1040A or Form spouse will be responsible for any amounts due1040, show your filing status as single by check-Married persons. If you are considered mar- on previously filed joint returns.ing the box on line 1. Use the Single column ofried for the whole year, you and your spouse can
Relief from joint responsibility. In somethe Tax Table or Section A of the Tax Computa-file a joint return, or you can file separate re-
cases, one spouse may be relieved of joint liabil-tion Worksheet to figure your tax.turns.
ity for tax, interest, and penalties on a joint returnConsidered married. You are considered for items of the other spouse that were incor-married for the whole year if on the last day of rectly reported on the joint return. You can askyour tax year you and your spouse meet any one for relief no matter how small the liability.Married Filing Jointlyof the following tests. There are three types of relief available.
1. You are married and living together as You can choose married filing jointly as your 1. Innocent spouse relief.husband and wife. filing status if you are married and both you and
2. Separation of liability, which applies to jointyour spouse agree to file a joint return. On a joint2. You are living together in a common law filers who are divorced, widowed, legallyreturn, you report your combined income andmarriage that is recognized in the state separated, or have not lived together fordeduct your combined allowable expenses. Youwhere you now live or in the state where the 12 months ending on the date electioncan file a joint return even if one of you had nothe common law marriage began. of this relief is filed.income or deductions.
If you and your spouse decide to file a joint3. You are married and living apart, but not 3. Equitable relief.
return, your tax may be lower than your com-legally separated under a decree of di-
 You must file Form 8857, Request for Inno-bined tax for the other filing statuses. Also, yourvorce or separate maintenance.
cent Spouse Relief, to request any of thesestandard deduction (if you do not itemize deduc-4. You are separated under an interlocutory kinds of relief. Publication 971, Innocent Spousetions) may be higher, and you may qualify for tax(not final) decree of divorce. For purposes Relief, explains these kinds of relief and whobenefits that do not apply to other filing statuses.of filing a joint return, you are not consid- may qualify for them.
If you and your spouse each have in-ered divorced.
come, you may want to figure your tax Signing a joint return. For a return to be
Spouse died during the year. If your both on a joint return and on separate considered a joint return, both husband and wife
TIP
spouse died during the year, you are considered returns (using the filing status of married filing generally must sign the return.
Page 22 Chapter 2 Filing Status

Page 25 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Spouse died before signing. If your status may benefit you if you want to be respon- $2,500 (instead of $5,000 if you filed a joint
sible only for your own tax or if it results in less return). For more information about thesespouse died before signing the return, the exec-
tax than filing a joint return. expenses, the credit, and the exclusion,utor or administrator must sign the return for
see chapter 32.your spouse. If neither you nor anyone else has If you and your spouse do not agree to file a
yet been appointed as executor or administrator, joint return, you may have to use this filing status 4. You cannot take the earned income credit.unless you qualify for head of household status,you can sign the return for your spouse and
5. You cannot take the exclusion or credit fordiscussed next.enter ªFiling as surviving spouseº in the area
adoption expenses in most cases.where you sign the return. You may be able to choose head of house-
hold filing status if you live apart from your 6. You cannot take the education credits (theSpouse away from home. If your spouse is spouse, meet certain tests, and are considered American opportunity credit, Hope credit,away from home, you should prepare the return, unmarried (explained later, under Head of and lifetime learning credit), the deductionsign it, and send it to your spouse to sign so that Household). This can apply to you even if you for student loan interest, or the tuition andit can be filed on time. are not divorced or legally separated. If you fees deduction.
qualify to file as head of household, instead of asInjury or disease prevents signing. If your
7. You cannot exclude any interest incomemarried filing separately, your tax may be lower,spouse cannot sign because of disease or injury
from qualified U.S. savings bonds that youyou may be able to claim the earned incomeand tells you to sign, you can sign your spouse's
used for higher education expenses.credit and certain other credits, and your stan-name in the proper space on the return followed
dard deduction will be higher. The head ofby the words ªBy (your name), Husband (or 8. If you lived with your spouse at any time
household filing status allows you to choose theWife).º Be sure to also sign in the space pro- during the tax year:
standard deduction even if your spouse choosesvided for your signature. Attach a dated state-
to itemize deductions. See Head of Household, a. You cannot claim the credit for the eld-ment, signed by you, to the return. The
later, for more information. erly or the disabled,statement should include the form number of the
return you are filing, the tax year, the reason Unless you are required to file sepa- b. You will have to include in income more
your spouse cannot sign, and that your spouse rately, you should figure your tax both (up to 85%) of any social security or
has agreed to your signing for him or her. ways (on a joint return and on separate equivalent railroad retirement benefits
TIP
returns). This way you can make sure you are you received, andSigning as guardian of spouse. If you are
using the filing status that results in the lowestthe guardian of your spouse who is mentally c. You cannot roll over amounts from ancombined tax. However, you will generally payincompetent, you can sign the return for your eligible retirement plan (other than amore combined tax on separate returns thanspouse as guardian. Roth IRA or designated Roth account)you would on a joint return for the reasons listed into a Roth IRA.Spouse in combat zone. If your spouse is under Special Rules, later.
unable to sign the return because he or she is
9. The following deductions and credits areserving in a combat zone (such as the Persian How to file. If you file a separate return, you reduced at income levels that are halfGulf Area, Yugoslavia, or Afghanistan), and you generally report only your own income, exemp- those for a joint return:do not have a power of attorney or other state- tions, credits, and deductions on your individual
ment, you can sign for your spouse. Attach a return. You can claim an exemption for your a. The child tax credit,
signed statement to your return that explains spouse if your spouse had no gross income and b. The retirement savings contributionsthat your spouse is serving in a combat zone. was not the dependent of another person. How- credit,For more information on special tax rules for ever, if your spouse had any gross income or
persons who are serving in a combat zone, or was the dependent of someone else, you cannot c. Itemized deductions, and
who are in missing status as a result of serving claim an exemption for him or her on your sepa- d. The deduction for personal exemptions.in a combat zone, see Publication 3, Armed rate return.
Forces' Tax Guide.  If you file as married filing separately, you 10. Your capital loss deduction limit is $1,500can use Form 1040A or Form 1040. Select thisOther reasons spouse cannot sign.  If (instead of $3,000 if you filed a joint re-filing status by checking the box on line 3 ofyour spouse cannot sign the joint return for any turn).either form. You also must enter your spouse'sother reason, you can sign for your spouse only
11. If your spouse itemizes deductions, youfull name in the space provided and must enterif you are given a valid power of attorney (a legal
cannot claim the standard deduction. If youyour spouse's SSN or ITIN in the space provideddocument giving you permission to act for your can claim the standard deduction, your ba-unless your spouse does not have and is notspouse). Attach the power of attorney (or a copy sic standard deduction is half the amountrequired to have an SSN or ITIN. Use the Mar-of it) to your tax return. You can use Form 2848, allowed on a joint return.ried filing separately column of the Tax Table orPower of Attorney and Declaration of Represen- Section C of the Tax Computation Worksheet totative. 12. Your first-time homebuyer credit is limitedfigure your tax. to $4,000 (instead of $8,000 if you filed a
Nonresident alien or dual-status alien. A joint return). If the special rule for long-time
Special Rules residents of the same main home applies,joint return generally cannot be filed if either
the credit is limited to $3,250 (instead ofspouse is a nonresident alien at any time during
If you choose married filing separately as your $6,500 if you filed a joint return).the tax year. However, if one spouse was a
filing status, the following special rules apply.nonresident alien or dual-status alien who was
Because of these special rules, you will usuallymarried to a U.S. citizen or resident alien at the Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs).
pay more tax on a separate return than if youend of the year, the spouses can choose to file a You may not be able to deduct all or part of your
used another filing status that you qualify for.joint return. If you do file a joint return, you and contributions to a traditional IRA if you or your
your spouse are both treated as U.S. residents spouse were covered by an employee retire-
ment plan at work during the year. Your deduc-for the entire tax year. For information on this 1. Your tax rate generally will be higher than tion is reduced or eliminated if your income ischoice, see chapter 1 of Publication 519. it would be on a joint return. more than a certain amount. This amount is
much lower for married individuals who file sep-2. Your exemption amount for figuring the al-
arately and lived together at any time during theternative minimum tax will be half that al-
year. For more information, see How Much Canlowed to a joint return filer.Married Filing You Deduct in chapter 17.3. You cannot take the credit for child and
Separately dependent care expenses in most cases, Rental activity losses. If you actively partici-
and the amount that you can exclude from pated in a passive rental real estate activity that
You can choose married filing separately as income under an employer's dependent produced a loss, you generally can deduct the
your filing status if you are married. This filing care assistance program is limited to loss from your nonpassive income, up to
Chapter 2 Filing Status Page 23

Page 26 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
$25,000. This is called a special allowance. Kidnapped child. A child may qualify you to alien, you are still considered married for pur-
However, married persons filing separate re- file as head of household even if the child has poses of the earned income credit (unless you
turns who lived together at any time during the been kidnapped. For more information, see meet the five tests listed earlier under Consid-
year cannot claim this special allowance. Mar- Publication 501. ered Unmarried ). You are not entitled to the
ried persons filing separate returns who lived credit unless you file a joint return with yourHow to file. If you file as head of household,apart at all times during the year are each al- spouse and meet other qualifications. See chap-you can use either Form 1040A or Form 1040.lowed a $12,500 maximum special allowance ter 36 for more information.Indicate your choice of this filing status byfor losses from passive real estate activities. Choice to treat spouse as resident. Youchecking the box on line 4 of either form. Use theSee Limits on Rental Losses in chapter 9. are considered married if you choose to treatHead of household column of the Tax Table or
your spouse as a resident alien.Community property states. If you live in Ari- Section D of the Tax Computation Worksheet to
zona, California, Idaho, Louisiana, Nevada, figure your tax.
New Mexico, Texas, Washington, or Wisconsin Keeping Up a Homeand file separately, your income may be consid- Considered Unmarriedered separate income or community income for To qualify for head of household status, youincome tax purposes. See Publication 555. must pay more than half of the cost of keepingTo qualify for head of household status, you
up a home for the year. You can determinemust be either unmarried or considered unmar-
whether you paid more than half of the cost ofried on the last day of the year. You are consid-Joint Return After keeping up a home by using the worksheetered unmarried on the last day of the tax year if
Separate Returns shown on this page.you meet all the following tests.
Cost of Keeping Up a HomeYou can change your filing status by filing an 1. You file a separate return (defined earlier
amended return using Form 1040X. under Joint Return After Separate Re-
If you or your spouse (or both of you) file a turns). Keep for Your Records
separate return, you generally can change to a
2. You paid more than half the cost of keep-joint return any time within 3 years from the due
ing up your home for the tax year.date of the separate return or returns. This does Amountnot include any extensions. A separate return 3. Your spouse did not live in your home dur- You Totalincludes a return filed by you or your spouse ing the last 6 months of the tax year. Your Paid Costclaiming married filing separately, single, or spouse is considered to live in your home Property taxes $ $head of household filing status. even if he or she is temporarily absent due Mortgage interest expenseto special circumstances. See Temporary
Rentabsences, under Qualifying Person, later.
Utility chargesSeparate Returns After 4. Your home was the main home of your Repairs/maintenanceJoint Return child, stepchild, or foster child for more Property insurance
than half the year. (See Home of qualifyingOnce you file a joint return, you cannot choose Food consumed
person, under Qualifying Person, later, for on the premisesto file separate returns for that year after the due
rules applying to a child's birth, death, ordate of the return. Other household expenses
temporary absence during the year.) Totals $ $Exception. A personal representative for a
5. You must be able to claim an exemptiondecedent can change from a joint return elected Minus total amount you ( )for the child. However, you meet this test ifby the surviving spouse to a separate return for paidyou cannot claim the exemption only be-the decedent. The personal representative has
cause the noncustodial parent can claim1 year from the due date of the return (including Amount others paid $the child using the rules described in Chil-extensions) to make the change. See Publica-
dren of divorced or separated parents ortion 559, Survivors, Executors, and Administra-
parents who live apart under Qualifyingtors, for more information on filing a return for a If the total amount you paid is more than the amountChild in chapter 3, or in Support Test fordecedent. others paid, you meet the requirement of paying moreChildren of Divorced or Separated Parents than half the cost of keeping up the home.or Parents Who Live Apart under Qualify-
ing Relative in chapter 3. The general rules
for claiming an exemption for a dependent Costs you include. Include in the cost of up-Head of Household are explained under Exemptions for De- keep expenses such as rent, mortgage interest,pendents in chapter 3. real estate taxes, insurance on the home, re-You may be able to file as head of household if
pairs, utilities, and food eaten in the home.you meet all the following requirements. If you were considered married for part If you used payments you received underof the year and lived in a community1. You are unmarried or ªconsidered unmar- Temporary Assistance for Needy Familiesproperty state (listed earlier under Mar-
CAUTION
!riedº on the last day of the year. (TANF) or other public assistance programs toried Filing Separately), special rules may apply pay part of the cost of keeping up your home,2. You paid more than half the cost of keep- in determining your income and expenses. See you cannot count them as money you paid.ing up a home for the year. Publication 555 for more information. However, you must include them in the total cost
3. A ªqualifying personº lived with you in the of keeping up your home to figure if you paidNonresident alien spouse. You are consid-home for more than half the year (except over half the cost.ered unmarried for head of household purposesfor temporary absences, such as school). if your spouse was a nonresident alien at any Costs you do not include. Do not include inHowever, if the ªqualifying personº is your time during the year and you do not choose to the cost of upkeep expenses such as clothing,dependent parent, he or she does not treat your nonresident spouse as a resident education, medical treatment, vacations, life in-have to live with you. See Special rule for alien. However, your spouse is not a qualifying surance, or transportation. Also, do not includeparent, later, under Qualifying Person. person for head of household purposes. You the rental value of a home you own or the valuemust have another qualifying person and meetIf you qualify to file as head of house- of your services or those of a member of yourthe other tests to be eligible to file as a head ofhold, your tax rate usually will be lower household.household. than the rates for single or married fil- Also do not include any government or chari-
TIP
ing separately. You will also receive a higher Earned income credit. Even if you are con- table assistance you received because of your
standard deduction than if you file as single or sidered unmarried for head of household pur- temporary relocation due to the storms, torna-
married filing separately. poses because you are married to a nonresident does, or flooding in a Midwestern disaster area.
Page 24 Chapter 2 Filing Status

Page 27 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
your father or mother if you pay more than half the cost of keeping up a home that was theQualifying Person individual's main home for more than half thethe cost of keeping your parent in a rest home or
year or, if less, the period during which thehome for the elderly.See Table 2-1 to see who is a qualifying person.
individual lived.Any person not described in Table 2-1 is not Temporary absences. You and your quali-
a qualifying person. fying person are considered to live together Example. You are unmarried. Your mother,even if one or both of you are temporarily absentHome of qualifying person. Generally, the for whom you can claim an exemption, lived infrom your home due to special circumstancesqualifying person must live with you for more an apartment by herself. She died on Septem-such as illness, education, business, vacation,than half of the year. ber 2. The cost of the upkeep of her apartmentor military service. It must be reasonable to for the year until her death was $6,000. You paidSpecial rule for parent. If your qualifying assume that the absent person will return to the $4,000 and your brother paid $2,000. Yourperson is your father or mother, you may be home after the temporary absence. You must brother made no other payments toward youreligible to file as head of household even if your continue to keep up the home during the ab- mother's support. Your mother had no income.father or mother does not live with you. How- sence. Because you paid more than half the cost ofever, you must be able to claim an exemption for
keeping up your mother's apartment from Janu-Death or birth. You may be eligible to file asyour father or mother. Also, you must pay more
ary 1 until her death, and you can claim anhead of household if the individual who qualifiesthan half the cost of keeping up a home that was
exemption for her, you can file as a head ofyou for this filing status is born or dies during thethe main home for the entire year for your father
household.or mother. You are keeping up a main home for year. You must have provided more than half of
Table 2-1. Who Is a Qualifying Person Qualifying You To File as Head of Household?1
Caution. See the text of this chapter for the other requirements you must meet to claim head of household filing
status. 
IF the person is your . . . AND . . . THEN that person is . . .
he or she is single a qualifying person, whether orqualifying child (such as a son,
not you can claim an exemptiondaughter, or grandchild who lived with
for the person.you more than half the year and meets
certain other tests)2
he or she is married and you can claim an a qualifying person.
exemption for him or her
he or she is married and you cannot claim not a qualifying person.3
an exemption for him or her
you can claim an exemption for him or her5 a qualifying person.6qualifying relative4 who is your father or
mother you cannot claim an exemption for him or not a qualifying person.
her
he or she lived with you more than half the a qualifying person.qualifying relative4 other than your father
year, and he or she is related to you in oneor mother (such as a grandparent,
of the ways listed under Relatives who dobrother, or sister who meets certain
not have to live with you in chapter 3 andtests)
you can claim an exemption for him or her5
he or she did not live with you more than half not a qualifying person.
the year
he or she is not related to you in one of the not a qualifying person.
ways listed under Relatives who do not have
to live with you in chapter 3 and is your
qualifying relative only because he or she
lived with you all year as a member of your
household
you cannot claim an exemption for him or not a qualifying person.
her
1A person cannot qualify more than one taxpayer to use the head of household filing status for the year.
2The term ªqualifying childº is defined in chapter 3. Note. If you are a noncustodial parent, the term ªqualifying childº for head of household filing
status does not include a child who is your qualifying child for exemption purposes only because of the rules described under Children of divorced
or separated parents or parents who live apart under Qualifying Child in chapter 3. If you are the custodial parent and those rules apply, the child
generally is your qualifying child for head of household filing status even though the child is not a qualifying child for whom you can claim an
exemption.
3This person is a qualifying person if the only reason you cannot claim the exemption is that you can be claimed as a dependent on someone
else's return.
4The term ªqualifying relativeº is defined in chapter 3.
5If you can claim an exemption for a person only because of a multiple support agreement, that person is not a qualifying person. See Multiple
Support Agreement in chapter 3.
6See Special rule for parent for an additional requirement.
Chapter 2 Filing Status Page 25

Page 28 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Death or birth. You may be eligible to file as a custodial parent for tax purposes. See Custodial
qualifying widow(er) with dependent child if the parent and noncustodial parent.Qualifying Widow(er) child who qualifies you for this filing status is
Revoking a release of claim to a dependent'sborn or dies during the year. You must haveWith Dependent Child exemption. Beginning in 2009, new rules al-provided more than half of the cost of keeping up
low the custodial parent to revoke a release ofa home that was the child's main home duringIf your spouse died in 2009, you can use married the entire part of the year he or she was alive. claim to exemption that was previously releasedfiling jointly as your filing status for 2009 if you to the noncustodial parent. See Revocation ofotherwise qualify to use that status. The year of
release of claim to an exemption.death is the last year for which you can file jointly
with your deceased spouse. See Married Filing Post-2008 divorce decree or separationJointly, earlier. agreement. Beginning with 2009 tax returns,You may be eligible to use qualifying a noncustodial parent claiming an exemption forwidow(er) with dependent child as your filing 3. a child can no longer attach certain pages from astatus for 2 years following the year your spouse divorce decree or separation agreement insteaddied. For example, if your spouse died in 2008, of Form 8332 if the decree or agreement wentand you have not remarried, you may be able to
into effect after 2008. The noncustodial parentuse this filing status for 2009 and 2010. Personal must attach Form 8332 or a similar statementThis filing status entitles you to use joint
signed by the custodial parent and whose onlyreturn tax rates and the highest standard deduc-
purpose is to release a claim to exemption. SeeExemptions andtion amount (if you do not itemize deductions).
Children of divorced or separated parents orThis status does not entitle you to file a joint
parents who live apart  under Exemptions forreturn. Dependents Dependents.
How to file. If you file as qualifying widow(er)
with dependent child, you can use either Form
1040A or Form 1040. Indicate your filing status What's New
by checking the box on line 5 of either form. Use Introductionthe Married filing jointly column of the Tax Table Exemption amount. The amount you can de- This chapter discusses exemptions. The follow-or Section B of the Tax Computation Worksheet duct for each exemption has increased fromto figure your tax. ing topics will be explained.$3,500 in 2008 to $3,650 in 2009.
• Personal exemptions Ð You generallyEligibility rules. You are eligible to file your Exemption phaseout. You lose part of the can take one for yourself and, if you are2009 return as a qualifying widow(er) with de- benefit of your exemptions if your adjusted gross married, one for your spouse.pendent child if you meet all of the following income (AGI) is above a certain amount. For
tests. 2009, this phaseout begins at $125,100 for mar- • Exemptions for dependents Ð You gener-
ried persons filing separately; $166,800 for sin- ally can take an exemption for each of• You were entitled to file a joint return with gle individuals; $208,500 for heads of your dependents. A dependent is youryour spouse for the year your spouse household; and $250,200 for married persons qualifying child or qualifying relative. If youdied. It does not matter whether you actu- filing jointly or qualifying widow(er)s. However, are entitled to claim an exemption for aally filed a joint return. in 2009, you can lose no more than 1/3 of the dependent, that dependent cannot claim aamount of your exemptions. In other words,• Your spouse died in 2007 or 2008 and you personal exemption on his or her own taxeach exemption cannot be reduced to less thandid not remarry before the end of 2009. return.$2,433.• You have a child or stepchild for whom • Phaseout of exemptions Ð You get lessyou can claim an exemption. This does Exemption for individual displaced by a Mid- of a deduction when your adjusted grossnot include a foster child. western disaster. You may be able to claim a income goes above a certain amount.$500 exemption if you provided housing to a• This child lived in your home all year, ex-
• Social security number (SSN) requirementperson displaced by a Midwestern disaster. Forcept for temporary absences. See Tempo-
more information, see Form 8914. for dependents Ð You must list the socialrary absences, earlier, under Head of
security number of any dependent forHousehold. There are also exceptions, de- Definition of qualifying child revised. Be- whom you claim an exemption.scribed later, for a child who was born or ginning in 2009, the following changes havedied during the year, and for a kidnapped been made to the definition of a qualifying child.child. Deduction. Exemptions reduce your taxable• To be your qualifying child, the child must income. Generally, you can deduct $3,650 for• You paid more than half the cost of keep- be younger than you unless the child is each exemption you claim in 2009. But, you maying up a home for the year. See Keeping permanently and totally disabled.Up a Home, earlier, under Head of House- lose part of the dollar amount of your exemp-
• A child cannot be your qualifying child if hehold. tions if your adjusted gross income is above a
or she files a joint return, unless the return certain amount. See Phaseout of Exemptions ,was filed only as a claim for refund. later.As mentioned earlier, this filing status
• If the parents of a child can claim the childis available for only 2 years following
as a qualifying child but no parent sothe year your spouse died.
CAUTION
! How to claim exemptions.  How you claim anclaims the child, no one else can claim the exemption on your tax return depends on whichchild as a qualifying child unless that per- form you file.Example.  John Reed's wife died in 2007. son's AGI is higher than the highest AGI ofJohn has not remarried. During 2008 and 2009, If you file Form 1040EZ, the exemptionany of the child's parents who can claimhe continued to keep up a home for himself and the child. amount is combined with the standard deductionhis child, who lives with him and for whom he amount and entered on line 5.• Your child is a qualifying child for pur-can claim an exemption. For 2007 he was enti-
 If you file Form 1040A or Form 1040, followposes of the child tax credit only if you cantled to file a joint return for himself and his
the instructions for the form. The total number ofand do claim an exemption for him or her.deceased wife. For 2008 and 2009, he can file
exemptions you can claim is the total in the boxas qualifying widower with a dependent child.
on line 6d. Also complete line 26 (Form 1040A)After 2009 he can file as head of household if he Definition of custodial parent. Beginning in
or line 42 (Form 1040).qualifies. 2009, new rules apply to determine who is the
Page 26 Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents

Page 29 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 3-1. Overview of the Rules for Claiming an Exemption for a Dependent
Caution. This table is only an overview of the rules. For details, see the rest of this chapter.
• You cannot claim any dependents if you, or your spouse if filing jointly, could be claimed as a dependent by another taxpayer.
• You cannot claim a married person who files a joint return as a dependent unless that joint return is only a claim for refund
and there would be no tax liability for either spouse on separate returns. 
• You cannot claim a person as a dependent unless that person is a U.S. citizen, U.S. resident alien, U.S. national, or a
resident of Canada or Mexico.1
• You cannot claim a person as a dependent unless that person is your qualifying child or qualifying relative.
Tests To Be a Qualifying Child Tests To Be a Qualifying Relative
1. The child must be your son, daughter, stepchild, foster 1. The person cannot be your qualifying child or the
child, brother, sister, half brother, half sister, stepbrother, qualifying child of any other taxpayer.
stepsister, or a descendant of any of them.
2. The person either (a) must be related to you in one of the
2. The child must be (a) under age 19 at the end of the year ways listed under Relatives who do not have to live with
and younger than you (or your spouse, if filing jointly), (b) you, or (b) must live with you all year as a member of your
under age 24 at the end of the year, a full-time student, household2 (and your relationship must not violate local
and younger than you (or your spouse, if filing jointly), or law).
(c) any age if permanently and totally disabled. 
3. The person's gross income for the year must be less than
3. The child must have lived with you for more than half of $3,650.3
the year.2
4. You must provide more than half of the person's total
4. The child must not have provided more than half of his or support for the year.4
her own support for the year.
5. The child is not filing a joint return for the year (unless that
return is filed only as a claim for refund).
6. If the child meets the rules to be a qualifying child of more
than one person, you must be the person entitled to claim
the child as a qualifying child.
1There is an exception for certain adopted children.
2There are exceptions for temporary absences, children who were born or died during the year, children of divorced or separated parents or
parents who live apart, and kidnapped children.
3There is an exception if the person is disabled and has income from a sheltered workshop.
4There are exceptions for multiple support agreements, children of divorced or separated parents or parents who live apart, and kidnapped
 children.
Useful Items Your Own Exemption
You may want to see: Exemptions You can take one exemption for yourself unless
you can be claimed as a dependent by anotherPublication There are two types of exemptions you may be taxpayer. If another taxpayer is entitled to claimable to take:❏ 501 Exemptions, Standard Deduction, you as a dependent, you cannot take an exemp-
and Filing Information • Personal exemptions for yourself and your tion for yourself even if the other taxpayer does
spouse, and not actually claim you as a dependent.
Form (and Instructions)
• Exemptions for dependents (dependency
❏ 2120 Multiple Support Declaration exemptions). Your Spouse's Exemption❏ 8332 Release/Revocation of Release of While each is worth the same amount ($3,650
Claim to Exemption for Child by Your spouse is never considered your depen-for 2009), different rules apply to each type.
Custodial Parent dent.
❏ 8914 Exemption Amount for Taxpayers Personal Exemptions Joint return. On a joint return you can claim
Housing Midwestern Displaced one exemption for yourself and one for your
Individuals You are generally allowed one exemption for spouse.
yourself. If you are married, you may be allowed
Separate return. If you file a separate return,one exemption for your spouse. These are
you can claim the exemption for your spousecalled personal exemptions.
only if your spouse had no gross income, is not
filing a return, and was not the dependent of
another taxpayer. This is true even if the other
taxpayer does not actually claim your spouse as
Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents Page 27

Page 30 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
a dependent. This is also true if your spouse is a under age 17 at the end of the year if you Foreign students' place of residence. For-
nonresident alien. claimed an exemption for that child. For more eign students brought to this country under a
information, see chapter 34. qualified international education exchange pro-Death of spouse. If your spouse died during gram and placed in American homes for a tem-the year and you file a joint return for yourself porary period generally are not U.S. residentsand your deceased spouse, you generally can and do not meet this test. You cannot claim anclaim your spouse's exemption under the rules
exemption for them. However, if you provided ajust explained under Joint return . If you file a Dependent Taxpayer Test home for a foreign student, you may be able toseparate return for the year, you may be able to
take a charitable contribution deduction. Seeclaim your spouse's exemption under the rules If you could be claimed as a dependent by an-
Expenses Paid for Student Living With You  injust described in Separate return. other person, you cannot claim anyone else as a
chapter 24.If you remarried during the year, you cannot dependent. Even if you have a qualifying child or
take an exemption for your deceased spouse. qualifying relative, you cannot claim that person
If you are a surviving spouse without gross as a dependent. U.S. national. A U.S. national is an individualincome and you remarry in the year your spouse If you are filing a joint return and your spouse who, although not a U.S. citizen, owes his or herdied, you can be claimed as an exemption on could be claimed as a dependent by someone allegiance to the United States. U.S. nationalsboth the final separate return of your deceased else, you and your spouse cannot claim any include American Samoans and Northern Mari-spouse and the separate return of your new dependents on your joint return. ana Islanders who chose to become U.S. na-spouse for that year. If you file a joint return with
tionals instead of U.S. citizens.your new spouse, you can be claimed as an
exemption only on that return. Joint Return Test
Qualifying ChildDivorced or separated spouse. If you ob- You generally cannot claim a married person as
tained a final decree of divorce or separate a dependent if he or she files a joint return. There are six tests that must be met for a child tomaintenance by the end of the year, you cannot be your qualifying child. The six tests are:take your former spouse's exemption. This rule Example. You supported your 18-year-old
applies even if you provided all of your former 1. Relationship,daughter, and she lived with you all year while
spouse's support. her husband was in the Armed Forces. The 2. Age,couple files a joint return. Even though your
3. Residency,daughter is your qualifying child, you cannot
take an exemption for her. 4. Support,
Exemptions for
Exception. The joint return test does not apply 5. Joint return, and
if a joint return is filed by the dependent and hisDependents 6. Special test for qualifying child of moreor her spouse merely as a claim for refund and than one person.no tax liability would exist for either spouse onYou are allowed one exemption for each person
separate returns. These tests are explained next.you can claim as a dependent. You can claim an
exemption for a dependent even if your depen-
Example. Your 18-year-old son and hisdent files a return.
17-year-old wife had $800 of interest income Relationship TestThe term ªdependentº means:
and no earned income. Neither is required to file
• A qualifying child, or To meet this test, a child must be:a tax return. Taxes were taken out of their inter-
est income due to backup withholding so they• A qualifying relative. • Your son, daughter, stepchild, foster child,filed a joint return only to get a refund. The or a descendant (for example, yourexception to the joint return test applies, so youThe terms ª qualifying child º and ª qualifying grandchild) of any of them, orare not disqualified from claiming their exemp-relativeº are defined later.
tions just because they file a joint return. You • Your brother, sister, half brother, half sis-You can claim an exemption for a qualifying
can claim their exemptions if you meet all the ter, stepbrother, stepsister, or a descen-child or qualifying relative only if these three
other requirements to do so. dant (for example, your niece or nephew)tests are met.
of any of them.
1. Dependent taxpayer test.
Citizen or Resident Test2. Joint return test. Adopted child. An adopted child is always
treated as your own child. The term ªadoptedYou cannot claim a person as a dependent un-3. Citizen or resident test.
childº includes a child who was lawfully placedless that person is a U.S. citizen, U.S. residentThese three tests are explained in detail alien, U.S. national, or a resident of Canada or with you for legal adoption.later. Mexico. However, there is an exception for cer-All the requirements for claiming an exemp- tain adopted children, as explained next. Foster child. A foster child is an individualtion for a dependent are summarized in Table
who is placed with you by an authorized place-3-1. Exception for adopted child. If you are a
ment agency or by judgment, decree, or otherU.S. citizen or U.S. national who has legallyDependent not allowed a personal order of any court of competent jurisdiction.adopted a child who is not a U.S. citizen, U.S.exemption. If you can claim an ex-
resident alien, or U.S. national, this test is met ifemption for your dependent, the de-
CAUTION
!
the child lived with you as a member of yourpendent cannot claim his or her own personal Age Testhousehold all year. This exception also applies ifexemption on his or her own tax return. This is
the child was lawfully placed with you for legal To meet this test, a child must be:true even if you do not claim the dependent's
adoption.exemption on your return or if the exemption will • Under age 19 at the end of the year andbe reduced under the phaseout rule described younger than you (or your spouse, if filingChild's place of residence. Children usuallyunder Phaseout of Exemptions, later. jointly),are citizens or residents of the country of their
parents.Housekeepers, maids, or servants. If these • A full-time student under age 24 at the endIf you were a U.S. citizen when your childpeople work for you, you cannot claim exemp- of the year and younger than you (or yourwas born, the child may be a U.S. citizen even iftions for them. spouse, if filing jointly), orthe other parent was a nonresident alien and the
• Permanently and totally disabled at anyChild tax credit. You may be entitled to a child child was born in a foreign country. If so, this test
time during the year, regardless of age.tax credit for each qualifying child who was is met.
Page 28 Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents

Page 31 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. Your son turned 19 on December • He or she cannot engage in any substan- Children of divorced or separated parents or
10. Unless he was permanently and totally dis- tial gainful activity because of a physical or parents who live apart. In most cases, be-
abled or a full-time student, he does not meet mental condition. cause of the residency test, a child of divorced or
the age test because, at the end of the year, he separated parents is the qualifying child of the• A doctor determines the condition haswas not under age 19. custodial parent. However, the child will belasted or can be expected to last continu- treated as the qualifying child of the noncus-ously for at least a year or can lead toChild must be younger than you or spouse. todial parent if all four of the following state-death.To be your qualifying child, a child who is not ments are true.permanently and totally disabled must be
younger than you. However, if you are married 1. The parents:Residency Testfiling jointly, the child must be younger than you
a. Are divorced or legally separated underor your spouse but does not have to be younger To meet this test, your child must have lived with a decree of divorce or separate mainte-than both of you. you for more than half of the year. There are nance,exceptions for temporary absences, children
Example 1 ± child not younger than you or who were born or died during the year, kid- b. Are separated under a written separa-spouse. Your 23-year-old brother, who is a napped children, and children of divorced or tion agreement, orfull-time student and unmarried, lives with you separated parents. c. Lived apart at all times during the last 6and your spouse. He is not disabled. Both you
Temporary absences. Your child is consid- months of the year, whether or not theyand your spouse are 21 years old, and you file a
ered to have lived with you during periods of are or were married.joint return. Your brother is not your qualifying
time when one of you, or both, are temporarilychild because he is not younger than you or your
absent due to special circumstances such as: 2. The child received over half of his or herspouse.
support for the year from the parents.• Illness,
Example 2 ± child younger than your 3. The child is in the custody of one or both• Education,spouse but not younger than you. The facts parents for more than half of the year.are the same as in Example 1 except that your • Business,
4. Either of the following statements is true.spouse is 25 years old. Because your brother is
• Vacation, oryounger than your spouse and you and your
a. The custodial parent signs a writtenspouse are filing a joint return, your brother is • Military service. declaration, discussed later, that he oryour qualifying child, even though he is not
she will not claim the child as a depen-younger than you.
dent for the year, and the noncustodialDeath or birth of child. A child who was born
Full-time student. A full-time student is a stu- parent attaches this written declarationor died during the year is treated as having lived
dent who is enrolled for the number of hours or to his or her return. (If the decree orwith you all year if your home was the child's
courses the school considers to be full-time at- home the entire time he or she was alive during agreement went into effect after 1984
tendance. the year. The same is true if the child lived with and before 2009, see Post-1984 and
you all year except for any required hospital stay pre-2009 divorce decree or separationStudent defined. To qualify as a student, following birth. agreement, later. If the decree or agree-your child must be, during some part of each of
ment went into effect after 2008, seeany 5 calendar months of the year: Child born alive. You may be able to claim Post-2008 divorce decree or separationan exemption for a child who was born alive agreement, later.)1. A full-time student at a school that has a during the year, even if the child lived only for aregular teaching staff, course of study, and moment. State or local law must treat the child b. A pre-1985 decree of divorce or sepa-a regularly enrolled student body at the as having been born alive. There must be proof rate maintenance or written separationschool, or of a live birth shown by an official document, agreement that applies to 2009 states
such as a birth certificate. The child must be2. A student taking a full-time, on-farm train- that the noncustodial parent can claim
your qualifying child or qualifying relative, and alling course given by a school described in the child as a dependent, the decree or
the other tests to claim an exemption for a de-(1), or by a state, county, or local govern- agreement was not changed after 1984
pendent must be met.ment agency. to say the noncustodial parent cannot
claim the child as a dependent, and theStillborn child. You cannot claim an ex-The 5 calendar months do not have to be con- noncustodial parent provides at leastemption for a stillborn child.secutive. $600 for the child's support during the
Kidnapped child. You can treat your child asSpecial rules may apply for people who year.
meeting the residency test even if the child hashad to relocate because of the storms,
been kidnapped, but both of the following state-tornadoes, or flooding in the Midwest-
TIP Custodial parent and noncustodial parent.ments must be true.ern disaster areas. For details, see Publication The custodial parent is the parent with whom the4492-B. child lived for the greater number of nights dur-1. The child is presumed by law enforcement
ing the year. The other parent is the noncus-authorities to have been kidnapped bySchool defined. A school can be an ele-
todial parent.someone who is not a member of yourmentary school, junior or senior high school,
family or the child's family. If the parents divorced or separated duringcollege, university, or technical, trade, or
the year and the child lived with both parentsmechanical school. However, an on-the-job 2. In the year the kidnapping occurred, thetraining course, correspondence school, or before the separation, the custodial parent is thechild lived with you for more than half ofschool offering courses only through the Internet one with whom the child lived for the greaterthe part of the year before the date of thedoes not count as a school. number of nights during the rest of the year.kidnapping.
A child is treated as living with a parent for aVocational high school students. Stu- This treatment applies for all years until the night if the child sleeps:dents who work on ªco-opº jobs in private indus- child is returned. However, the last year thistry as a part of a school's regular course of • At that parent's home, whether or not thetreatment can apply is the earlier of:classroom and practical training are considered parent is present, or
full-time students. 1. The year there is a determination that the • In the company of the parent, when thechild is dead, or child does not sleep at a parent's homePermanently and totally disabled. Your
(for example, the parent and child are onchild is permanently and totally disabled if both 2. The year the child would have reached
vacation together).of the following apply. age 18.
Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents Page 29

Page 32 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Equal number of nights. If the child lived the year. The special rule for children of divorced Revocation of release of claim to an ex-
with each parent for an equal number of nights or separated parents does not apply. emption. For 2009, new rules allow the custo-
during the year, the custodial parent is the par- dial parent to revoke a release of claim to
ent with the higher adjusted gross income. Example 6 ± child emancipated in August. exemption that the custodial parent previously
Your daughter lives with you from January 1, released to the noncustodial parent on FormDecember 31. The night of December 31 is 2009, until May 31, 2009, and lives with her 8332 or a similar statement. If the custodialtreated as part of the year in which it begins. For other parent, your ex-spouse, from June 1, parent provides, or makes reasonable efforts toexample, December 31, 2009, is treated as part 2009, through the end of the year. She turns 18 provide, the noncustodial parent with written no-of 2009.
and is emancipated under state law on August 1, tice of the revocation in 2009, the revocation can
Emancipated child. If a child is emanci- 2009. Because she is treated as not living with be effective no earlier than 2010. The custodial
pated under state law, the child is treated as not either parent beginning on August 1, she is parent can use Part III of Form 8332 for thisliving with either parent. See Examples 5 and 6. treated as living with you the greater number of purpose and must attach a copy of the revoca-
nights in 2009. You are the custodial parent. tion to his or her return for each tax year he orAbsences. If a child was not with either par-
she claims the child as a dependent as a resultent on a particular night (because, for example, Written declaration.  The custodial parent of the revocation.the child was staying at a friend's house), the may use either Form 8332 or a similar statementchild is treated as living with the parent with (containing the same information required by the Remarried parent. If you remarry, the sup-whom the child normally would have lived for form) to make the written declaration to release port provided by your new spouse is treated asthat night, except for the absence. But if it cannot the exemption to the noncustodial parent. The provided by you.be determined with which parent the child nor- noncustodial parent must attach the form ormally would have lived or if the child would not Parents who never married. This specialstatement to his or her tax return.have lived with either parent that night, the child rule for divorced or separated parents also ap-The exemption can be released for 1 year,is treated as not living with either parent that plies to parents who never married and livedfor a number of specified years (for example,night. apart at all times during the last 6 months of thealternate years), or for all future years, as speci- year.Parent works at night. If, due to a parent's fied in the declaration. If the exemption is re-
nighttime work schedule, a child lives for a leased for more than 1 year, the original release
greater number of days but not nights with the must be attached to the return of the noncus- Support Test (To Be a Qualifyingparent who works at night, that parent is treated todial parent for the first year, and a copy must Child)as the custodial parent. On a school day, the be attached for each later year.child is treated as living at the primary residence To meet this test, the child cannot have providedPost-1984 and pre-2009 divorce decree orregistered with the school.
more than half of his or her own support for theseparation agreement. If the divorce decree
year.or separation agreement went into effect afterExample 1 ± child lived with one parent
This test is different from the support test to1984 and before 2009, the noncustodial parentgreater number of nights. You and your
be a qualifying relative, which is described later.child's other parent are divorced. In 2009, your may be able to attach certain pages from the
However, to see what is or is not support, seechild lived with you 210 nights and with the other decree or agreement instead of Form 8332. The
Support Test (To Be a Qualifying Relative) ,parent 155 nights. You are the custodial parent. decree or agreement must state all three of the
later. If you are not sure whether a child providedfollowing.
Example 2 ± child is away at camp. In more than half of his or her own support, you
1. The noncustodial parent can claim the2009, your daughter lives with each parent for may find Worksheet 3-1 helpful.
child as a dependent without regard to anyalternate weeks. In the summer, she spends 6
condition, such as payment of support.weeks at summer camp. During the time she is Scholarships. A scholarship received by a
at camp, she is treated as living with you for 3 child who is a full-time student is not taken into2. The custodial parent will not claim the childweeks and with her other parent, your account in determining whether the child pro-as a dependent for the year.ex-spouse, for 3 weeks because this is how long vided more than half of his or her own support.3. The years for which the noncustodial par-she would have lived with each parent if she had
ent, rather than the custodial parent, cannot attended summer camp.
claim the child as a dependent. Joint Return Test (To Be aExample 3 ± child lived same number of The noncustodial parent must attach all of Qualifying Child)days with each parent. Your son lived with the following pages of the decree or agreementyou 180 nights during the year and lived the To meet this test, the child cannot file a jointto his or her tax return.same number of nights with his other parent, return for the year.your ex-spouse. Your adjusted gross income is • The cover page (write the other parent's
$40,000. Your ex-spouse's adjusted gross in- social security number on this page). Example. You supported your 18-year-oldcome is $25,000. You are treated as your son's daughter, and she lived with you all year while• The pages that include all of the informa-custodial parent because you have the higher her husband was in the Armed Forces. Thetion identified in items (1) through (3)adjusted gross income. couple files a joint return. Because your daugh-above.
ter filed a joint return, she is not your qualifyingExample 4 ± child is at parent's home but • The signature page with the other parent's child.with other parent. Your son normally lives signature and the date of the agreement.
with you during the week and with his other
Exception. The joint return test does not applyparent, your ex-spouse, every other weekend. Post-2008 divorce decree or separation if your child and his or her spouse file a jointYou become ill and are hospitalized. The other agreement. Beginning with 2009 tax returns, return merely as a claim for refund.parent lives in your home with your son for 10 the noncustodial parent can no longer attach
consecutive days while you are in the hospital. pages from the decree or agreement instead of Example. Your 18-year-old son and hisYour son is treated as living with you during this Form 8332 if the decree or agreement went into 17-year-old wife had $800 of interest income10-day period because he was living in your effect after 2008. The noncustodial parent will and no earned income. Neither is required to filehome. have to attach Form 8332 or a similar statement a tax return. Taxes were taken out of their inter-signed by the custodial parent and whose only est income due to backup withholding so theyExample 5 ± child emancipated in May. purpose is to release a claim to exemption. filed a joint return only to get a refund. TheWhen your son turned age 18 in May 2009, he
The noncustodial parent must attach exception to the joint return test applies, so yourbecame emancipated under the law of the state
the required information even if it was son may be your qualifying child if all the otherwhere he lives. As a result, he is not considered
filed with a return in an earlier year.
CAUTION
!in the custody of his parents for more than half of tests are met.
Page 30 Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents

Page 33 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
child, the child is treated as the qualifying dependent because of the Dependent TaxpayerSpecial Test for Qualifying Child of
child of the person who had the highest Test explained earlier.More Than One Person
AGI for the year, but only if that person's
Example 6 Ðchild lived with both parentsAGI is higher than the highest AGI of anyIf your qualifying child is not a qualify- and grandparent. The facts are the same asof the child's parents who can claim theing child of anyone else, this test does in Example 1 except that you and your daugh-child. If the child's parents file a joint returnnot apply to you and you do not need to
TIP ter's father are married to each other, live withwith each other, this rule can be appliedread about it. This is also true if your qualifying your daughter and your mother, and have AGI ofby dividing the parents' combined AGIchild is not a qualifying child of anyone else $20,000 on a joint return. If you and your hus-equally between the parents. See Exam-except your spouse with whom you file a joint band do not claim your daughter as a qualifyingple 6.return. child, your mother can claim her instead. Even
Subject to these tiebreaker rules, you and the though the AGI on your joint return, $20,000, isIf a child is treated as the qualifying
other person may be able to choose which of more than your mother's AGI of $15,000, for thischild of the noncustodial parent under
you claims the child as a qualifying child. purpose each parent's AGI can be treated asthe rules for children of divorced or
CAUTION
!
$10,000, so your mother's $15,000 AGI isseparated parents or parents who live apart de-
Example 1 Ðchild lived with parent and treated as higher than the highest AGI of any ofscribed earlier, see Applying this special test to
grandparent. You and your 3-year-old daugh- the child's parents who can claim the child.divorced or separated parents or parents who
ter Jane lived with your mother all year. You arelive apart, later.
25 years old, unmarried, and your AGI is $9,000. Example 7 Ð separated parents. You,Sometimes, a child meets the relationship,
Your mother's AGI is $15,000. Jane's father did your husband, and your 10-year-old son livedage, residency, support, and joint return tests to
not live with you or your daughter. The rule together until August 1, 2009, when your hus-be a qualifying child of more than one person.
explained earlier for children of divorced or sep- band moved out of the household. In August andAlthough the child meets the conditions to be a
arated parents or parents who live apart does September, your son lived with you. For the restqualifying child of each of these persons, only
not apply. Jane is a qualifying child of both you of the year, your son lived with your husband,one person can actually treat the child as a
and your mother because she meets the rela- the boy's father. Your son is a qualifying child ofqualifying child. To meet this special test, you
tionship, age, residency, support, and joint re- both you and your husband because your sonmust be the person who can treat the child as a
turn tests for both you and your mother. lived with each of you for more than half the yearqualifying child. Only that person can treat the
However, only one of you can claim her. Jane is and because he met the relationship, age, sup-child as a qualifying child to take all of the follow-
not a qualifying child of anyone else, including port, and joint return tests for both of you. At theing tax benefits (provided the person is eligible
end of the year, you and your husband still wereher father. You agree to let your mother claimfor each benefit).
not divorced, legally separated, or separatedJane. This means your mother can claim Jane
1. The exemption for the child. under a written separation agreement, so theas a qualifying child for the dependency exemp-
rule for children of divorced or separated par-tion, child tax credit, head of household filing2. The child tax credit.
ents or parents who live apart does not apply.status, credit for child and dependent care ex-
3. Head of household filing status. penses, exclusion for dependent care benefits, You and your husband will file separate re-
and the earned income credit, if she qualifies for turns. Your husband agrees to let you treat your4. The credit for child and dependent care
each of those tax benefits (and if you do not son as a qualifying child. This means, if yourexpenses.
claim Jane as a qualifying child for any of those husband does not claim your son as a qualifying5. The exclusion from income for dependent tax benefits). child, you can claim your son as a qualifyingcare benefits. child for the dependency exemption, child tax
Example 2 Ðparent has higher AGI than credit, and exclusion for dependent care bene-6. The earned income credit.
grandparent. The facts are the same as in fits, if you qualify for each of those tax benefits.The other person cannot take any of these Example 1 except your AGI is $18,000. Because However, you cannot claim head of householdbenefits based on this qualifying child. In other your mother's AGI is not higher than yours, she filing status because you and your husband didwords, you and the other person cannot agree to cannot claim Jane. Only you can claim Jane. not live apart for the last 6 months of the year. Asdivide these tax benefits between you. The other a result, your filing status is married filing sepa-person cannot take any of these tax benefits Example 3 Ð two persons claim same rately, so you cannot claim the earned incomeunless he or she has a different qualifying child. child. The facts are the same as in Example 1 credit or the credit for child and dependent care
except that you and your mother both claim Jane expenses.Tiebreaker rules. To determine which person
as a qualifying child. In this case, you as thecan treat the child as a qualifying child to claim
child's parent will be the only one allowed to Example 8 Ð separated parents claimthese six tax benefits, the following tie-breaker
same child. The facts are the same as inclaim Jane as a qualifying child. The IRS willrules apply.
Example 7 except that you and your husbanddisallow your mother's claim to the six tax bene-
• If only one of the persons is the child's both claim your son as a qualifying child. In thisfits listed earlier unless she has another qualify-parent, the child is treated as the qualify- case, only your husband will be allowed to treating child.ing child of the parent. your son as a qualifying child. This is because,
Example 4 Ðqualifying children split be- during 2009, the boy lived with him longer than• If the parents do not file a joint return to-
tween two persons. The facts are the same with you. If you claimed an exemption, the childgether but both parents claim the child as
as in Example 1 except you also have two other tax credit, or the exclusion for dependent carea qualifying child, the IRS will treat the
young children who are qualifying children of benefits for your son, the IRS will disallow yourchild as the qualifying child of the parent
both you and your mother. Only one of you can claim to all these tax benefits, unless you havewith whom the child lived for the longer
claim each child. However, if your mother's AGI another qualifying child. In addition, becauseperiod of time during the year. If the child
is higher than yours, you can allow your mother you and your husband did not live apart for thelived with each parent for the same
to claim one or more of the children. For exam- last 6 months of the year, your husband cannotamount of time, the IRS will treat the child
ple, if you claim one child, your mother can claim claim head of household filing status. As a re-as the qualifying child of the parent who
the other two. sult, his filing status is married filing separately,had the higher adjusted gross income
so he cannot claim the earned income credit or(AGI) for the year.
Example 5 Ðtaxpayer who is a qualifying the credit for child and dependent care ex-• If no parent can claim the child as a quali- child. The facts are the same as in Example 1 penses.fying child, the child is treated as the quali- except you are only 18 years old and did notfying child of the person who had the provide more than half of your own support for Example 9 Ð unmarried parents. You,highest AGI for the year. the year. This means you are your mother's your 5-year-old son, and your son's father lived
qualifying child. If she can claim you as a depen- together all year. You and your son's father are• If a parent can claim the child as a qualify-
ing child but no parent does so claim the dent, then you cannot claim your daughter as a not married. Your son is a qualifying child of both
Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents Page 31

Page 34 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you and his father because he meets the rela- credit for your son. However, your son's father 1. The year there is a determination that the
cannot claim your son as a qualifying child for child is dead, ortionship, age, residency, support, and joint re-
head of household filing status, the credit forturn tests for both you and his father. Your AGI is 2. The year the child would have reachedchild and dependent care expenses, the exclu-$12,000 and your son's father's AGI is $14,000. age 18.sion for dependent care benefits, or the earnedYour son's father agrees to let you claim the
income credit. You and your mother did not havechild as a qualifying child. This means you can
any child care expenses or dependent care ben-claim him as a qualifying child for the depen-
efits, but the boy is a qualifying child of both you Not a Qualifying Child Testdency exemption, child tax credit, head of
and your mother for head of household filinghousehold filing status, credit for child and de-
A child is not your qualifying relative if the child isstatus and the earned income credit because hependent care expenses, exclusion for depen-
your qualifying child or the qualifying child of anymeets the relationship, age, residency, support,dent care benefits, and the earned income
other taxpayer.and joint return tests for both you and yourcredit, if you qualify for each of those tax benefits
mother. (Note: The support test does not apply(and if your son's father does not, in fact, claim
Example 1. Your 22-year-old daughter, whofor the earned income credit.) However, youyour son as a qualifying child for any of those tax is a full-time student, lives with you and meets allagree to let your mother claim your son. Thisbenefits). the tests to be your qualifying child. She is notmeans she can claim him for head of household
your qualifying relative.filing status and the earned income credit if sheExample 10 Ðunmarried parents claim
qualifies for each and if you do not claim him assame child. The facts are the same as in Example 2. Your 2-year-old son lives witha qualifying child for the earned income credit.Example 9 except that you and your son's father your parents and meets all the tests to be their(You cannot claim head of household filing sta-both claim your son as a qualifying child. In this qualifying child. He is not your qualifying rela-tus because your mother paid the entire cost ofcase, only your son's father will be allowed to tive.keeping up the home.)treat your son as a qualifying child. This is be-
cause his AGI, $14,000, is more than your AGI, Example 3. Your son lives with you but isExample 2. The facts are the same as in$12,000. If you claimed an exemption, the child not your qualifying child because he is 30 yearsExample 1 except that your AGI is $25,000 andtax credit, head of household filing status, credit old and does not meet the age test. He may beyour mother's AGI is $21,000. Your mother can-for child and dependent care expenses, exclu- your qualifying relative if the gross income testnot claim your son as a qualifying child for anysion for dependent care benefits, or the earned and the support test are met.purpose because her AGI is not higher thanincome credit for your son, the IRS will disallow
yours.your claim to all these tax benefits, unless you Example 4. Your 13-year-old grandsonhave another qualifying child. lived with his mother for 3 months, with his uncleExample 3. The facts are the same as in
for 4 months, and with you for 5 months duringExample 1 except that you and your mother bothExample 11Ðchild did not live with a par- the year. He is not your qualifying child becauseclaim your son as a qualifying child for theent. You and your 7-year-old niece, your sis- he does not meet the residency test. He may beearned income credit. Your mother also claimster's child, lived with your mother all year. You your qualifying relative if the gross income testhim as a qualifying child for head of householdare 25 years old, and your AGI is $9,300. Your and the support test are met.filing status. You as the child's parent will be themother's AGI is $15,000. Your niece's parents
only one allowed to claim your son as a qualify-file jointly, have an AGI of less than $9,000, and Child of person not required to file a return.ing child for the earned income credit. The IRSdo not live with you or their child. Your niece is a A child is not the qualifying child of any otherwill disallow your mother's claim to the earnedqualifying child of both you and your mother taxpayer and so may qualify as your qualifyingincome credit and head of household filing sta-because she meets the relationship, age, resi- relative if the child's parent (or other person fortus unless she has another qualifying child.dency, support, and joint return tests for both whom the child is defined as a qualifying child) isyou and your mother. However, only your not required to file an income tax return andmother can treat her as a qualifying child. This is Qualifying Relative either:because your mother's AGI, $15,000, is more
• Does not file an income tax return, orthan your AGI, $9,300. There are four tests that must be met for a
person to be your qualifying relative. The four • Files a return only to get a refund of in-Applying this special test to divorced or sep- tests are: come tax withheld.arated parents or parents who live apart. If
a child is treated as the qualifying child of the 1. Not a qualifying child test,
noncustodial parent under the rules described Example 1 Ðreturn not required. You2. Member of household or relationship test,earlier for children of divorced or separated par- support an unrelated friend and her 3-year-old
3. Gross income test, andents or parents who live apart, only the noncus- child, who lived with you all year in your home.
todial parent can claim an exemption and the Your friend has no gross income, is not required4. Support test.child tax credit for the child. However, the custo- to file a 2009 tax return, and does not file a 2009
dial parent, if eligible, or other eligible person tax return. Both your friend and her child areAge. Unlike a qualifying child, a qualifying rel-can claim the child as a qualifying child for head your qualifying relatives if the member of house-ative can be any age. There is no age test for aof household filing status, the credit for child and hold or relationship test, gross income test, andqualifying relative.dependent care expenses, the exclusion for de- support test are met.
pendent care benefits, and the earned income Kidnapped child. You can treat a child as
credit. If the child is the qualifying child of more Example 2 Ðreturn filed to claim refund.your qualifying relative even if the child has been
than one person for these benefits, then the The facts are the same as in Example 1 exceptkidnapped, but both of the following statements
tiebreaker rules will determine which person can your friend had wages of $1,500 during the yearmust be true.
treat the child as a qualifying child. and had income tax withheld from her wages.
1. The child is presumed by law enforcement She files a return only to get a refund of the
Example 1. You and your 5-year-old son authorities to have been kidnapped by income tax withheld and does not claim the
lived all year with your mother, who paid the someone who is not a member of your earned income credit or any other tax credits or
entire cost of keeping up the home. Your AGI is family or the child's family. deductions. Both your friend and her child are
$10,000. Your mother's AGI is $25,000. Your your qualifying relatives if the member of house-2. In the year the kidnapping occurred, theson's father did not live with you or your son. hold or relationship test, gross income test, andchild met the tests to be your qualifyingUnder the rules explained earlier for children of support test are met.relative for the part of the year before thedivorced or separated parents or parents who date of the kidnapping.live apart, your son is treated as the qualifying Example 3 Ð earned income credit
child of his father, who can claim an exemption This treatment applies for all years until the claimed. The facts are the same as in Exam-
and the child tax credit for him. Because of this, child is returned. However, the last year this ple 2 except your friend had wages of $8,000
you cannot claim an exemption or the child tax treatment can apply is the earlier of: during the year and claimed the earned income
Page 32 Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents

Page 35 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
credit on her return. Your friend's child is the • A son or daughter of your brother or sister. Local law violated. A person does not meet
this test if at any time during the year the rela-qualifying child of another taxpayer (your friend), • A brother or sister of your father or tionship between you and that person violatesso you cannot claim your friend's child as your mother. local law.qualifying relative.
• Your son-in-law, daughter-in-law, fa-
Child in Canada or Mexico. A child who lives ther-in-law, mother-in-law, brother-in-law, Example. Your girlfriend lived with you as a
in Canada or Mexico may be your qualifying or sister-in-law. member of your household all year. However,
relative, and you may be able to claim the child your relationship with her violated the laws of theAny of these relationships that were establishedas a dependent. If the child does not live with state where you live, because she was marriedby marriage are not ended by death or divorce.you, the child does not meet the residency test to someone else. Therefore, she does not meet
this test and you cannot claim her as a depen-to be your qualifying child. If the persons the Example. You and your wife began sup- dent.child does live with are not U.S. citizens and porting your wife's father, a widower, in 2003.have no U.S. gross income, those persons are Your wife died in 2008. In spite of your wife's Adopted child. An adopted child is alwaysnot ªtaxpayers,º so the child is not the qualifying death, your father-in-law continues to meet this treated as your own child. The term ªadoptedchild of any other taxpayer. If the child is not your test, even if he does not live with you. You can childº includes a child who was lawfully placedqualifying child or the qualifying child of any claim him as a dependent if all other tests are with you for legal adoption.other taxpayer, the child is your qualifying rela- met, including the gross income test and supporttive if the gross income test and the support test test. Cousin. Your cousin meets this test only if heare met.
Foster child. A foster child is an individual or she lives with you all year as a member ofYou cannot claim as a dependent a child who
who is placed with you by an authorized place- your household. A cousin is a descendant of alives in a foreign country other than Canada or
ment agency or by judgment, decree, or other brother or sister of your father or mother.Mexico, unless the child is a U.S. citizen, U.S.
order of any court of competent jurisdiction.resident alien, or U.S. national. There is an ex-
ception for certain adopted children who lived
Joint return. If you file a joint return, the per- Gross Income Testwith you all year. See Citizen or Resident Test,
son can be related to either you or your spouse.earlier. To meet this test, a person's gross income forAlso, the person does not need to be related to
the year must be less than $3,650.the spouse who provides support.Example. You provide all the support of
your children, ages 6, 8, and 12, who live in For example, your spouse's uncle who re- Gross income defined. Gross income is all
Mexico with your mother and have no income. ceives more than half of his support from you income in the form of money, property, and
You are single and live in the United States. may be your qualifying relative, even though he services that is not exempt from tax.
does not live with you. However, if you and yourYour mother is not a U.S. citizen and has no In a manufacturing, merchandising, or min-
spouse file separate returns, your spouse's un-U.S. income, so she is not a ªtaxpayer.º Your ing business, gross income is the total net sales
cle can be your qualifying relative only if he liveschildren are not your qualifying children because minus the cost of goods sold, plus any miscella-
with you all year as a member of your house-they do not meet the residency test. Also, they neous income from the business.
hold.are not the qualifying children of any other tax- Gross receipts from rental property are gross
payer, so they are your qualifying relatives and income. Do not deduct taxes, repairs, etc., to
Temporary absences. A person is consid-you can claim them as dependents if all the tests determine the gross income from rental prop-
ered to live with you as a member of your house-are met. You may also be able to claim your erty.
hold during periods of time when one of you, ormother as a dependent if all the tests are met, Gross income includes a partner's share of
both, are temporarily absent due to special cir-including the gross income test and the support the gross (not a share of the net) partnership
cumstances such as:test. income.
Gross income also includes all taxable un-• Illness,
employment compensation and certain scholar-
• Education,Member of Household or ship and fellowship grants. Scholarships
received by degree candidates that are used forRelationship Test • Business,
tuition, fees, supplies, books, and equipment
• Vacation, orTo meet this test, a person must either: required for particular courses may not be in-
cluded in gross income. For more information• Military service.1. Live with you all year as a member of your about scholarships, see chapter 12.household, or Tax-exempt income, such as certain socialIf the person is placed in a nursing home for
security benefits, is not included in gross in-2. Be related to you in one of the ways listed an indefinite period of time to receive constant
come.under Relatives who do not have to live medical care, the absence may be considered
with you. temporary. Disabled dependent working at sheltered
workshop. For purposes of this test (the grossIf at any time during the year the person was Death or birth. A person who died during the income test), the gross income of an individualyour spouse, that person cannot be your qualify- year, but lived with you as a member of your who is permanently and totally disabled at anying relative. However, see Personal Exemp- household until death, will meet this test. The time during the year does not include income fortions, earlier. same is true for a child who was born during the services the individual performs at a sheltered
year and lived with you as a member of your workshop. The availability of medical care at theRelatives who do not have to live with you.
household for the rest of the year. The test is workshop must be the main reason for the indi-A person related to you in any of the following
also met if a child lived with you as a member of vidual's presence there. Also, the income mustways does not have to live with you all year as a
your household except for any required hospital come solely from activities at the workshop thatmember of your household to meet this test.
stay following birth. are incident to this medical care.• Your child, stepchild, foster child, or a de- If your dependent died during the year and A ªsheltered workshopº is a school that:scendant of any of them (for example, you otherwise qualified to claim an exemptionyour grandchild). (A legally adopted child • Provides special instruction or training de-for the dependent, you can still claim the exemp-is considered your child.) signed to alleviate the disability of the indi-tion. vidual, and• Your brother, sister, half brother, half sis-
ter, stepbrother, or stepsister. Example. Your dependent mother died on • Is operated by certain tax-exempt organi-
January 15. She met the tests to be your qualify- zations, or by a state, a U.S. possession,• Your father, mother, grandparent, or other ing relative. The other tests to claim an exemp- a political subdivision of a state or posses-direct ancestor, but not foster parent. tion for a dependent were also met. You can sion, the United States, or the District of
• Your stepfather or stepmother. claim an exemption for her on your return. Columbia.
Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents Page 33

Page 36 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ªPermanently and totally disabledº has the dependency allotments in figuring support. The care for her as a trade or business or to benefit
same meaning here as under Qualifying child, allotment of pay and the tax-exempt basic allow- the agency that placed her in their home. The
earlier. ance for quarters are both considered as pro- Smiths' unreimbursed expenses are not deduct-
vided by you for support. ible as charitable contributions but are consid-
ered support they provided for Lauren.Tax-exempt income. In figuring a person'sSupport Test (To Be a Qualifying total support, include tax-exempt income, sav- Home for the aged. If you make a lump-sumRelative) ings, and borrowed amounts used to support advance payment to a home for the aged to takethat person. Tax-exempt income includes cer- care of your relative for life and the payment isTo meet this test, you generally must provide tain social security benefits, welfare benefits, based on that person's life expectancy, themore than half of a person's total support during nontaxable life insurance proceeds, Armed amount of support you provide each year is thethe calendar year. Forces family allotments, nontaxable pensions, lump-sum payment divided by the relative's lifeHowever, if two or more persons provide and tax-exempt interest. expectancy. The amount of support you providesupport, but no one person provides more than
also includes any other amounts you providedhalf of a person's total support, see Multiple Example 1. You provide $4,000 toward during the year.Support Agreement, later. your mother's support during the year. She has
How to determine if support test is met. earned income of $600, nontaxable social se-
You figure whether you have provided more curity benefits of $4,800, and tax-exempt inter- Total Supportthan half of a person's total support by compar- est of $200. She uses all these for her support.
ing the amount you contributed to that person's You cannot claim an exemption for your mother To figure if you provided more than half of a
support with the entire amount of support that because the $4,000 you provide is not more person's support, you must first determine the
person received from all sources. This includes than half of her total support of $9,600. total support provided for that person. Total sup-
support the person provided from his or her own port includes amounts spent to provide food,
funds. Example 2. Your brother's daughter takes lodging, clothing, education, medical and dental
You may find Worksheet 3-1 helpful in figur- out a student loan of $2,500 and uses it to pay care, recreation, transportation, and similar ne-
ing whether you provided more than half of a her college tuition. She is personally responsible cessities.
person's support. for the loan. You provide $2,000 toward her total Generally, the amount of an item of supportsupport. You cannot claim an exemption for her is the amount of the expense incurred in provid-Person's own funds not used for support. because you provide less than half of her sup- ing that item. For lodging, the amount of supportA person's own funds are not support unless port. is the fair rental value of the lodging.they are actually spent for support.
Social security benefits. If a husband and Expenses that are not directly related to any
Example. Your mother received $2,400 in wife each receive benefits that are paid by one one member of a household, such as the cost of
social security benefits and $300 in interest. She check made out to both of them, half of the total food for the household, must be divided among
paid $2,000 for lodging and $400 for recreation. paid is considered to be for the support of each the members of the household.
She put $300 in a savings account. spouse, unless they can show otherwise.
Even though your mother received a total of If a child receives social security benefits and Example 1. Grace Brown, mother of Mary
$2,700 ($2,400 + $300), she spent only $2,400 uses them toward his or her own support, the Miller, lives with Frank and Mary Miller and their
($2,000 + $400) for her own support. If you benefits are considered as provided by the child. two children. Grace gets social security benefits
spent more than $2,400 for her support and no of $2,400, which she spends for clothing, trans-Support provided by the state (welfare,other support was received, you have provided portation, and recreation. Grace has no otherfood stamps, housing, etc.). Benefits pro-more than half of her support. income. Frank and Mary's total food expense forvided by the state to a needy person generally the household is $5,200. They pay Grace'sare considered support provided by the state.Child's wages used for own support. You medical and drug expenses of $1,200. The fairHowever, payments based on the needs of thecannot include in your contribution to your rental value of the lodging provided for Grace isrecipient will not be considered as used entirelychild's support any support that is paid for by the $1,800 a year, based on the cost of similarfor that person's support if it is shown that part ofchild with the child's own wages, even if you paid rooming facilities. Figure Grace's total supportthe payments were not used for that purpose.the wages. as follows:
Year support is provided. The year you pro- Foster care payments and expenses. Pay-
vide the support is the year you pay for it, even if ments you receive for the support of a foster Fair rental value of lodging ..... . $ 1,800you do so with borrowed money that you repay child from a child placement agency are consid-
Clothing, transportation, andin a later year. ered support provided by the agency. Similarly,
recreation ................. . 2,400If you use a fiscal year to report your income, payments you receive for the support of a foster
you must provide more than half of the depen- child from a state or county are considered sup- Medical expenses ........... . 1,200
dent's support for the calendar year in which port provided by the state or county. Share of food (1/5 of $5,200) .... . 1,040your fiscal year begins. If you are not in the trade or business of
providing foster care and your unreimbursed Total support .............. . $6,440Armed Forces dependency allotments. The out-of-pocket expenses in caring for a fosterpart of the allotment contributed by the govern- child were mainly to benefit an organizationment and the part taken out of your military pay qualified to receive deductible charitable contri- The support Frank and Mary provide ($1,800are both considered provided by you in figuring butions, the expenses are deductible as charita- lodging + $1,200 medical expenses + $1,040whether you provide more than half of the sup- ble contributions but are not considered support food = $4,040) is more than half of Grace'sport. If your allotment is used to support persons you provided. For more information about the $6,440 total support.other than those you name, you can take the deduction for charitable contributions, see chap-exemptions for them if they otherwise qualify. Example 2. Your parents live with you, yourter 24. If your unreimbursed expenses are not
spouse, and your two children in a house youdeductible as charitable contributions, they areExample. You are in the Armed Forces. own. The fair rental value of your parents' shareconsidered support you provided.You authorize an allotment for your widowed of the lodging is $2,000 a year ($1,000 each),If you are in the trade or business of provid-mother that she uses to support herself and her which includes furnishings and utilities. Your fa-ing foster care, your unreimbursed expensessister. If the allotment provides more than half of ther receives a nontaxable pension of $4,200,are not considered support provided by you.each person's support, you can take an exemp- which he spends equally between your mothertion for each of them, if they otherwise qualify, Example.  Lauren, a foster child, lived with and himself for items of support such as cloth-even though you authorize the allotment only for Mr. and Mrs. Smith for the last 3 months of the ing, transportation, and recreation. Your totalyour mother. year. The Smiths cared for Lauren because they food expense for the household is $6,000. Your
Tax-exempt military quarters allowances. wanted to adopt her (although she had not been heat and utility bills amount to $1,200. Your
These allowances are treated the same way as placed with them for adoption). They did not mother has hospital and medical expenses of
Page 34 Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents

Page 37 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet 3-1. Worksheet for Determining Support Keep for Your Records
Funds Belonging to the Person You Supported
1. Enter the total funds belonging to the person you supported, including income received (taxable
and nontaxable) and amounts borrowed during the year, plus the amount in savings and other
accounts at the beginning of the year .......................................... . 1.
2. Enter the amount on line 1 that was used for the person's support ..................... . 2.
3. Enter the amount on line 1 that was used for other purposes ......................... . 3.
4. Enter the total amount in the person's savings and other accounts at the end of the year ..... . 4.
5. Add lines 2 through 4. (This amount should equal line 1.) ............................ . 5.
Expenses for Entire Household (where the person you supported lived)
6. Lodging (complete line 6a or 6b):
 6a. Enter the total rent paid ................................................ . 6a.
 6b. Enter the fair rental value of the home. If the person you supported owned the home, 
also include this amount in line 21. .......................................... . 6b.
7. Enter the total food expenses ............................................... . 7.
8. Enter the total amount of utilities (heat, light, water, etc. not included in line 6a or 6b) ........ . 8.
9. Enter the total amount of repairs (not included in line 6a or 6b) ........................ . 9.
10. Enter the total of other expenses. Do not include expenses of maintaining the home, such as
mortgage interest, real estate taxes, and insurance. ............................... . 10.
11. Add lines 6a through 10. These are the total household expenses ..................... . 11.
12. Enter total number of persons who lived in the household ........................... . 12.
Expenses for the Person You Supported
13. Divide line 11 by line 12. This is the person's share of the household expenses ............ . 13.
14. Enter the person's total clothing expenses ...................................... . 14.
15. Enter the person's total education expenses ..................................... . 15.
16. Enter the person's total medical and dental expenses not paid for or reimbursed by insurance . . 16.
17. Enter the person's total travel and recreation expenses ............................. . 17.
18. Enter the total of the person's other expenses .................................... . 18.
19. Add lines 13 through 18. This is the total cost of the person's support for the year .......... . 19.
Did the Person Provide More Than Half of His or Her Own Support?
20. Multiply line 19 by 50% (.50) ................................................ . 20.
21. Enter the amount from line 2, plus the amount from line 6b if the person you supported owned 
the home. This is the amount the person provided for his or her own support .............. . 21.
22. Is line 21 more than line 20?
 No. You meet the support test for this person to be your qualifying child. If this person also meets the other tests to be a
qualifying child, stop here; do not complete lines 23±26. Otherwise, go to line 23 and fill out the rest of the worksheet to
determine if this person is your qualifying relative. 
 Yes. You do not meet the support test for this person to be either your qualifying child or your qualifying relative. Stop
here.
Did You Provide More Than Half?
23. Enter the amount others provided for the person's support. Include amounts provided by state,
local, and other welfare societies or agencies. Do not include any amounts included on line 1. . . 23.
24. Add lines 21 and 23 ...................................................... . 24.
25. Subtract line 24 from line 19. This is the amount you provided for the person's support ....... . 25.
26. Is line 25 more than line 20?
 Yes. You meet the support test for this person to be your qualifying relative.
 No. You do not meet the support test for this person to be your qualifying relative. You cannot claim an exemption for
this person unless you can do so under a multiple support agreement, the support test for children of divorced or
separated parents, or the special rule for kidnapped children. See Multiple Support Agreement, Support Test for Children
of Divorced or Separated Parents or Parents Who Live Apart, or Kidnapped Child under Qualifying Relative.
Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents Page 35

Page 38 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
$600, which you pay during the year. Figure Living with someone rent free. If you live provide the rest of his support ± $2,000. Be-
cause GI benefits are included in total support,with a person rent free in his or her home, youyour parents' total support as follows:
your son's total support is $4,200 ($2,200 +must reduce the amount you provide for support
$2,000). You have not provided more than halfof that person by the fair rental value of lodgingSupport provided Father Mother of his support.he or she provides you.
Fair rental value of lodging $1,000 $1,000
Child care expenses. If you pay someone toProperty. Property provided as support isPension spent for their provide child or dependent care, you can includemeasured by its fair market value. Fair marketsupport ............ . 2,100 2,100 these payments in the amount you provided forvalue is the price that property would sell for onShare of food (1/6 of the support of your child or disabled dependent,the open market. It is the price that would be$6,000) ............ . 1,000 1,000 even if you claim a credit for the payments. Foragreed upon between a willing buyer and a information on the credit, see chapter 32.willing seller, with neither being required to act,Medical expenses for
mother ............. . 600 and both having reasonable knowledge of the Other support items. Other items may be
relevant facts. considered as support depending on the facts inParents' total support .. . $4,100 $4,700
each case.Capital expenses. Capital items, such asYou must apply the support test separately furniture, appliances, and cars, that are bought
to each parent. You provide $2,000 ($1,000 for a person during the year can be included in
lodging, $1,000 food) of your father's total sup- Do Not Includetotal support under certain circumstances.
port of $4,100 ± less than half. You provide in Total SupportThe following examples show when a capital$2,600 to your mother ($1,000 lodging, $1,000 item is or is not support.food, $600 medical) ± more than half of her total The following items are not included in total
support of $4,700. You meet the support test for support.Example 1. You buy a $200 power lawnyour mother, but not your father. Heat and utility mower for your 13-year-old child. The child is 1. Federal, state, and local income taxes paidcosts are included in the fair rental value of the given the duty of keeping the lawn trimmed. by persons from their own income. lodging, so these are not considered separately. Because the lawn mower benefits all members
2. Social security and Medicare taxes paid byof the household, you cannot include the cost of
Lodging. If you provide a person with lodging, persons from their own income. the lawn mower in the support of your child.
you are considered to provide support equal to 3. Life insurance premiums. the fair rental value of the room, apartment, Example 2. You buy a $150 television set
house, or other shelter in which the person lives. 4. Funeral expenses. as a birthday present for your 12-year-old child.
Fair rental value includes a reasonable allow- The television set is placed in your child's bed- 5. Scholarships received by your child if yourance for the use of furniture and appliances, and room. You can include the cost of the television child is a full-time student. for heat and other utilities that are provided. set in the support of your child.
6. Survivors' and Dependents' EducationalFair rental value defined. This is the Assistance payments used for the supportExample 3. You pay $5,000 for a car andamount you could reasonably expect to receive of the child who receives them.register it in your name. You and yourfrom a stranger for the same kind of lodging. It is
17-year-old daughter use the car equally. Be- Government or charitable assistance you re-used instead of actual expenses such as taxes, cause you own the car and do not give it to your ceived because of your temporary relocationinterest, depreciation, paint, insurance, utilities, daughter but merely let her use it, you cannot due to the storms, tornadoes, or flooding in acost of furniture and appliances, etc. In some include the cost of the car in your daughter's Midwestern disaster area is not included in totalcases, fair rental value may be equal to the rent total support. However, you can include in your support. Disregard these amounts in determin-paid. daughter's support your out-of-pocket expenses ing who provided a person's support.If you provide the total lodging, the amount of of operating the car for her benefit.support you provide is the fair rental value of the
room the person uses, or a share of the fair Example 4. Your 17-year-old son, using Multiple Support Agreementrental value of the entire dwelling if the person personal funds, buys a car for $4,500. You pro-has use of your entire home. If you do not pro- vide all the rest of your son's support ± $4,000. Sometimes no one provides more than half ofvide the total lodging, the total fair rental value Since the car is bought and owned by your son, the support of a person. Instead, two or moremust be divided depending on how much of the the car's fair market value ($4,500) must be persons, each of whom would be able to taketotal lodging you provide. If you provide only a included in his support. Your son has provided the exemption but for the support test, togetherpart and the person supplies the rest, the fair more than half of his own total support of $8,500 provide more than half of the person's support.rental value must be divided between both of ($4,500 + $4,000), so he is not your qualifying When this happens, you can agree that anyyou according to the amount each provides. child. You did not provide more than half of his one of you who individually provides more than
total support, so he is not your qualifying rela- 10% of the person's support, but only one, canExample. Your parents live rent free in a tive. You cannot claim an exemption for your claim an exemption for that person as a qualify-house you own. It has a fair rental value of son. ing relative. Each of the others must sign a$5,400 a year furnished, which includes a fair statement agreeing not to claim the exemptionrental value of $3,600 for the house and $1,800 Medical insurance premiums. Medical insur- for that year. The person who claims the exemp-for the furniture. This does not include heat and ance premiums you pay, including premiums for tion must keep these signed statements for hisutilities. The house is completely furnished with supplementary Medicare coverage, are in- or her records. A multiple support declarationfurniture belonging to your parents. You pay cluded in the support you provide. identifying each of the others who agreed not to$600 for their utility bills. Utilities are not usually claim the exemption must be attached to theMedical insurance benefits. Medical in-included in rent for houses in the area where return of the person claiming the exemption.surance benefits, including basic and supple-your parents live. Therefore, you consider the Form 2120, Multiple Support Declaration, canmentary Medicare benefits, are not part oftotal fair rental value of the lodging to be $6,000 be used for this purpose.support.($3,600 fair rental value of the unfurnished You can claim an exemption under a multiplehouse, $1,800 allowance for the furnishings pro- support agreement for someone related to youTuition payments and allowances under thevided by your parents, and $600 cost of utilities) or for someone who lived with you all year as aGI Bill. Amounts veterans receive under theof which you are considered to provide $4,200 member of your household.GI Bill for tuition payments and allowances while($3,600 + $600). they attend school are included in total support.
Person living in his or her own home. The Example 1. You, your sister, and your two
total fair rental value of a person's home that he Example. During the year, your son re- brothers provide the entire support of your
or she owns is considered support contributed ceives $2,200 from the government under the GI mother for the year. You provide 45%, your
Bill. He uses this amount for his education. Youby that person. sister 35%, and your two brothers each provide
Page 36 Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents

Page 39 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
10%. Either you or your sister can claim an parent attaches this written declaration Written declaration.  The custodial parent
exemption for your mother. The other must sign may use either Form 8332 or a similar statementto his or her return. (If the decree or
a statement agreeing not to take an exemption (containing the same information required by theagreement went into effect after 1984
for your mother. The one who claims the exemp- form) to make the written declaration to releaseand before 2009, see Post-1984 and
tion must attach Form 2120, or a similar declara- the exemption to the noncustodial parent. Thepre-2009 divorce decree or separation
tion, to his or her return and must keep the noncustodial parent must attach the form oragreement, later. If the decree or agree-
statement signed by the other for his or her statement to his or her tax return.ment went into effect after 2008, see
records. Because neither brother provides more Post-2008 divorce decree or separation The exemption can be released for 1 year,than 10% of the support, neither can take the agreement, later.) for a number of specified years (for example,exemption and neither has to sign a statement. alternate years), or for all future years, as speci-b. A pre-1985 decree of divorce or sepa- fied in the declaration. If the exemption is re-rate maintenance or written separationExample 2. You and your brother each pro- leased for more than 1 year, the original releaseagreement that applies to 2009 statesvide 20% of your mother's support for the year. must be attached to the return of the noncus-that the noncustodial parent can claimThe remaining 60% of her support is provided todial parent for the first year, and a copy mustthe child as a dependent, the decree orequally by two persons who are not related to be attached for each later year.agreement was not changed after 1984her. She does not live with them. Because more
to say the noncustodial parent cannotthan half of her support is provided by persons Post-1984 and pre-2009 divorce decree or
who cannot claim an exemption for her, no one claim the child as a dependent, and the separation agreement. If the divorce decree
can take the exemption. noncustodial parent provides at least or separation agreement went into effect after
$600 for the child's support during the 1984 and before 2009, the noncustodial parent
Example 3. Your father lives with you and may be able to attach certain pages from theyear.
receives 25% of his support from social security, decree or agreement instead of Form 8332. The
40% from you, 24% from his brother (your un- decree or agreement must state all three of theCustodial parent and noncustodial parent.cle), and 11% from a friend. Either you or your following.The custodial parent is the parent with whom theuncle can take the exemption for your father if child lived for the greater number of nights dur- 1. The noncustodial parent can claim thethe other signs a statement agreeing not to. The
ing the year. The other parent is the noncus- child as a dependent without regard to anyone who takes the exemption must attach Form
todial parent. condition, such as payment of support.2120, or a similar declaration, to his return and
If the parents divorced or separated duringmust keep for his records the signed statement 2. The custodial parent will not claim the childthe year and the child lived with both parentsfrom the one agreeing not to take the exemption. as a dependent for the year.before the separation, the custodial parent is the
3. The years for which the noncustodial par-one with whom the child lived for the greater
ent, rather than the custodial parent, cannumber of nights during the rest of the year.Support Test for Children of
claim the child as a dependent.A child is treated as living with a parent for aDivorced or Separated Parents or
night if the child sleeps:Parents Who Live Apart The noncustodial parent must attach all of
the following pages of the decree or agreement• At that parent's home, whether or not theIn most cases, a child of divorced or separated to his or her tax return.parent is present, orparents will be a qualifying child of one of the
• The cover page (write the other parent'sparents. See Children of divorced or separated • In the company of the parent, when the
social security number on this page).parents or parents who live apart under Qualify- child does not sleep at a parent's home
ing Child, earlier. However, if the child does not (for example, the parent and child are on • The pages that include all of the informa-meet the requirements to be a qualifying child of vacation together). tion identified in items (1) through (3)either parent, the child may be a qualifying rela- above.tive of one of the parents. In that case, the Equal number of nights. If the child lived
• The signature page with the other parent'sfollowing rules must be used in applying the with each parent for an equal number of nights
signature and the date of the agreement.support test. during the year, the custodial parent is the par-
ent with the higher adjusted gross income.A child will be treated as being the qualifying Post-2008 divorce decree or separationrelative of his or her noncustodial parent if all December 31. The night of December 31 is agreement. Beginning with 2009 tax returns,four of the following statements are true. treated as part of the year in which it begins. For the noncustodial parent can no longer attach
example, December 31, 2009, is treated as part pages from the decree or agreement instead of1. The parents: of 2009. Form 8332 if the decree or agreement went into
effect after 2008. The noncustodial parent willa. Are divorced or legally separated under Emancipated child. If a child is emanci-
have to attach Form 8332 or a similar statementa decree of divorce or separate mainte- pated under state law, the child is treated as not
signed by the custodial parent and whose onlynance, living with either parent.
purpose is to release a claim to exemption.b. Are separated under a written separa- Absences. If a child was not with either par-
The noncustodial parent must attachtion agreement, or ent on a particular night (because, for example, the required information even if it wasthe child was staying at a friend's house), thec. Lived apart at all times during the last 6 filed with a return in an earlier year.
CAUTION
!child is treated as living with the parent withmonths of the year, whether or not they
whom the child normally would have lived forare or were married. Remarried parent. If you remarry, the sup-that night, except for the absence. But if it cannot port provided by your new spouse is treated asbe determined with which parent the child nor-2. The child received over half of his or her provided by you.mally would have lived or if the child would notsupport for the year from the parents (and
have lived with either parent that night, the childthe rules on multiple support agreements, Child support under pre-1985 agreement.explained earlier, do not apply). is treated as not living with either parent that All child support payments actually receivednight.3. The child is in the custody of one or both from the noncustodial parent under a pre-1985
parents for more than half of the year. Parent works at night. If, due to a parent's agreement are considered used for the support
nighttime work schedule, a child lives for a of the child.4. Either of the following statements is true. greater number of days but not nights with the
parent who works at night, that parent is treated Example. Under a pre-1985 agreement, thea. The custodial parent signs a written
as the custodial parent. On a school day, the noncustodial parent provides $1,200 for thedeclaration, discussed later, that he or
child's support. This amount is considered sup-child is treated as living at the primary residenceshe will not claim the child as a depen-
port provided by the noncustodial parent even ifdent for the year, and the noncustodial registered with the school.
Chapter 3 Personal Exemptions and Dependents Page 37

Page 40 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the $1,200 was actually spent on things other No SSN. If a person for whom you expect to
than support. claim an exemption on your return does not Remindershave an SSN, either you or that person shouldAlimony. Payments to a spouse that are apply for an SSN as soon as possible by filingincludible in the spouse's gross income as either Estimated tax safe harbor for higher incomeForm SS-5, Application for a Social Securityalimony, separate maintenance payments, or taxpayers. If your adjusted gross income wasCard, with the Social Security Administrationsimilar payments from an estate or trust, are not more than $150,000 ($75,000 if you are married(SSA). You can get Form SS-5 online at www.treated as a payment for the support of a depen- filing a separate return), you must deposit thesocialsecurity.gov or at your local SSA office.dent. smaller of 90% of your expected tax for 2010 or It usually takes about 2 weeks to get an
110% of the tax shown on your 2009 return toSSN. If you do not have a required SSN by theParents who never married. This special rule
filing due date, you can file Form 4868 for an avoid an estimated tax penalty.for divorced or separated parents also applies to
extension of time to file.parents who never married and lived apart at all Payment of estimated tax electronically.times during the last 6 months of the year. Born and died in 2009. If your child was You may be able to pay your estimated tax by
born and died in 2009, and you do not have anMultiple support agreement. If the support of electronic means. For more information, seeSSN for the child, you may attach a copy of thethe child is determined under a multiple support How To Pay Estimated Tax in chapter 2 of Publi-child's birth certificate, death certificate, or hos-agreement, this special support test for divorced cation 505.pital records instead. The document must showor separated parents or parents who live apart
the child was born alive. If you do this, enterdoes not apply.
ªDIEDº in column (2) of line 6c of your Form
1040 or Form 1040A.       
Introduction
Alien or adoptee with no SSN. If your depen-
This chapter discusses how to pay your tax asPhaseout of dent does not have and cannot get an SSN, you
you earn or receive income during the year. Inmust list the individual taxpayer identification
general, the federal income tax is aExemptions number (ITIN) or adoption taxpayer identifica-
pay-as-you-go tax. There are two ways to pay astion number (ATIN) instead of an SSN.
you go.The amount you can claim as a deduction for Taxpayer identification numbers forexemptions is reduced once your adjusted gross • Withholding. If you are an employee,aliens. If your dependent is a resident or non-income (AGI) goes above a certain level for your your employer probably withholds incomeresident alien who does not have and is notfiling status. These levels are as follows: eligible to get an SSN, your dependent must tax from your pay. Tax also may be with-
apply for an individual taxpayer identification held from certain other income, such asAGI Level number (ITIN). Write the number in column (2) of pensions, bonuses, commissions, andThat line 6c of your Form 1040 or Form 1040A. To gambling winnings. The amount withheldReduces
apply for an ITIN, use Form W-7, Application for is paid to the IRS in your name. Exemption
IRS Individual Taxpayer Identification Number.Filing Status Amount • Estimated tax. If you do not pay your tax
Taxpayer identification numbers for through withholding, or do not pay enoughMarried filing separately ..... . $ 125,100 adoptees. If you have a child who was placed tax that way, you may have to pay esti-Single ................. .  166,800 with you by an authorized placement agency, mated tax. People who are in business forHead of household ......... .  208,500 you may be able to claim an exemption for the themselves generally will have to pay theirMarried filing jointly ........ .  250,200 child. However, if you cannot get an SSN or an tax this way. Also, you may have to payQualifying widow(er) ........ .  250,200 ITIN for the child, you must get an adoption estimated tax if you receive income suchtaxpayer identification number (ATIN) for theYou must reduce the dollar amount of your as dividends, interest, capital gains, rent,child from the IRS. See Form W-7A, Applicationexemptions by 2% for each $2,500, or part of and royalties. Estimated tax is used to payfor Taxpayer Identification Number for Pending$2,500 ($1,250 if you are married filing sepa- not only income tax, but self-employmentU.S. Adoptions, for details.rately), that your AGI exceeds the amount tax and alternative minimum tax as well. shown above for your filing status. However, you
can lose no more than 1/3 of the dollar amount of This chapter explains these methods. In addi-your exemptions. In other words, each exemp- tion, it also explains the following.tion cannot be reduced to less than $2,433.
If your AGI exceeds the level for your filing • Credit for withholding and estimated
status, use the Deduction for Exemptions Work- tax. When you file your 2009 income tax
sheet in the instructions for Form 1040 or Form 4. return, take credit for all the income tax
1040A to figure the amount of your deduction for withheld from your salary, wages, pen-
exemptions. However, if you are claiming a sions, etc., and for the estimated tax you
$500 exemption for housing a Midwestern dis- paid for 2009. Also take credit for any ex-Tax Withholdingplaced individual, use Form 8914 instead. cess social security or railroad retirement
tax withheld (discussed in chapter 37).
and Estimated • Underpayment penalty. If you did not
pay enough tax during the year, eitherSocial Security through withholding or by making esti-Tax
mated tax payments, you may have to payNumbers for a penalty. In most cases, the IRS can fig-
ure this penalty for you. See Underpay-Dependents What's New for 2010 ment Penalty for 2009 at the end of this
chapter. You must list the social security number (SSN) Tax law changes for 2010. When you figureof any dependent for whom you claim an exemp- how much income tax you want withheld fromtion in column (2) of line 6c of your Form 1040 or your pay and when you figure your estimated Useful ItemsForm 1040A. tax, consider tax law changes effective in 2010. You may want to see:
If you do not list the dependent's SSN See What's New for 2010  in the front of this
when required or if you list an incorrect publication. For information on expiring tax ben- Publication
SSN, the exemption may be disal- efits for 2010, see What's New for 2010 in Publi-
CAUTION
!
❏ 505 Tax Withholding and Estimated Taxlowed. cation 505.
Page 38 Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax

Page 41 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
❏ 919 How Do I Adjust My Tax Household workers. If you are a household change the information later, you must fill out a
new form.worker, you can ask your employer to withholdWithholding?
If you work only part of the year (for example,income tax from your pay. A household worker is
you start working after the beginning of theForm (and Instructions) an employee who performs household work in a
year), too much tax may be withheld. You mayprivate home, local college club, local fraternity
❏ W-4 Employee's Withholding Allowance be able to avoid overwithholding if your em-or sorority chapter.
Certificate ployer agrees to use the part-year method. SeeTax is withheld only if you want it withheld
Part-Year Method in chapter 1 of Publicationand your employer agrees to withhold it. If you❏ W-4P Withholding Certificate for Pension
505 for more information.do not have enough income tax withheld, youor Annuity Payments
may have to pay estimated tax, as discussed Employee also receiving pension income.❏ W-4S Request for Federal Income Tax later under Estimated Tax for 2010. If you receive pension or annuity income andWithholding From Sick Pay
begin a new job, you will need to file Form W-4❏ W-4V Voluntary Withholding Request Farmworkers. Income tax generally is with- with your new employer. However, you canheld from your cash wages for work on a farm choose to split your withholding allowances be-❏ 1040-ES Estimated Tax for Individuals unless your employer both: tween your pension and job in any manner. See❏ 2210 Underpayment of Estimated Tax by Publication 919 for more information.• Pays you cash wages of less than $150Individuals, Estates, and Trusts during the year, and
• Has expenditures for agricultural labor to- Changing Your Withholdingtaling less than $2,500 during the year.
During the year changes may occur to your
Tax Withholding marital status, exemptions, adjustments, deduc-Differential wage payments.  When employ- tions, or credits you expect to claim on your taxees are on leave from employment for militaryfor 2010 return. When this happens, you may need toduty, some employers may make up the differ- give your employer a new Form W-4 to changeence between the military pay and civilian pay.This section discusses income tax withholding your withholding status or number of al-Payments made after December 31, 2008, to anon: lowances.employee who is on active duty for a period of If the changes reduce the number of al-• Salaries and wages, more than 30 days, will be subject to income tax lowances you are claiming or changes your mar-withholding, but not subject to social security or• Tips, ital status from married to single, you must giveMedicare taxes. The wages and withholding will your employer a new Form W-4 within 10 days.• Taxable fringe benefits, be reported on Form W-2, Wage and Tax State- Generally, you can submit a new Form W-4ment.• Sick pay, whenever you wish to change the number of
your withholding allowances for any other rea-• Pensions and annuities, son.Determining Amount of Tax• Gambling winnings,
Withheld Using Form W-4 Changing your withholding for 2011. If• Unemployment compensation, and events in 2010 will decrease the number of yourThe amount of income tax your employer with- withholding allowances for 2011, you must give• Certain federal payments, such as social holds from your regular pay depends on two your employer a new Form W-4 by December 1,security. things. 2010. If the event occurs in December 2010,This section explains the rules for withholding submit a new Form W-4 within 10 days.• The amount you earn in each payroll pe-tax from each of these types of income. riod.
This section also covers backup withholding • The information you give your employer Checking Your Withholdingon interest, dividends, and other payments. on Form W-4.
After you have given your employer a Form W-4,
Salaries and Wages Form W-4 includes four types of information you can check to see whether the amount of tax
that your employer will use to figure your with- withheld from your pay is too little or too much.Income tax is withheld from the pay of most holding. See Publication 919 , later. If too much or too
employees. Your pay includes your regular pay, little tax is being withheld, you should give your• Whether to withhold at the single rate or atbonuses, commissions, and vacation al- employer a new Form W-4 to change your with-the lower married rate.lowances. It also includes reimbursements and holding.
other expense allowances paid under a nonac- • How many withholding allowances you
countable plan. See Supplemental Wages , claim (each allowance reduces the Note. You cannot give your employer a pay-
later, for more information about reimburse- amount withheld). ment to cover withholding on salaries and
ments and allowances paid under a nonac- wages for past pay periods or a payment for• Whether you want an additional amountcountable plan. estimated tax.withheld.
If your income is low enough that you will not
• Whether you are claiming an exemptionhave to pay income tax for the year, you may be
from withholding. See Exemption From Completing Form W-4 andexempt from withholding. This is explained
Withholding, later.under Exemption From Withholding, later. Worksheets
You can ask your employer to withhold in- Form W-4 has worksheets to help you figurecome tax from noncash wages and other wages Note. You must specify a filing status and a how many withholding allowances you cannot subject to withholding. If your employer does number of withholding allowances on Form W-4. claim. The worksheets are for your own records.not agree to withhold tax, or if not enough is You cannot specify only a dollar amount of with- Do not give them to your employer.withheld, you may have to pay estimated tax, as holding.discussed later under Estimated Tax for 2010. Multiple jobs. If you have income from more
than one job at the same time, complete only
Military retirees. Military retirement pay is one set of Form W-4 worksheets. Then split yourNew Job
treated in the same manner as regular pay for allowances between the Forms W-4 for each
income tax withholding purposes, even though it When you start a new job, you must fill out Form job. You cannot claim the same allowances with
is treated as a pension or annuity for other tax W-4 and give it to your employer. Your employer more than one employer at the same time. You
purposes. should have copies of the form. If you need to can claim all your allowances with one employer
Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax Page 39

Page 42 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
and none with the other(s), or divide them any compensation, or self-employment in- However, if your employer has withheld
other way. come. more than the correct amount of tax for the Form
W-4 you have in effect, you do not have to fill out• You will owe additional amounts with yourMarried individuals. If both you and your a new Form W-4 to have your withholding low-return, such as self-employment tax.spouse are employed and expect to file a joint ered to the correct amount. Your employer can
return, figure your withholding allowances using • Your withholding is based on obsolete repay the amount that was withheld incorrectly.
your combined income, adjustments, deduc- Form W-4 information for a substantial If you are not repaid, your Form W-2 will reflect
tions, exemptions, and credits. Use only one set part of the year. the full amount actually withheld, which you
of worksheets. You can divide your total al- would claim when you file your tax return.• Your earnings are more than $130,000 iflowances any way, but you cannot claim an
you are single or $180,000 if you are mar-allowance that your spouse also claims.
ried.If you and your spouse expect to file sepa- Exemption From Withholdingrate returns, figure your allowances using sepa- • You work only part of the year.
rate worksheets based on your own individual If you claim exemption from withholding, your• You change the number of your withhold-income, adjustments, deductions, exemptions, employer will not withhold federal income taxing allowances during the year.and credits. from your wages. The exemption applies only to
income tax, not to social security or MedicareAlternative method of figuring withholding tax.Cumulative wage method. If you change theallowances. You do not have to use the Form number of your withholding allowances during You can claim exemption from withholdingW-4 worksheets if you use a more accurate the year, too much or too little tax may have for 2010 only if both of the following situationsmethod of figuring the number of withholding been withheld for the period before you made apply.allowances. For more information, see Alterna- the change. You may be able to compensate fortive method of figuring withholding allowances • For 2009 you had a right to a refund of allthis if your employer agrees to use the cumula-under Completing Form W-4 and Worksheets in federal income tax withheld because youtive wage withholding method for the rest of thePublication 505, chapter 1. had no tax liability.year. You must ask your employer in writing to
use this method. • For 2010 you expect a refund of all federalPersonal Allowances Worksheet. Use the
To be eligible, you must have been paid for income tax withheld because you expectPersonal Allowances Worksheet on page 1 of
the same kind of payroll period (weekly, bi- to have no tax liability.Form W-4 to figure your withholding allowances
weekly, etc.) since the beginning of the year.based on exemptions and any special al-
lowances that apply. Students. If you are a student, you are not
automatically exempt. See chapter 1 to find out ifDeductions and Adjustments Worksheet. Publication 919 you must file a return. If you work only part timeUse this worksheet if you plan to itemize your or only during the summer, you may qualify forTo make sure you are getting the right amount ofdeductions, claim certain credits, or claim ad- exemption from withholding.tax withheld, get Publication 919. It will help youjustments to the income on your 2010 tax return
compare the total tax to be withheld during theand you want to reduce your withholding. Also, Age 65 or older or blind. If you are 65 or olderyear with the tax you can expect to figure oncomplete this worksheet when you have or blind, use Worksheet 1-1 or 1-2 in chapter 1 ofyour return. It also will help you determine howchanges to these items to see if you need to Publication 505, to help you decide if you qualifymuch additional withholding, if any, is neededchange your withholding. for exemption from withholding. Do not use ei-each payday to avoid owing tax when you fileThe Deductions and Adjustments Worksheet ther worksheet if you will itemize deductions,your return. If you do not have enough tax with-is on page 2 of Form W-4. Chapter 1 of Publica- claim exemptions for dependents, or claim taxheld, you may have to pay estimated tax, astion 505 explains this worksheet. credits on your 2010 return. Instead, see Itemiz-explained under Estimated Tax for 2010, later. ing deductions or claiming exemptions or creditsTwo-Earners/Multiple Jobs Worksheet.
in chapter 1 of Publication 505.You may need to complete this worksheet if you
have more than one job or a working spouse. Rules Your Employer Must Follow Claiming exemption from withholding. ToAlso, on line 8 of this worksheet you can add any
claim exemption, you must give your employer aadditional withholding necessary to cover any It may be helpful for you to know some of the
Form W-4. Do not complete lines 5 and 6. Enteramount you expect to owe other than income withholding rules your employer must follow.
ªExemptº on line 7.tax, such as self-employment tax. These rules can affect how to fill out your Form
If you claim exemption, but later your situa-W-4 and how to handle problems that may arise.
tion changes so that you will have to pay income
New Form W-4. When you start a new job, tax after all, you must file a new Form W-4 withinGetting the Right Amount of Tax
your employer should give you a Form W-4 to fill 10 days after the change. If you claim exemptionWithheld out. Beginning with your first payday, your em- in 2010, but you expect to owe income tax for
ployer will use the information you give on the 2011, you must file a new Form W-4 by Decem-In most situations, the tax withheld from your
form to figure your withholding. ber 1, 2010.pay will be close to the tax you figure on your
If you later fill out a new Form W-4, yourreturn if you follow these two rules. Your claim of exempt status may be re-
employer can put it into effect as soon as possi- viewed by the IRS.• You accurately complete all the Form W-4 ble. The deadline for putting it into effect is theworksheets that apply to you. An exemption is good for only 1 year.start of the first payroll period ending 30 or more
You must give your employer a new Form W-4days after you turn it in.• You give your employer a new Form W-4 by February 15 each year to continue your ex-when changes occur. emption.No Form W-4. If you do not give your em-
ployer a completed Form W-4, your employerBut because the worksheets and withholding
must withhold at the highest rate, as if you weremethods do not account for all possible situa-
single and claimed no withholding allowances. Supplemental Wagestions, you may not be getting the right amount
withheld. This is most likely to happen in the Repaying withheld tax. If you find you are Supplemental wages include bonuses, commis-following situations. having too much tax withheld because you did sions, overtime pay, vacation allowances, cer-
not claim all the withholding allowances you are tain sick pay, and expense allowances under• You are married and both you and your
entitled to, you should give your employer a new certain plans. The payer can figure withholdingspouse work.
Form W-4. Your employer cannot repay any of on supplemental wages using the same method• You have more than one job at a time. the tax previously withheld. Instead, claim the used for your regular wages. However, if these
• You have nonwage income, such as inter- full amount withheld when you file your tax re- payments are identified separately from your
est, dividends, alimony, unemployment turn. regular wages, your employer or other payer of
Page 40 Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax

Page 43 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
supplemental wages can withhold income tax Not enough pay to cover taxes. If your regu- Give the completed form to the payer of your
from these wages at a flat rate. lar pay is not enough for your employer to with- sick pay. The payer must withhold according to
hold all the tax (including income tax and social your directions on the form.
security and Medicare taxes (or the equivalentExpense allowances. Reimbursements or
railroad retirement tax) due on your pay plus Estimated tax. If you do not request withhold-other expense allowances paid by your em-
your tips, you can give your employer money to ing on Form W-4S, or if you do not have enoughployer under a nonaccountable plan are treated
cover the shortage. See Giving your employer tax withheld, you may have to make estimatedas supplemental wages.
money for taxes in chapter 6. tax payments. If you do not pay enough tax,Reimbursements or other expense al-
either through estimated tax or withholding, or alowances paid under an accountable plan that
Allocated tips. Your employer should not combination of both, you may have to pay aare more than your proven expenses are treated
withhold income tax, social security tax, Medi- penalty. See Underpayment Penalty for 2009 atas paid under a nonaccountable plan if you do
care tax, or railroad retirement tax on any allo- the end of this chapter.not return the excess payments within a reason-
cated tips. Withholding is based only on yourable period of time.
pay plus your reported tips. Your employerFor more information about accountable and Pensions and Annuitiesshould refund to you any incorrectly withheldnonaccountable expense allowance plans, see tax. See Allocated Tips  in chapter 6 for moreReimbursements in chapter 26. Income tax usually will be withheld from yourinformation. pension or annuity distributions unless you
choose not to have it withheld. This rule applies
Penalties Taxable Fringe Benefits to distributions from:
• A traditional individual retirement arrange-You may have to pay a penalty of $500 if both of The value of certain noncash fringe benefits you ment (IRA),the following apply. receive from your employer is considered part of
your pay. Your employer generally must with- • A life insurance company under an en-• You make statements or claim withholding
hold income tax on these benefits from your dowment, annuity, or life insurance con-allowances on your Form W-4 that reduce
regular pay. tract,the amount of tax withheld.
For information on fringe benefits, see Fringe • A pension, annuity, or profit-sharing plan,• You have no reasonable basis for those Benefits under Employee Compensation in
statements or allowances at the time you chapter 5. • A stock bonus plan, andprepare your Form W-4. Although the value of your personal use of an • Any other plan that defers the time youemployer-provided car, truck, or other highway receive compensation.There is also a criminal penalty for willfully motor vehicle is taxable, your employer can
supplying false or fraudulent information on your choose not to withhold income tax on that The amount withheld depends on whetherForm W-4 or for willfully failing to supply informa- amount. Your employer must notify you if this you receive payments spread out over moretion that would increase the amount withheld. choice is made.
than 1 year (periodic payments), within 1 yearThe penalty upon conviction can be either a fine For more information on withholding on tax-
(nonperiodic payments), or as an eligible rollo-of up to $1,000 or imprisonment for up to 1 year, able fringe benefits, see chapter 1 of Publication
ver distribution (ERD). Income tax withholdingor both. 505.
from an ERD is mandatory.These penalties will apply if you deliberately
and knowingly falsify your Form W-4 in an at- Sick Pay More information. For more information ontempt to reduce or eliminate the proper withhold-
taxation of annuities and distributions (includinging of taxes. A simple error or an honest mistake Sick pay is a payment to you to replace your ERDs) from qualified retirement plans, seewill not result in one of these penalties. For regular wages while you are temporarily absent chapter 10. For information on IRAs, see chap-example, a person who has tried to figure the from work due to sickness or personal injury. To ter 17. For more information on withholding onnumber of withholding allowances correctly, but qualify as sick pay, it must be paid under a plan pensions and annuities, including a discussionclaims seven when the proper number is six, will to which your employer is a party.not be charged a W-4 penalty. of Form W-4P, see Pensions and Annuities inIf you receive sick pay from your employer or chapter 1 of Publication 505.an agent of your employer, income tax must be
withheld. An agent who does not pay regularTips
wages to you may choose to withhold income Gambling Winnings
The tips you receive while working on your job tax at a flat rate.
are considered part of your pay. You must in- Income tax is withheld at a flat 25% rate fromHowever, if you receive sick pay from a third
clude your tips on your tax return on the same certain kinds of gambling winnings.party who is not acting as an agent of your
line as your regular pay. However, tax is not employer, income tax will be withheld only if you Gambling winnings of more than $5,000 from
withheld directly from tip income, as it is from choose to have it withheld. See Form W-4S , the following sources are subject to income tax
your regular pay. Nevertheless, your employer below. withholding.
will take into account the tips you report when If you receive payments under a plan in • Any sweepstakes; wagering pool, includ-figuring how much to withhold from your regular which your employer does not participate (such ing payments made to winners of pokerpay. as an accident or health plan where you paid all tournaments; or lottery.the premiums), the payments are not sick paySee chapter 6  for information on reporting
and usually are not taxable.your tips to your employer. For more information • Any other wager, if the proceeds are at
on the withholding rules for tip income, see Pub- least 300 times the amount of the bet.
lication 531, Reporting Tip Income. Union agreements. If you receive sick pay It does not matter whether your winnings areunder a collective bargaining agreement be- paid in cash, in property, or as an annuity. Win-tween your union and your employer, the agree-How employer figures amount to withhold. nings not paid in cash are taken into account atment may determine the amount of income taxThe tips you report to your employer are counted their fair market value.withholding. See your union representative oras part of your income for the month you report
your employer for more information. Exception. Gambling winnings from bingo,them. Your employer can figure your withholding
keno, and slot machines generally are not sub-in either of two ways.
ject to income tax withholding. However, youForm W-4S. If you choose to have income tax• By withholding at the regular rate on the may need to provide the payer with a socialwithheld from sick pay paid by a third party, suchsum of your pay plus your reported tips. security number to avoid withholding. Seeas an insurance company, you must fill out Form
Backup withholding on gambling winnings in• By withholding at the regular rate on your W-4S. Its instructions contain a worksheet you
chapter 1 of Publication 505. If you receive gam-pay plus a percentage of your reported can use to figure the amount you want withheld.
bling winnings not subject to withholding, youtips. They also explain restrictions that may apply.
Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax Page 41

Page 44 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
may need to pay estimated tax. See Estimated credit corporation loans or crop disaster pay- Who Does Not Have ToTax for 2010, later. ments.
Pay Estimated TaxIf you do not pay enough tax, either through
withholding or estimated tax, or a combination of Backup Withholding If you receive salaries or wages, you can avoidboth, you may have to pay a penalty. See Un-
having to pay estimated tax by asking your em-derpayment Penalty for 2009, later. Banks or other businesses that pay you certain ployer to take more tax out of your earnings. Tokinds of income must file an information returnForm W-2G. If a payer withholds income tax do this, give a new Form W-4 to your employer.
(Form 1099) with the IRS. The information re-from your gambling winnings, you should re- See chapter 1 of Publication 505.
ceive a Form W-2G, Certain Gambling Win- turn shows how much you were paid during the
nings, showing the amount you won and the year. It also includes your name and taxpayer Estimated tax not required. You do not have
amount withheld. Report the tax withheld on line identification number (TIN). TINs are explained to pay estimated tax for 2010 if you meet all61 of Form 1040. in chapter 1 under Social Security Number. three of the following conditions.
These payments generally are not subject to • You had no tax liability for 2009.Unemployment withholding. However, ªbackupº withholding is • You were a U.S. citizen or resident for therequired in certain situations. Backup withhold-Compensation whole year.ing can apply to most kinds of payments that are
You can choose to have income tax withheld • Your 2009 tax year covered a 12-monthreported on Form 1099.
from unemployment compensation. To make period.The payer must withhold at a flat 28% rate inthis choice, fill out Form W-4V (or a similar form
the following situations.provided by the payer) and give it to the payer. You had no tax liability for 2009 if your total tax
All unemployment compensation is taxable. was zero or you did not have to file an income• You do not give the payer your TIN in the
So, if you do not have income tax withheld, you tax return. For the definition of ªtotal tax,º seerequired manner.
may have to pay estimated tax. See Estimated Total tax for 2009Ðline 14b in Publication 505,• The IRS notifies the payer that the TINTax for 2010, later. chapter 2.
you gave is incorrect.If you do not pay enough tax, either through
withholding or estimated tax, or a combination of • You are required, but fail, to certify that Who Must Pay Estimatedboth, you may have to pay a penalty. See Un- you are not subject to backup withholding.derpayment Penalty for 2009, later, for informa- Tax
• The IRS notifies the payer to start with-tion.
If you owe additional tax for 2009, you may haveholding on interest or dividends because
to pay estimated tax for 2010.you have underreported interest or divi-Federal Payments
You can use the following general rule as adends on your income tax return. The IRS
guide during the year to see if you will haveYou can choose to have income tax withheld will do this only after it has mailed you four
enough withholding, or if you should increasefrom certain federal payments you receive. notices over at least a 210-day period.
your withholding or make estimated tax pay-These payments are:
ments.See Backup Withholding in chapter 1 of Publi-1. Social security benefits, cation 505 for more information.
General rule. In most cases, you must pay2. Tier 1 railroad retirement benefits,
estimated tax for 2010 if both of the following3. Commodity credit corporation loans you Penalties. There are civil and criminal penal- apply.choose to include in your gross income, ties for giving false information to avoid backup
and 1. You expect to owe at least $1,000 in taxwithholding. The civil penalty is $500. The crimi-
for 2010, after subtracting your withholdingnal penalty, upon conviction, is a fine of up to4. Payments under the Agricultural Act of and refundable credits.1949 (7 U.S.C. 1421 et. seq.), as $1,000 or imprisonment of up to 1 year, or both.
amended, or title II of the Disaster Assis- 2. You expect your withholding plus your re-
tance Act of 1988, that are treated as in- fundable credits to be less than the smaller
surance proceeds and that you receive of:
because:
Estimated Tax for 2010 a. 90% of the tax to be shown on your
a. Your crops were destroyed or damaged 2010 tax return, or
Estimated tax is the method used to pay tax onby drought, flood, or any other natural
b. 100% of the tax shown on the yourdisaster, or income that is not subject to withholding. This 2009 tax return. Your 2009 tax returnincludes income from self-employment, interest,b. You were unable to plant crops be- must cover all 12 months.dividends, alimony, rent, gains from the sale ofcause of a natural disaster described in
assets, prizes, and awards. You also may have(a).
If the result from using the general ruleto pay estimated tax if the amount of income tax
above suggests that you will not haveTo make this choice, fill out Form W-4V (or a being withheld from your salary, pension, or enough withholding, complete the
CAUTION
!similar form provided by the payer) and give it to other income is not enough. 2010 Estimated Tax Worksheet in the instruc-the payer. Estimated tax is used to pay both income tax tions to Form 1040-ES for a more accurate cal-If you do not choose to have income tax and self-employment tax, as well as other taxes culation.withheld, you may have to pay estimated tax.
and amounts reported on your tax return. If youSee Estimated Tax for 2010, later. Special rules for farmers, fishermen, anddo not pay enough tax, either through withhold-If you do not pay enough tax, either through higher income taxpayers. If at leasting or estimated tax, or a combination of both,withholding or estimated tax, or a combination of two-thirds of your gross income for 2009 or 2010both, you may have to pay a penalty. See Un- you may have to pay a penalty. If you do not pay is from farming or fishing, substitute 66 2/3% forderpayment Penalty for 2009, at the end of this enough by the due date of each payment period 90% in (2a) under the General Rule earlier. Ifchapter, for information. (see When To Pay Estimated Tax , later), you your AGI for 2009 was more than $150,000may be charged a penalty even if you are due a ($75,000 if your filing status for 2010 is marriedMore information. For more information refund when you file your tax return. For infor- filing a separate return), substitute 110% forabout the tax treatment of social security and
mation on when the penalty applies, see Un- 100% in (2b) under General rule , earlier. Seerailroad retirement benefits, see chapter 11. Get
derpayment Penalty for 2009, at the end of this Figure 4-A, later, and Publication 505, chapter 2Publication 225, Farmer's Tax Guide, for infor-
chapter.mation about the tax treatment of commodity for more information.
Page 42 Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax

Page 45 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure 4-A. Do You Have To Pay Estimated Tax?
Will you owe $1,000 or more
for 2010 after subtracting
income tax withholding and
refundable credits* from your
total tax? (Do not subtract
any estimated tax payments.)
You MUST make estimated
tax payment(s) by the
required due date(s).
Start Here
No
/H17075
Yes
Yes
Will your income tax
withholding and refundable
credits* be at least 100%** of
the tax shown on your 2009
tax return?
/H17075
No
/H17075
Will your income tax
withholding and refundable
credits* be at least 90%
(66
2⁄3 % for farmers and
fishermen) of the tax shown on
your 2010 tax return? Note: Your 2009 return must
have covered a 12-month
period.
You are NOT required to pay
estimated tax.
See When To Pay
Estimated Tax.
No
Yes
*Use the refundable credits shown on the 2010 Estimated Tax Worksheet, line 13b.
/H17074
/H17076
/H17076
**110% if less than two-thirds of your gross income for 2009 and 2010 is from farming or fishing and your
2009 adjusted gross income was more than $150,000 ($75,000 if your filing status for 2010 is married filing a separate return).
Aliens. Resident and nonresident aliens also choice of filing a joint tax return or separate was Heather's. For 2010, they plan to file mar-
may have to pay estimated tax. Resident aliens ried filing separately. Joe figures his share of thereturns for 2010.
should follow the rules in this chapter unless tax on the 2009 joint return as follows.2009 separate returns and 2010 joint re-noted otherwise. Nonresident aliens should get
turn. If you plan to file a joint return with your Tax on $40,100 based on aForm 1040-ES (NR), U.S. Estimated Tax for
separate return ........ . $6,219spouse for 2010, but you filed separate returnsNonresident Alien Individuals. Tax on $8,400 based on afor 2009, your 2009 tax is the total of the taxYou are an alien if you are not a citizen or separate return ........ .  846shown on your separate returns. You filed anational of the United States. You are a resident Total ................. . $ 7,065separate return if you filed as single, head ofalien if you either have a green card or meet the Joe's percentage of total ($6,219household, or married filing separately.substantial presence test. For more information ÷  $7,065) ............ . 88%about the substantial presence test, see Publi- Joe's share of tax on joint return 2009 joint return and 2010 separate re-cation 519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens. ($6,444 ×  88%) ........ . $ 5,671turns. If you plan to file a separate return for
2010 but you filed a joint return for 2009, yourMarried taxpayers. If you qualify to make joint
2009 tax is your share of the tax on the jointestimated tax payments, apply the rules dis- How To Figure return. You file a separate return if you file ascussed here to your joint estimated income.
Estimated Taxsingle, head of household, or married filing sep-You and your spouse can make joint esti-
arately.mated tax payments even if you are not living To figure your estimated tax, you must figuretogether. To figure your share of the tax on the joint your expected adjusted gross income (AGI), tax-However, you and your spouse cannot make return, first figure the tax both you and your able income, taxes, deductions, and credits forjoint estimated tax payments if: spouse would have paid had you filed separate the year.
returns for 2009 using the same filing status as When figuring your 2010 estimated tax, it• You are legally separated under a decree
for 2010. Then multiply the tax on the joint return may be helpful to use your income, deductions,of divorce or separate maintenance,
and credits for 2009 as a starting point. Use yourby the following fraction. • You and your spouse have different tax 2009 federal tax return as a guide. You can useyears, or The tax you would have paid had Form 1040-ES to figure your estimated tax.
you filed a separate return Nonresident aliens use Form 1040-ES (NR) to• Either spouse is a nonresident alien (un-
figure estimated tax (see chapter 8 of Publica-less that spouse elected to be treated as a The total tax you and your spouse
tion 519 for more information).resident alien for tax purposes (see chap- would have paid had you filed
separate returns You must make adjustments both forter 1 of Publication 519)).
changes in your own situation and for recent
If you do not qualify to make joint estimated Example. Joe and Heather filed a joint re- changes in the tax law. For 2010, there are
tax payments, apply these rules to your sepa- turn for 2009 showing taxable income of several changes in the law. For a discussion of
rate estimated income. Making joint or separate $48,500 and a tax of $6,444. Of the $48,500 these changes, visit the IRS website at www.irs.
estimated tax payments will not affect your taxable income, $40,100 was Joe's and the rest gov.
Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax Page 43

Page 46 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you first haveForm 1040-ES includes a worksheet to help • Your required annualized income install-
income on which Make a Make lateryou figure your estimated tax. Keep the work- ment for that period.you must pay payment installmentssheet for your records. estimated tax: by:* by:* You also do not have to pay estimated tax if youFor more complete information and exam- will pay enough through withholding to keep theBefore April 1 April 15 June 15ples of how to figure your estimated tax for 2010, amount you owe with your return under $1,000.Sept. 15see chapter 2 of Publication 505. Jan. 15 next year
April 1 ± May 31 June 15 Sept. 15 How To Pay Estimated TaxWhen To Pay Estimated Jan. 15 next year
There are five ways to pay estimated tax.Tax June 1 ± Aug. 31 Sept. 15 Jan. 15 next year
• Credit an overpayment on your 2009 re-After Aug. 31 Jan. 15 (None)For estimated tax purposes, the year is divided turn to your 2010 estimated tax.next yearinto four payment periods. Each period has a
specific payment due date. If you do not pay • Send in your payment (check or money*See January payment and Saturday, Sunday,
enough tax by the due date of each of the pay- order) with a payment voucher from Formholiday rule, earlier.
ment periods, you may be charged a penalty 1040-ES.
even if you are due a refund when you file your How much to pay to avoid a penalty. To • Pay electronically using the Electronicincome tax return. The payment periods and determine how much you should pay by each Federal Tax Payment System (EFTPS).due dates for estimated tax payments are payment due date, see How To Figure Eachshown next. • Pay by electronic funds withdrawal if youPayment, next. are filing Form 1040 or Form 1040A elec-
For the period:  Due date: tronically.
How To Figure • Pay by credit or debit card using aJan. 1* ± March 31 ...... . April 15
Each Payment pay-by-phone system or the Internet.April 1 ± May 31 ........ . June 15
June 1 ± August 31 ...... . Sept. 15 You should pay enough estimated tax by theSept. 1± Dec. 31 ........ . January 15 Credit an Overpaymentdue date of each payment period to avoid anext year** penalty for that period. You can figure your re- If you show an overpayment of tax after complet-*If your tax year does not begin on January 1, quired payment for each period by using either
ing your Form 1040 or Form 1040A for 2009,see the Form 1040-ES instructions. the regular installment method or the annualized**See January payment, later. you can apply part or all of it to your estimatedincome installment method. These methods are
tax for 2010. On line 74 of Form 1040, or line 47described in chapter 2 of Publication 505. If you
of Form 1040A, enter the amount you wantSaturday, Sunday, holiday rule. If the due do not pay enough during each payment period,
date for an estimated tax payment falls on a credited to your estimated tax rather than re-you may be charged a penalty even if you are
Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the payment funded. Take the amount you have credited intodue a refund when you file your tax return.
will be on time if you make it on the next day that account when figuring your estimated tax pay-If the earlier discussion of No income subjectis not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday. In ments.to estimated tax during first period  or the later2011, January 15 is a Saturday and Monday, You cannot have any of that amount re-discussion of Change in estimated tax applies toJanuary 17, is a holiday. The January 15 pay- funded to you until you file your tax return for theyou, you may benefit from reading Annualizedment is due by January 18, 2011. following year. You also cannot use that over-Income Installment Method in chapter 2 of Publi-
payment in any other way.cation 505 for information on how to avoid aJanuary payment. If you file your 2010 Form
penalty.1040 or Form 1040A by January 31, 2011, and
pay the rest of the tax you owe, you do not need Pay by Check or Money OrderUnderpayment penalty. Under the regular in-to make the payment due on January 18, 2011. stallment method, if your estimated tax payment Using the Estimated Tax 
for any period is less than one-fourth of yourFiscal year taxpayers. If your tax year does Payment Voucher
estimated tax, you may be charged a penalty fornot start on January 1, see the Form 1040-ES
underpayment of estimated tax for that periodinstructions for your payment due dates. Each payment of estimated tax by check or
when you file your tax return. Under the annual- money order must be accompanied by a pay-
ized income installment method, your estimated ment voucher from Form 1040-ES. If you made
tax payments vary with your income, but theWhen To Start estimated tax payments last year and did not
amount required must be paid each period. See use a paid preparer to file your return, you
You do not have to make estimated tax pay- chapter 4 of Publication 505 for more informa- should receive a copy of the 2010 Formments until you have income on which you will tion. 1040-ES in the mail. It will contain paymentowe the tax. If you have income subject to esti- vouchers preprinted with your name, address,mated tax during the first payment period, you Change in estimated tax. After you make an and social security number. Using the preprintedmust make your first payment by the due date estimated tax payment, changes in your income, vouchers will speed processing, reduce thefor the first payment period. You can pay all your adjustments, deductions, credits, or exemptions chance of error, and help save processing costs.estimated tax at that time, or you can pay it in may make it necessary for you to refigure your Use the window envelopes that came withinstallments. If you choose to pay in install- estimated tax. Pay the unpaid balance of your your Form 1040-ES package. If you use yourments, make your first payment by the due date amended estimated tax by the next payment own envelopes, make sure you mail your pay-for the first payment period. Make your remain- due date after the change or in installments by ment vouchers to the address shown in theing installment payments by the due dates for that date and the due dates for the remaining Form 1040-ES instructions for the place wherethe later periods. payment periods. you live.
No income subject to estimated tax during If you did not pay estimated tax last year, you
first period. If you do not have income subject can order Form 1040-ES from the IRS (seeEstimated Tax Paymentsto estimated tax until a later payment period, you inside back cover of this publication) orNot Requiredmust make your first payment by the due date download it from the IRS website at www.irs.
for that period. You can pay your entire esti- gov. Follow the instructions in the package toYou do not have to pay estimated tax if yourmated tax by the due date for that period or you make sure you use the vouchers correctly.withholding in each payment period is at least ascan pay it in installments by the due date for that much as: Do not use the address shown in theperiod and the due dates for the remaining peri-
Form 1040 or Form 1040A instruc-• One-fourth of your required annual pay-ods. The following chart shows when to make
tions.ment, orinstallment payments.
CAUTION
!
Page 44 Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax

Page 47 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you file a joint return and are making joint Forms W-2 and W-2G. Always file Form W-2 • Form 1099-INT, Interest Income;
estimated tax payments, enter the names and with your income tax return. File Form W-2G • Form 1099-MISC, Miscellaneous Income;social security numbers on the payment voucher with your return only if it shows any federal
• Form 1099-OID, Original Issue Discount;in the same order as they will appear on the joint income tax withheld from your winnings.
return. You should get at least two copies of each • Form 1099-Q, Payments From Qualifiedform you receive. Attach one copy to the front of Education Programs;Change of address. You must notify the IRS your federal income tax return. Keep one copy
if you are making estimated tax payments and • Form 1099-R, Distributions From Pen-for your records. You also should receive copies
you changed your address during the year. to file with your state and local returns. sions, Annuities, Retirement or
Send a clear and concise written statement to Profit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insurance
the Internal Revenue Service Center where you Contracts, etc.;
filed your last return and provide all of the follow- Form W-2 • Form SSA-1099, Social Security Benefiting.
Statement; andYour employer is required to provide or send• Your full name (and spouse's full name). Form W-2 to you no later than February 1, 2010. • Form RRB-1099, Payments by the Rail-• Your signature (and spouse's signature). You should receive a separate Form W-2 from road Retirement Board.each employer you worked for.• Your old address (and spouse's old ad- If you stopped working before the end of If you received the types of income reporteddress if different). 2009, your employer could have given you your on some forms in the 1099 series, you may not• Your new address. Form W-2 at any time after you stopped working. be able to use Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ.However, your employer must provide or send it• Your social security number (and spouse's See the instructions to these forms for details.to you by February 1, 2010.social security number).
If you ask for the form, your employer must
You can use Form 8822, Change of Address, for Form 1099-R. Attach Form 1099-R to yoursend it to you within 30 days after receiving your
this purpose. written request or within 30 days after your final return if box 4 shows federal income tax with-
wage payment, whichever is later. held. Include the amount withheld in the total on
Pay Electronically If you have not received your Form W-2 on line 61 of Form 1040 or line 38 of Form 1040A.
time, you should ask your employer for it. If you You cannot use Form 1040EZ if you receivedIf you want to make estimated payments by do not receive it by February 15, call the IRS. payments reported on Form 1099-R.using EFTPS, by electronic funds withdrawal, or Form W-2 shows your total pay and otherby credit or debit card, see the Form 1040-ES compensation and the income tax, social secur-instructions or How To Pay Estimated Tax in Backup withholding. If you were subject toity tax, and Medicare tax that was withheld dur-chapter 2 of Publication 505. backup withholding on income you received dur-ing the year. Include the federal income tax
ing 2009, include the amount withheld, aswithheld (as shown in box 2 of Form W-2) on:
shown in box 4 of your Form 1099, in the total on
• Line 61 if you file Form 1040, line 61 of Form 1040, line 38 of Form 1040A, or
line 7 of Form 1040EZ.• Line 38 if you file Form 1040A, orCredit for Withholding
• Line 7 if you file Form 1040EZ.and Estimated Tax Form Not CorrectIn addition, Form W-2 is used to report any
taxable sick pay you received and any incomefor 2009 If you receive a form with incorrect informationtax withheld from your sick pay.
on it, you should ask the payer for a correctedWhen you file your 2009 income tax return, take
form. Call the telephone number or write to thecredit for all the income tax and excess social Form W-2G
address given for the payer on the form. Thesecurity or railroad retirement tax withheld from
corrected Form W-2G or Form 1099 you receiveIf you had gambling winnings in 2009, the payeryour salary, wages, pensions, etc. Also take
may have withheld income tax. If tax was with- will have an ªXº in the ªCORRECTEDº box at thecredit for the estimated tax you paid for 2009.
held, the payer will give you a Form W-2G show- top of the form. A special form, Form W-2c,These credits are subtracted from your tax. Be-
ing the amount you won and the amount of tax Corrected Wage and Tax Statement, is used tocause these credits are refundable, you should
withheld.file a return and claim these credits, even if you correct a Form W-2.
Report the amounts you won on line 21 ofdo not owe tax.
Form 1040. Take credit for the tax withheld on
Two or more employers. If you had two or line 61 of Form 1040. If you had gambling win- Form Received After Filing
more employers in 2009 and were paid wages of nings, you must use Form 1040; you cannot use
If you file your return and you later receive amore than $106,800, too much social security or Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ.
tier 1 railroad retirement tax may have been form for income that you did not include on your
withheld from your wages. You may be able to return, you should report the income and take
claim the excess as a credit against your income The 1099 Series credit for any income tax withheld by filing Form
tax when you file your return. See Credit for 1040X, Amended U.S. Individual Income TaxMost forms in the 1099 series are not filed withExcess Social Security Tax or Railroad Retire- Return.your return. These forms should be furnished toment Tax Withheld in chapter 37.
you by February 1, 2010 (or by February 16,
2010, if furnished by a broker). Unless instructed Separate ReturnsWithholding to file any of these forms with your return, keep
them for your records. There are several differ- If you are married but file a separate return, youIf you had income tax withheld during 2009, you ent forms in this series, including: can take credit only for the tax withheld fromshould be sent a statement by February 1, 2010,
your own income. Do not include any amountshowing your income and the tax withheld. De- • Form 1099-B, Proceeds From Broker and
withheld from your spouse's income. However,pending on the source of your income, you will Barter Exchange Transactions;
different rules may apply if you live in a commu-receive: • Form 1099-C, Cancellation of Debt; nity property state.• Form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement, • Form 1099-DIV, Dividends and Distribu- Community property states are listed in
• Form W-2G, Certain Gambling Winnings, tions; chapter 2. For more information on these rules,or and some exceptions, see Publication 555,• Form 1099-G, Certain Government Pay-
Community Property.• A form in the 1099 series. ments;
Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax Page 45

Page 48 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you made joint estimated tax payments, Generally, you will not have to pay a penaltyFiscal Years
you must decide how to divide the payments for 2009 if any of the following situations applies.
If you file your tax return on the basis of a fiscal between your returns. One of you can claim all • The total of your withholding and esti-year (a 12-month period ending on the last day of the estimated tax paid and the other none, or mated tax payments was at least as muchof any month except December), you must fol- you can divide it in any other way you agree on. as your 2008 tax (or 110% of your 2008low special rules to determine your credit for If you cannot agree, you must divide the pay- tax if your AGI was more than $150,000,federal income tax withholding. For a discussion ments in proportion to each spouse's individual $75,000 if your 2009 filing status is mar-of how to take credit for withholding on a fiscal tax as shown on your separate returns for 2009. ried filing separately) and you paid all re-year return, see Fiscal Years (FY) in chapter 3 of quired estimated tax payments on time.Publication 505.
• The tax balance due on your 2009 returnDivorced Taxpayers
is no more than 10% of your total 2009Estimated Tax If you made joint estimated tax payments for tax, and you paid all required estimated
2009, and you were divorced during the year, tax payments on time.Take credit for all your estimated tax payments either you or your former spouse can claim all offor 2009 on line 62 of Form 1040 or line 39 of • Your total 2009 tax minus your withholdingthe joint payments, or you each can claim part ofForm 1040A. Include any overpayment from and refundable credits is less than $1,000.them. If you cannot agree on how to divide the2008 that you had credited to your 2009 esti- payments, you must divide them in proportion to • You did not have a tax liability for 2008mated tax. You must use Form 1040 or Form each spouse's individual tax as shown on your and your 2008 tax year was 12 months.1040A if you paid estimated tax. You cannot use separate returns for 2009.Form 1040EZ. • You did not have any withholding taxesIf you claim any of the joint payments on your and your current year tax less any house-Name changed. If you changed your name, tax return, enter your former spouse's social hold employment taxes is less thanand you made estimated tax payments using security number (SSN) in the space provided on $1,000.your old name, attach a brief statement to the the front of Form 1040 or Form 1040A. If you
front of your tax return indicating: divorced and remarried in 2009, enter your pres- See Publication 505, chapter 4, for a definition of
ent spouse's SSN in that space and write your ªtotal taxº for 2008 and 2009.• When you made the payments, former spouse's SSN, followed by ªDIV,º to the
• The amount of each payment, left of Form 1040, line 62, or Form 1040A, line Farmers and fishermen Special rules apply if
39. you are a farmer or fisherman. See Farmers and• The IRS address to which you sent the
Fishermen in chapter 4 of Publication 505 forpayments,
more information.
• Your name when you made the payments,
IRS can figure the penalty for you. If youand Underpayment Penalty think you owe the penalty but you do not want to
• Your social security number. figure it yourself when you file your tax return,
for 2009 you may not have to. Generally, the IRS willThe statement should cover payments you
figure the penalty for you and send you a bill.made jointly with your spouse as well as any you If you did not pay enough tax, either through However, if you think you are able to lower ormade separately. withholding or by making timely estimated tax eliminate your penalty, you must complete Form
payments, you will have an underpayment of 2210 or Form 2210-F and attach it to your return.Separate Returns estimated tax and you may have to pay a pen- See chapter 4 of Publication 505.
alty.If you and your spouse made separate esti-
mated tax payments for 2009 and you file sepa-
rate returns, you can take credit only for your
own payments.
Page 46 Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax

Page 49 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Part Two.
The eight chapters in this part discuss many kinds of income. They explainIncome which income is and is not taxed. See Part Three for information on gains and
losses you report on Schedule D (Form 1040) and for information on selling
your home.
Business, or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040), Net
Profit From Business. You generally are not anIntroduction employee unless you are subject to the will and
5. This chapter discusses compensation received control of the person who employs you as to
for services as an employee, such as wages, what you are to do and how you are to do it.
salaries, and fringe benefits. The following top- Babysitting. If you babysit for relatives orics are included. neighborhood children, whether on a regularWages, Salaries, • Bonuses and awards. basis or only periodically, the rules for childcare
providers apply to you.• Special rules for certain employees.and Other
• Sickness and injury benefits. Miscellaneous
Earnings The chapter explains what income is included Compensation
in the employee's gross income and what is not
This section discusses different types of em-included.
ployee compensation.
What's New Useful Items Advance commissions and other earnings.You may want to see: If you receive advance commissions or otherDifferential wage payments. Payments
amounts for services to be performed in themade by an employer to an individual for any Publication future and you are a cash-method taxpayer, youperiod during which the individual is an active must include these amounts in your income in❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Carduty member of the uniformed services are the year you receive them.Expensestreated as wages. See the discussion under If you repay unearned commissions or otherMiscellaneous Compensation. ❏ 503 Child and Dependent Care amounts in the same year you receive them,Expenses reduce the amount included in your income byBicycle commuters. The qualified employer
the repayment. If you repay them in a later tax❏ 505 Tax Withholding and Estimated Taxtransportation fringe benefit is expanded to in-
year, you can deduct the repayment as an item-clude any qualified bicycle commuting reim- ❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income ized deduction on your Schedule A (Form 1040),bursement. See  Transportation  under  Fringe or you may be able to take a credit for that year.Benefits. See Repayments in chapter 12.
Transportation fringe benefits increased.
Allowances and reimbursements. If you re-Beginning January 1, 2009, the exclusion for Employee ceive travel, transportation, or other businesscommuter vehicle transportation and transit expense allowances or reimbursements frompass fringe benefits cannot be more than a total Compensation your employer, see Publication 463. If you areof $120 per month. Beginning March 1, 2009, reimbursed for moving expenses, see Publica-the amount of the exclusion increased to $230 a This section discusses various types of em- tion 521, Moving Expenses.month. See  Transportation under Fringe Bene- ployee compensation including fringe benefits,
retirement plan contributions, stock options, andfits. Back pay awards. Include in income amounts
restricted property. you are awarded in a settlement or judgment for
back pay. These include payments made to youForm W-2. If you are an employee, you should for damages, unpaid life insurance premiums,receive Form W-2 from your employer showing and unpaid health insurance premiums. TheyReminder the pay you received for your services. Include should be reported to you by your employer onyour pay on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A, Form W-2.Foreign income. If you are a U.S. citizen or or on line 1 of Form 1040EZ, even if you do not
receive a Form W-2.resident alien, you must report income from Bonuses and awards. Bonuses or awards
If you performed services, other than as ansources outside the United States (foreign in- you receive for outstanding work are included in
independent contractor, and your employer didcome) on your tax return unless it is exempt by your income and should be shown on your Form
not withhold social security and Medicare taxesU.S. law. This is true whether you reside inside W-2. These include prizes such as vacation trips
from your pay, you must file Form 8919, Uncol-or outside the United States and whether or not for meeting sales goals. If the prize or award you
lected Social Security and Medicare Tax onyou receive a Form W-2, Wage and Tax State- receive is goods or services, you must include
Wages, with your Form 1040. These wagesment, or Form 1099 from the foreign payer. This the fair market value of the goods or services in
must be included on line 7 of Form 1040. See your income. However, if your employer merelyapplies to earned income (such as wages and Form 8919 for more information. promises to pay you a bonus or award at sometips) as well as unearned income (such as inter-
future time, it is not taxable until you receive it orest, dividends, capital gains, pensions, rents, Childcare providers. If you provide childcare, it is made available to you.and royalties). either in the child's home or in your home or
If you reside outside the United States, you other place of business, the pay you receive Employee achievement award. If you re-
may be able to exclude part or all of your foreign must be included in your income. If you are not ceive tangible personal property (other than
source earned income. For details, see Publica- an employee, you are probably self-employed cash, a gift certificate, or an equivalent item) as
tion 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resi- and must include payments for your services on an award for length of service or safety achieve-
dent Aliens Abroad. Schedule C (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From ment, you generally can exclude its value from
Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings Page 47

Page 50 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
your income. However, the amount you can ex- However, if at any time during the tax year, receive under the policy are not taxable. For
clude is limited to your employer's cost and the plan fails to meet certain requirements, or is more information, see Publication 525.
cannot be more than $1,600 ($400 for awards not operated under those requirements, all
that are not qualified plan awards) for all such amounts deferred under the plan for the tax year Social security and Medicare taxes paid by
awards you receive during the year. Your em- and all preceding tax years are included in your employer. If you and your employer have an
ployer can tell you whether your award is a income for the current year. This amount is in- agreement that your employer pays your social
qualified plan award. Your employer must make cluded in your wages shown on Form W-2, box security and Medicare taxes without deducting
the award as part of a meaningful presentation, 1. It is also shown on Form W-2, box 12, using them from your gross wages, you must report
under conditions and circumstances that do not code Z. the amount of tax paid for you as taxable wages
create a significant likelihood of it being dis- on your tax return. The payment also is treatedNote received for services. If your employerguised pay. as wages for figuring your social security andgives you a secured note as payment for yourHowever, the exclusion does not apply to the Medicare taxes and your social security andservices, you must include the fair market valuefollowing awards. Medicare benefits. However, these payments(usually the discount value) of the note in your are not treated as social security and Medicare• A length-of-service award if you received it income for the year you receive it. When you wages if you are a household worker or a farmfor less than 5 years of service or if you later receive payments on the note, a propor- worker.received another length-of-service award tionate part of each payment is the recovery of
during the year or the previous 4 years. the fair market value that you previously in- Stock appreciation rights. Do not include acluded in your income. Do not include that part stock appreciation right granted by your em-• A safety achievement award if you are a again in your income. Include the rest of the ployer in income until you exercise (use) themanager, administrator, clerical employee, payment in your income in the year of payment. right. When you use the right, you are entitled toor other professional employee or if more If your employer gives you a nonnegotiable a cash payment equal to the fair market value ofthan 10% of eligible employees previously unsecured note as payment for your services, the corporation's stock on the date of use minusreceived safety achievement awards dur- payments on the note that are credited toward the fair market value on the date the right wasing the year. the principal amount of the note are compensa- granted. You include the cash payment in yourtion income when you receive them. income in the year you use the right.Example. Ben Green received three em- Severance pay. You must include in incomeployee achievement awards during the year: a amounts you receive as severance pay and any Fringe Benefitsnonqualified plan award of a watch valued at payment for the cancellation of your employ-$250, and two qualified plan awards of a stereo ment contract. Fringe benefits received in connection with thevalued at $1,000 and a set of golf clubs valued at
performance of your services are included in$500. Assuming that the requirements for quali- Accrued leave payment. If you are a fed-
your income as compensation unless you payfied plan awards are otherwise satisfied, each eral employee and receive a lump-sum payment
fair market value for them or they are specificallyaward by itself would be excluded from income. for accrued annual leave when you retire or
excluded by law. Abstaining from the perform-However, because the $1,750 total value of the resign, this amount will be included as wages on
ance of services (for example, under a covenantawards is more than $1,600, Ben must include your Form W-2.
not to compete) is treated as the performance of$150 ($1,750 ± $1,600) in his income. If you resign from one agency and are reem-
services for purposes of these rules.ployed by another agency, you may have to
Differential wage payments. This is any pay- repay part of your lump-sum annual leave pay- Accounting period. You must use the samement made to you by an employer for any period ment to the second agency. You can reduce accounting period your employer uses to reportduring which you are, for a period of more than gross wages by the amount you repaid in the your taxable noncash fringe benefits. Your em-30 days, an active duty member of the uni- same tax year in which you received it. Attach to ployer has the option to report taxable noncashformed services and represents all or a portion your tax return a copy of the receipt or statement fringe benefits by using either of the followingof the wages you would have received from the given to you by the agency you repaid to explain rules.employer during that period. These payments the difference between the wages on the return
are treated as wages and are subject to income and the wages on your Forms W-2. • The general rule: benefits are reported fortax withholding, but not FICA or FUTA taxes. a full calendar year (January 1±DecemberOutplacement services. If you choose toThe payments are reported as wages on Form 31).accept a reduced amount of severance pay soW-2.
that you can receive outplacement services • The special accounting period rule: bene-
(such as training in rÂesumÂe writing and interview fits provided during the last 2 months ofGovernment cost-of-living allowances.
techniques), you must include the unreduced the calendar year (or any shorter period)Cost-of-living allowances generally are included
amount of the severance pay in income. are treated as paid during the followingin your income. However, they are not included
However, you can deduct the value of these calendar year. For example, each yearin your income if you are a federal civilian em-
outplacement services (up to the difference be- your employer reports the value of bene-ployee or a federal court employee who is sta-
tween the severance pay included in income fits provided during the last 2 months oftioned in Alaska, Hawaii, or outside the United
and the amount actually received) as a miscella- the prior year and the first 10 months ofStates. Beginning January 1, 2010, these fed-
neous deduction (subject to the the current year.eral employees will be transitioned from a non-
2%-of-adjusted-gross-income (AGI) limit) ontaxable cost-of-living adjustment to a taxable
Schedule A (Form 1040).locality-based comparability payment. Your employer does not have to use the sameAllowances and differentials that increase Sick pay. Pay you receive from your employer accounting period for each fringe benefit, butyour basic pay as an incentive for taking a less while you are sick or injured is part of your salary must use the same period for all employees whodesirable post of duty are part of your compen- or wages. In addition, you must include in your receive a particular benefit.sation and must be included in income. For income sick pay benefits received from any of You must use the same accounting periodexample, your compensation includes Foreign the following payers. that you use to report the benefit to claim anPost, Foreign Service, and Overseas Tropical
• A welfare fund. employee business deduction (for use of a car,differentials. For more information, see Publica-
for example).tion 516, U.S. Government Civilian Employees • A state sickness or disability fund.Stationed Abroad.
Form W-2. Your employer reports your tax-• An association of employers or employ-
Nonqualified deferred compensation plans. able fringe benefits in box 1 (Wages, tips, otherees.
Your employer will report to you the total amount compensation) of Form W-2. The total value of• An insurance company, if your employerof deferrals for the year under a nonqualified your fringe benefits also may be noted in box 14.paid for the plan.deferred compensation plan. This amount is The value of your fringe benefits may be added
shown on Form W-2, box 12, using code Y. This However, if you paid the premiums on an acci- to your other compensation on one Form W-2, or
amount is not included in your income. dent or health insurance policy, the benefits you you may receive a separate Form W-2 showing
Page 48 Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings

Page 51 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
just the value of your fringe benefits in box 1 with employer are not included in your income. Distri- when working overtime, and company picnics
a notation in box 14. are not included in your income.butions from your HSA that are used to pay
qualified medical expenses are not included in Holiday gifts. If your employer gives you ayour income. Distributions not used for qualified turkey, ham, or other item of nominal value atAccident or Health Plan medical expenses are included in your income. Christmas or other holidays, do not include theSee Publication 969 for the requirements of an value of the gift in your income. However, if yourGenerally, the value of accident or health plan HSA. employer gives you cash, a gift certificate, or acoverage provided to you by your employer is Contributions by a partnership to a bona fide similar item that you can easily exchange fornot included in your income. Benefits you re- partner's HSA are not contributions by an em- cash, you include the value of that gift as extraceive from the plan may be taxable, as ex- ployer. The contributions are treated as a distri- salary or wages regardless of the amount in-plained later under Sickness and Injury Benefits. bution of money and are not included in the volved.For information on the items covered in this partner's gross income. Contributions by a part-section, other than Long-term care coverage, nership to a partner's HSA for services renderedsee Publication 969, Health Savings Accounts are treated as guaranteed payments that are Educational Assistanceand Other Tax-Favored Health Plans. includible in the partner's gross income. In both
situations, the partner can deduct the contribu- You can exclude from your income up to $5,250Long-term care coverage. Contributions by
tion made to the partner's HSA. of qualified employer-provided educational as-your employer to provide coverage for long-term
sistance. For more information, see Publicationcare services generally are not included in your Contributions by an S corporation to a 2%
970, Tax Benefits for Education.income. However, contributions made through a shareholder-employee's HSA for services ren-
flexible spending or similar arrangement (such dered are treated as guaranteed payments and
as a cafeteria plan) must be included in your are includible in the shareholder-employee's
income. This amount will be reported as wages Group-Term Life Insurancegross income. The shareholder-employee can
in box 1 of your Form W-2. deduct the contribution made to the share- Generally, the cost of up to $50,000 ofContributions you make to the plan are dis- holder-employee's HSA. group-term life insurance coverage provided tocussed in Publication 502, Medical and Dental
Qualified HSA funding distribution. You you by your employer (or former employer) is notExpenses.
can make a one-time distribution from your indi- included in your income. However, you must
Archer MSA contributions.  Contributions by vidual retirement account (IRA) to an HSA and include in income the cost of employer-provided
your employer to your Archer MSA generally are insurance that is more than the cost of $50,000you generally will not include any of the distribu-
not included in your income. Their total will be of coverage reduced by any amount you paytion in your income. See Publication 590 for the
reported in box 12 of Form W-2 with code R. You toward the purchase of the insurance.requirements for these qualified HSA funding
must report this amount on Form 8853, Archer For exceptions, see Entire cost excluded ,distributions.
MSAs and Long-Term Care Insurance Con- and Entire cost taxed, later.Failure to maintain eligibility. If your HSAtracts. File the form with your return. If your employer provided more than $50,000received qualified HSA distributions from aIf your employer does not make contributions of coverage, the amount included in your in-health FSA or HRA (discussed earlier) or a qual-to your MSA, you can make your own contribu- come is reported as part of your wages in box 1ified HSA funding distribution, you must be antions to your MSA. These contributions are dis- of your Form W-2. Also, it is shown separately ineligible individual for HSA purposes for the pe-cussed in Publication 969. Also, see Form 8853. box 12 with code C.riod beginning with the month in which the quali-
Health flexible spending arrangement fied distribution was made and ending on the Group-term life insurance. This insurance is
(health FSA). If your employer provides a term life insurance protection (insurance for alast day of the 12th month following that month.
health FSA that qualifies as an accident or fixed period of time) that:If you fail to be an eligible individual during this
health plan, the amount of your salary reduction, period, other than because of death or disability, • Provides a general death benefit,and reimbursements of your medical care ex- you must include the distribution in your income
penses and those of your spouse and depen- • Is provided to a group of employees,for the tax year in which you become ineligible.
dents, generally are not included in your income. This income is also subject to an additional 10% • Is provided under a policy carried by thetax.Qualified HSA distribution. A health FSA employer, and
can make a qualified HSA distribution. This dis- • Provides an amount of insurance to eachtribution is a direct transfer to your HSA trustee employee based on a formula that pre-Adoption Assistanceby your employer. Generally, the distribution is vents individual selection.not included in your income and is not deducti- You may be able to exclude from your incomeble. See Publication 969 for the requirements for amounts paid or expenses incurred by your em- Permanent benefits. If your group-term lifethese qualified HSA distributions. ployer for qualified adoption expenses in con- insurance policy includes permanent benefits,
nection with your adoption of an eligible child.Health reimbursement arrangement (HRA). such as a paid-up or cash surrender value, you
See the Instructions for Form 8839 for moreIf your employer provides an HRA that qualifies must include in your income, as wages, the cost
information.as an accident or health plan, coverage and of the permanent benefits minus the amount you
reimbursements of your medical care expenses pay for them. Your employer should be able to Adoption benefits are reported by your em-
and those of your spouse and dependents gen- tell you the amount to include in your income.ployer in box 12 of Form W-2 with code T. They
erally are not included in your income. also are included as social security and Medi- Accidental death benefits. Insurance that
care wages in boxes 3 and 5. However, they areQualified HSA distribution. An HRA can provides accidental or other death benefits but
not included as wages in box 1. To determinemake a qualified HSA distribution. This distribu- does not provide general death benefits (travel
the taxable and nontaxable amounts, you musttion is a direct transfer to your HSA trustee by insurance, for example) is not group-term life
complete Part III of Form 8839, Qualified Adop-your employer. Generally, the distribution is not insurance.
tion Expenses. File the form with your return.included in your income and is not deductible. Former employer. If your former employerSee Publication 969 for the requirements for provided more than $50,000 of group-term lifethese qualified HSA distributions. insurance coverage during the year, the amountDe Minimis (Minimal) Benefits
Health savings accounts (HSA). If you are included in your income is reported as wages in
If your employer provides you with a product oran eligible individual, you and any other person, box 1 of Form W-2. Also, it is shown separately
service and the cost of it is so small that it wouldincluding your employer or a family member, in box 12 with code C. Box 12 also will show the
be unreasonable for the employer to account forcan make contributions to your HSA. Contribu- amount of uncollected social security and Medi-
it, the value is not included in your income.tions, other than employer contributions, are de- care taxes on the excess coverage, with codes
Generally, the value of benefits such as dis-ductible on your return whether or not you M and N. You must pay these taxes with your
counts at company cafeterias, cab fares homeitemize deductions. Contributions made by your income tax return. Include them in your total tax
Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings Page 49

Page 52 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
on line 60, Form 1040, and enter ªUTº and the a. You retired before January 2, 1984, andWorksheet 5-1. Figuring the
were covered by the plan when you re-amount of the taxes on the dotted line next to Cost of Group-Term Life
tired, orline 60. Insurance to Include in
b. You reached age 55 before January 2,IncomeÐIllustrated
1984, and were employed by the em-Keep for Your Records
Two or more employers. Your exclusion for ployer or its predecessor in 1983.employer-provided group-term life insurance
1. Enter the total amount of yourcoverage cannot exceed the cost of $50,000 of
insurance coverage from yourcoverage, whether the insurance is provided by Entire cost taxed. You are taxed on the entire
employer(s) .......... . 1. 80,000 cost of group-term life insurance if either of thea single employer or multiple employers. If two
2. Limit on exclusion for following circumstances apply.or more employers provide insurance coverage employer-providedthat totals more than $50,000, the amounts re- • The insurance is provided by your em-group-term life insurance
ported as wages on your Forms W-2 will not be ployer through a qualified employees'coverage ............ . 2. 50,000
correct. You must figure how much to include in trust, such as a pension trust or a qualified3. Subtract line 2 from line 1 . . 3. 30,000
annuity plan.your income. Reduce the amount you figure by 4. Divide line 3 by $1,000.
Figure to the nearest tenth 4. 30.0any amount reported with code C in box 12 of • You are a key employee and your em-5. Go to Table 5-1. Using youryour Forms W-2, add the result to the wages ployer's plan discriminates in favor of keyage on the last day of the taxreported in box 1, and report the total on your employees.year, find your age group inreturn. the left column, and enter the
cost from the column on the Retirement Planning Services
right for your age group .. . 5. .23Figuring the taxable cost. Use the following
6. Multiply line 4 by line 5 ... . 6. 6.90 If your employer has a qualified retirement plan,worksheet to figure the amount to include in your qualified retirement planning services provided7. Enter the number of fullincome. months of coverage at this to you (and your spouse) by your employer are
cost. ............... . 7. 12 not included in your income. Qualified services
8. Multiply line 6 by line 7 ... . 8. 82.80 include retirement planning advice, informationWorksheet 5-1. Figuring the 9. Enter the premiums about your employer's retirement plan, and in-
Cost of Group-Term Life you paid per month 9. 4.15 formation about how the plan may fit into your
Insurance To Include in 10. Enter the number of overall individual retirement income plan. You
months you paid cannot exclude the value of any tax preparation,Income
the premiums ... . 10. 12 accounting, legal, or brokerage services pro-Keep for Your Records
11. Multiply line 9 by line 10. .. . 11. 49.80 vided by your employer.
12. Subtract line 11 from line 8.
1. Enter the total amount of your Include this amount in your
insurance coverage from your income as wages ...... . 12. 33.00 Transportationemployer(s) .......... . 1.
2. Limit on exclusion for If your employer provides you with a qualified
employer-provided Table 5-1. Cost of $1,000 of transportation fringe benefit, it can be excludedgroup-term life insurance Group-Term Life Insurance for One from your income, up to certain limits. A qualifiedcoverage ............ . 2. 50,000 transportation fringe benefit is:Month3. Subtract line 2 from line 1 . . 3.
• Transportation in a commuter highway ve-4. Divide line 3 by $1,000. Age Cost hicle (such as a van) between your homeFigure to the nearest tenth 4. Under 25 ................. . $ .05 and work place,5. Go to Table 5-1. Using your 25 through 29 .............. . .06
age on the last day of the tax 30 through 34 .............. . .08 • A transit pass,year, find your age group in 35 through 39 .............. . .09
the left column, and enter the • Qualified parking, or40 through 44 .............. . .10cost from the column on the 45 through 49 .............. . .15 • Qualified bicycle commuting reimburse-right for your age group .. . 5. 50 through 54 .............. . .23 ment.6. Multiply line 4 by line 5 ... . 6. 55 through 59 .............. . .43
7. Enter the number of full Cash reimbursement by your employer for these60 through 64 .............. . .66
months of coverage at this expenses under a bona fide reimbursement ar-65 through 69 .............. . 1.27
cost. ............... . 7. rangement also is excludable. However, cash70 and older ............... . 2.06
8. Multiply line 6 by line 7 ... . 8. reimbursement for a transit pass is excludable
9. Enter the premiums only if a voucher or similar item that can be
Entire cost excluded. You are not taxed onyou paid per month 9. exchanged only for a transit pass is not readily
the cost of group-term life insurance if any of the10. Enter the number of available for direct distribution to you.
following circumstances apply.months you paid
the premiums ... . 10. Exclusion limit. The exclusion for commuter1. You are permanently and totally disabled11. Multiply line 9 by line 10. .. . 11. vehicle transportation and transit pass fringeand have ended your employment.12. Subtract line 11 from line 8. benefits cannot be more than $120 per month.
Include this amount in your However, beginning March 1, 2009, the amount2. Your employer is the beneficiary of the pol-
income as wages ...... . 12. of the exclusion increased to $230 a month.icy for the entire period the insurance is in
The exclusion for the qualified parking fringeforce during the tax year.
benefit cannot be more than $230 a month.3. A charitable organization (defined in chap- The exclusion for qualified bicycle commut-Example. You are 51 years old and work for ter 24) to which contributions are deducti- ing in a calendar year is $20 multiplied by theemployers A and B. Both employers provide ble is the only beneficiary of the policy for number of qualified bicycle commuting monthsgroup-term life insurance coverage for you for the entire period the insurance is in force that year.during the tax year. (You are not entitled tothe entire year. Your coverage is $35,000 with If the benefits have a value that is more thana deduction for a charitable contribution foremployer A and $45,000 with employer B. You these limits, the excess must be included in yournaming a charitable organization as thepay premiums of $4.15 a month under the em- income. You are not entitled to these exclusionsbeneficiary of your policy.)ployer B group plan. You figure the amount to if the reimbursements are made under a com-
include in your income as follows. 4. The plan existed on January 1, 1984, and pensation reduction agreement.
Page 50 Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings

Page 53 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Commuter highway vehicle. This is a high- have it paid to you. The amount you set aside Stock Optionsway vehicle that seats at least six adults (not (called an elective deferral) is treated as an
including the driver). At least 80% of the vehi- employer contribution to a qualified plan. An If you receive a nonstatutory option to buy or sellcle's mileage must reasonably be expected to elective deferral, other than a designated Roth stock or other property as payment for yourbe: contribution (discussed later), is not included in services, you usually will have income when you
receive the option, when you exercise the optionwages subject to income tax at the time contrib-• For transporting employees between their
(use it to buy or sell the stock or other property),homes and work place, and uted. However, it is included in wages subject to
or when you sell or otherwise dispose of thesocial security and Medicare taxes.• On trips during which employees occupy option. However, if your option is a statutoryElective deferrals include elective contribu-at least half of the vehicle's adult seating stock option, you will not have any income untilcapacity (not including the driver). tions to the following retirement plans. you sell or exchange your stock. Your employer
can tell you which kind of option you hold. For1. Cash or deferred arrangements (section
more information, see Publication 525.Transit pass. This is any pass, token, fare- 401(k) plans).card, voucher, or similar item entitling a person
2. The Thrift Savings Plan for federal employ-to ride mass transit (whether public or private) Restricted Propertyees.free or at a reduced rate or to ride in a commuter
highway vehicle operated by a person in the Generally, if you receive property for your serv-3. Salary reduction simplified employee pen-business of transporting persons for compensa- ices, you must include its fair market value insion plans (SARSEP).tion. your income in the year you receive the prop-4. Savings incentive match plans for employ- erty. However, if you receive stock or other prop-Qualified parking. This is parking provided to ees (SIMPLE plans). erty that has certain restrictions that affect itsan employee at or near the employer's place of
value, you do not include the value of the prop-5. Tax-sheltered annuity plans (403(b) plans).business. It also includes parking provided on or
erty in your income until it has substantiallynear a location from which the employee com- 6. Section 501(c)(18)(D) plans. vested. (You can choose to include the value ofmutes to work by mass transit, in a commuter
the property in your income in the year it is7. Section 457 plans.highway vehicle, or by carpool. It does not in-
transferred to you.) For more information, seeclude parking at or near the employee's home.
Restricted Property in Publication 525. Qualified automatic contribution arrange-
Qualified bicycle commuting. This is reim- ments. Under a qualified automatic contribu-
bursement based on the number of qualified Dividends received on restricted stock.tion arrangement, your employer can treat youbicycle commuting months for the year. A quali- Dividends you receive on restricted stock areas having elected to have a part of your compen-fied bicycle commuting month is any month you treated as compensation and not as dividendsation contributed to a section 401(k) plan.use the bicycle regularly for a substantial portion income. Your employer should include theseBefore each plan year, your employer must giveof the travel between your home and place of payments on your Form W-2.you a written notice of your rights under theemployment and you do not receive any of the
arrangement. You can elect to change the Stock you chose to include in income.other qualified transportation fringe benefits.
Dividends you receive on restricted stock youamount of the contributions or elect out of theThe reimbursement can be for expenses you
chose to include in your income in the yeararrangement.incurred during the year for the purchase of a
transferred are treated the same as any otherbicycle and bicycle improvements, repair, and Overall limit on deferrals. For 2009, you dividends. Report them on your return as divi-storage. generally should not have deferred more than a dends. For a discussion of dividends, see chap-
total of $16,500 of contributions to the plans ter 8.Retirement Plan listed in (1) through (3) and (5) above. The limit   For information on how to treat dividendsfor SIMPLE plans is $11,500. The limit for sec-Contributions reported on both your Form W-2 and Form
tion 501(c)(18)(D) plans is the lesser of $7,000 1099-DIV, see Dividends received on restricted
or 25% of your compensation. The limit for sec-Your employer's contributions to a qualified re- stock in Publication 525.
tirement plan for you are not included in income tion 457 plans is the lesser of your includible
at the time contributed. (Your employer can tell compensation or $16,500.
you whether your retirement plan is qualified.) Designated Roth contributions. Employ-However, the cost of life insurance coverage
ers with section 401(k) and section 403(b) plans Special Rules forincluded in the plan may have to be included.
can create qualified Roth contribution programsSee Group-Term Life Insurance , earlier, under
Certain Employeesso that you may elect to have part or all of yourFringe Benefits.
elective deferrals to the plan designated as af-If your employer pays into a nonqualified
This section deals with special rules for peopleter-tax Roth contributions. Designated Rothplan for you, you generally must include the
in certain types of employment: members of thecontributions in your income as wages for the contributions are treated as elective deferrals,
clergy, members of religious orders, peopletax year in which the contributions are made. except that they are included in income. working for foreign employers, military person-However, if your interest in the plan is not trans- Excess deferrals. Your employer or plan nel, and volunteers.ferable or is subject to a substantial risk of forfei-
administrator should apply the proper annualture (you have a good chance of losing it) at the
limit when figuring your plan contributions. How-time of the contribution, you do not have to Clergyever, you are responsible for monitoring the totalinclude the value of your interest in your income
you defer to ensure that the deferrals are notuntil it is transferable or is no longer subject to a If you are a member of the clergy, you must
more than the overall limit.substantial risk of forfeiture. include in your income offerings and fees you
receive for marriages, baptisms, funerals,If you set aside more than the limit, the ex-For information on distributions from masses, etc., in addition to your salary. If thecess generally must be included in your incomeretirement plans, see Publication 575, offering is made to the religious institution, it isfor that year, unless you have an excess deferralPension and Annuity Income (or Publi-
TIP not taxable to you.cation 721, Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service Re- of a designated Roth contribution. See Publica-
   If you are a member of a religious organiza-tirement Benefits, if you are a federal employee tion 525 for a discussion of the tax treatment of
tion and you give your outside earnings to theor retiree). excess deferrals. organization, you still must include the earnings
Catch-up contributions. You may be al- in your income. However, you may be entitled toElective deferrals. If you are covered by cer-
lowed catch-up contributions (additional elective a charitable contribution deduction for thetain kinds of retirement plans, you can choose to
deferral) if you are age 50 or older by the end of amount paid to the organization. See chapterhave part of your compensation contributed by
your tax year. 24.your employer to a retirement fund, rather than
Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings Page 51

Page 54 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Pension. A pension or retirement pay for a order. Amounts you receive for these services Militarymember of the clergy usually is treated as any are included in your income, even if you have
other pension or annuity. It must be reported on taken a vow of poverty.  Payments you receive as a member of a militarylines 16a and 16b of Form 1040 or on lines 12a service generally are taxed as wages except forExample. Mark Brown is a member of aand 12b of Form 1040A. retirement pay, which is taxed as a pension.religious order and has taken a vow of poverty. Allowances generally are not taxed. For moreHousing.  Special rules for housing apply to He renounces all claims to his earnings and information on the tax treatment of military al-members of the clergy. Under these rules, you turns over his earnings to the order. lowances and benefits, see Publication 3,do not include in your income the rental value of Mark is a schoolteacher. He was instructed Armed Forces' Tax Guide.a home (including utilities) or a designated hous- by the superiors of the order to get a job with aing allowance provided to you as part of your private tax-exempt school. Mark became an em-pay. However, the exclusion cannot be more ployee of the school, and, at his request, the Differential wage payments. Any paymentsthan the reasonable pay for your service. If you school made the salary payments directly to the made to you by an employer during the time youpay for the utilities, you can exclude any allow- order. are performing service in the uniformed servicesance designated for utility cost, up to your actual Because Mark is an employee of the school, are treated as compensation. These wages arecost. The home or allowance must be provided he is performing services for the school rather subject to income tax withholding and are re-as compensation for your services as an or- than as an agent of the order. The wages Mark ported on a Form W-2. See the discussion underdained, licensed, or commissioned minister. earns working for the school are included in his Miscellaneous Compensation, earlier.However, you must include the rental value of income.the home or the housing allowance as earnings
from self-employment on Schedule SE (Form Military retirement pay. If your retirementForeign Employer1040) if you are subject to the self-employment pay is based on age or length of service, it is
tax. For more information, see Publication 517, taxable and must be included in your income asSpecial rules apply if you work for a foreignSocial Security and Other Information for Mem- a pension on lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040 oremployer.bers of the Clergy and Religious Workers. on lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A. Do not
U.S. citizen. If you are a U.S. citizen who include in your income the amount of any reduc-
works in the United States for a foreign govern- tion in retirement or retainer pay to provide aMembers of Religious
ment, an international organization, a foreign survivor annuity for your spouse or childrenOrders embassy, or any foreign employer, you must under the Retired Serviceman's Family Protec-
include your salary in your income. tion Plan or the Survivor Benefit Plan.If you are a member of a religious order who has
taken a vow of poverty, how you treat earnings Social security and Medicare taxes. You For more detailed discussion of survivor an-
that you renounce and turn over to the order are exempt from social security and Medicare nuities, see chapter 10.
depends on whether your services are per- employee taxes if you are employed in the Disability. If you are retired on disability,formed for the order. United States by an international organization or see Military and Government Disability Pen-a foreign government. However, you must payServices performed for the order. If you are sions under Sickness and Injury Benefits, later.self-employment tax on your earnings from serv-performing the services as an agent of the order ices performed in the United States, evenin the exercise of duties required by the order, though you are not self-employed. This rule also Veterans' benefits. Do not include in your in-do not include in your income the amounts applies if you are an employee of a qualifying come any veterans' benefits paid under any law,turned over to the order. wholly owned instrumentality of a foreign gov- regulation, or administrative practice adminis-If your order directs you to perform services ernment. tered by the Department of Veterans Affairsfor another agency of the supervising church or
(VA). The following amounts paid to veterans oran associated institution, you are considered to Employees of international organizations or
their families are not taxable.be performing the services as an agent of the foreign governments. Your compensation
order. Any wages you earn as an agent of an for official services to an international organiza- • Education, training, and subsistence al-
order that you turn over to the order are not tion is exempt from federal income tax if you are lowances.
included in your income. not a citizen of the United States or you are a
• Disability compensation and pension pay-citizen of the Philippines (whether or not you are
ments for disabilities paid either to veter-Example. You are a member of a church a citizen of the United States).
ans or their families.order and have taken a vow of poverty. You Your compensation for official services to a
renounce any claims to your earnings and turn foreign government is exempt from federal in- • Grants for homes designed for wheelchair
over to the order any salaries or wages you come tax if all of the following are true. living.
earn. You are a registered nurse, so your order • You are not a citizen of the United States • Grants for motor vehicles for veterans whoassigns you to work in a hospital that is an or you are a citizen of the Philippines lost their sight or the use of their limbs.associated institution of the church. However, (whether or not you are a citizen of theyou remain under the general direction and con- • Veterans' insurance proceeds and divi-United States).trol of the order. You are considered to be an dends paid either to veterans or their ben-agent of the order and any wages you earn at • Your work is like the work done by em- eficiaries, including the proceeds of athe hospital that you turn over to your order are ployees of the United States in foreign veteran's endowment policy paid beforenot included in your income. countries. death.
• The foreign government gives an equalServices performed outside the order. If • Interest on insurance dividends you leaveexemption to employees of the Unitedyou are directed to work outside the order, your on deposit with the VA.States in its country.services are not an exercise of duties required
• Benefits under a dependent-care assis-by the order unless they meet both of the follow-
tance program.Waiver of alien status. If you are an aliening requirements.
who works for a foreign government or interna- • The death gratuity paid to a survivor of a• They are the kind of services that are ordi- tional organization and you file a waiver under member of the Armed Forces who diednarily the duties of members of the order. section 247(b) of the Immigration and National- after September 10, 2001.ity Act to keep your immigrant status, different• They are part of the duties that you must
• Payments made under the compensatedrules may apply. See Foreign Employer in Publi-exercise for, or on behalf of, the religious
cation 525. work therapy program.order as its agent.
• Any bonus payment by a state or politicalIf you are an employee of a third party, the Employment abroad. For information on the
subdivision because of service in a com-services you perform for the third party will not tax treatment of income earned abroad, see
bat zone.be considered directed or required of you by the Publication 54.
Page 52 Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings

Page 55 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
not include in your income the following benefits until you reach minimum retirement age. Mini-Volunteers you receive from a state or local government. mum retirement age generally is the age at
which you can first receive a pension or annuityThe tax treatment of amounts you receive as a • Rebates or reductions of property or in- if you are not disabled.volunteer worker for the Peace Corps or similar come taxes you receive because of serv-
agency is covered in the following discussions. ices you performed as a volunteer You may be entitled to a tax credit if
firefighter or emergency medical re- you were permanently and totally dis-Peace Corps. Living allowances you receive sponder. abled when you retired. For informa-
TIPas a Peace Corps volunteer or volunteer leader tion on this credit and the definition of permanentfor housing, utilities, household supplies, food, • Payments you receive because of serv- and total disability, see chapter 33.and clothing are exempt from tax. ices you performed as a volunteer
Beginning on the day after you reach mini-firefighter or emergency medical re-Taxable allowances. The following al- mum retirement age, payments you receive aresponder, up to $30 for each month youlowances must be included in your income and taxable as a pension or annuity. Report theprovided services.reported as wages. payments on lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040 or
The excluded income reduces any related tax or on lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A. The rules• Allowances paid to your spouse and minor contribution deduction. for reporting pensions are explained in How Tochildren while you are a volunteer leader
Report in chapter 10.training in the United States.
For information on disability payments from a• Living allowances designated by the Di- governmental program provided as a substituterector of the Peace Corps as basic com- for unemployment compensation, see chapterSickness and Injurypensation. These are allowances for 12.personal items such as domestic help, Benefitslaundry and clothing maintenance, enter- Retirement and profit-sharing plans. If you
tainment and recreation, transportation, receive payments from a retirement orThis section discusses sickness and injury ben-and other miscellaneous expenses. profit-sharing plan that does not provide for disa-efits including disability pensions, long-term
bility retirement, do not treat the payments as acare insurance contracts, workers' compensa-• Leave allowances. disability pension. The payments must be re-tion, and other benefits.• Readjustment allowances or termination ported as a pension or annuity. For more infor-
payments. These are considered received mation on pensions, see chapter 10.Disability income. Generally, you must report
by you when credited to your account. as income any amount you receive for personal
Accrued leave payment. If you retire on disa-injury or sickness through an accident or health
bility, any lump-sum payment you receive forplan that is paid for by your employer. If both youExample. Gary Carpenter, a Peace Corps accrued annual leave is a salary payment. Theand your employer pay for the plan, only thevolunteer, gets $175 a month as a readjustment payment is not a disability payment. Include it inamount you receive that is due to your em-allowance during his period of service, to be paid your income in the tax year you receive it.ployer's payments is reported as income. How-to him in a lump sum at the end of his tour of
ever, certain payments may not be taxable toduty. Although the allowance is not available to
you. Your employer should be able to give youhim until the end of his service, Gary must in- Military and Governmentspecific details about your pension plan and tellclude it in his income on a monthly basis as it is
Disability Pensionsyou the amount you paid for your disability pen-credited to his account.
sion. In addition to disability pensions and annui-
Certain military and government disability pen-Volunteers in Service to America (VISTA). If ties, you may be receiving other payments for
sions are not taxable.you are a VISTA volunteer, you must include sickness and injury.
meal and lodging allowances paid to you in your Do not report as income any amounts Service-connected disability. You may beincome as wages. paid to reimburse you for medical ex- able to exclude from income amounts you re-
National Senior Services Corps programs. penses you incurred after the plan was ceive as a pension, annuity, or similar allowance
TIP
Do not include in your income amounts you established. for personal injury or sickness resulting from
receive for supportive services or reimburse- active service in one of the following govern-
ments for out-of-pocket expenses from the fol- Cost paid by you. If you pay the entire cost of ment services.
lowing programs. a health or accident insurance plan, do not in- • The armed forces of any country.clude any amounts you receive from the plan for• Retired Senior Volunteer Program personal injury or sickness as income on your • The National Oceanic and Atmospheric(RSVP). tax return. If your plan reimbursed you for medi- Administration.
• Foster Grandparent Program. cal expenses you deducted in an earlier year, • The Public Health Service.you may have to include some, or all, of the• Senior Companion Program. reimbursement in your income. See Reimburse- • The Foreign Service.
ment in a later year in chapter 21.
Service Corps of Retired Executives Conditions for exclusion. Do not includeCafeteria plans. Generally, if you are covered(SCORE). If you receive amounts for support- the disability payments in your income if any ofby an accident or health insurance plan throughive services or reimbursements for the following conditions apply.a cafeteria plan, and the amount of the insur-out-of-pocket expenses from SCORE, do not
ance premiums was not included in your in- 1. You were entitled to receive a disabilityinclude these amounts in income.
come, you are not considered to have paid the payment before September 25, 1975.Volunteer tax counseling. Do not include in premiums and you must include any benefits 2. You were a member of a listed govern-your income any reimbursements you receive you receive in your income. If the amount of the ment service or its reserve component, orfor transportation, meals, and other expenses premiums was included in your income, you are were under a binding written commitmentyou have in training for, or actually providing, considered to have paid the premiums, and any to become a member, on September 24,volunteer federal income tax counseling for the benefits you receive are not taxable. 1975.elderly (TCE).
You can deduct as a charitable contribution 3. You receive the disability payments for aDisability Pensionsyour unreimbursed out-of-pocket expenses in combat-related injury. This is a personal
taking part in the volunteer income tax assis- injury or sickness thatIf you retired on disability, you must include intance (VITA) program. See chapter 24. income any disability pension you receive under a. Results directly from armed conflict,Volunteer firefighters and emergency medi- a plan that is paid for by your employer. You
cal responders. If you are a volunteer must report your taxable disability payments as b. Takes place while you are engaged in
firefighter or emergency medical responder, do wages on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A, extra-hazardous service,
Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings Page 53

Page 56 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
c. Takes place under conditions simulat- Long-Term Care Workers' Compensationing war, including training exercises
Insurance Contractssuch as maneuvers, or Amounts you receive as workers' compensation
for an occupational sickness or injury are fullyd. Is caused by an instrumentality of war. Long-term care insurance contracts generally exempt from tax if they are paid under a workers'are treated as accident and health insurance compensation act or a statute in the nature of a4. You would be entitled to receive disability contracts. Amounts you receive from them workers' compensation act. The exemption alsocompensation from the Department of Vet- (other than policyholder dividends or premium applies to your survivors. The exemption, how-erans Affairs (VA) if you filed an applica- refunds) generally are excludable from income ever, does not apply to retirement plan benefitstion for it. Your exclusion under this as amounts received for personal injury or sick- you receive based on your age, length of serv-condition is equal to the amount you would ness. To claim an exclusion for payments made ice, or prior contributions to the plan, even if yoube entitled to receive from the VA. on a per diem or other periodic basis under a retired because of an occupational sickness orlong-term care insurance contract, you must file injury.Pension based on years of service. If you Form 8853 with your return.
If part of your workers' compensationreceive a disability pension based on years of A long-term care insurance contract is an reduces your social security orservice, you generally must include it in your insurance contract that only provides coverage equivalent railroad retirement benefitsincome. However, if the pension qualifies for the
CAUTION
! for qualified long-term care services. The con- received, that part is considered social securityexclusion for a service-connected disability (dis- tract must: (or equivalent railroad retirement) benefits andcussed earlier), do not include in income the part
• Be guaranteed renewable, may be taxable. For more information, see Pub-of your pension that you would have received if
lication 915, Social Security and Equivalent Rail-the pension had been based on a percentage of • Not provide for a cash surrender value or road Retirement Benefits.disability. You must include the rest of your pen- other money that can be paid, assigned,
sion in your income. pledged, or borrowed, Return to work.   If you return to work after
Retroactive VA determination. If you retire qualifying for workers' compensation, salary• Provide that refunds, other than refunds
from the armed services based on years of serv- payments you receive for performing light dutieson the death of the insured or complete
ice and are later given a retroactive serv- are taxable as wages.surrender or cancellation of the contract,
ice-connected disability rating by the VA, your and dividends under the contract may be
retirement pay for the retroactive period is ex- used only to reduce future premiums or Other Sickness and Injurycluded from income up to the amount of VA increase future benefits, and
disability benefits you would have been entitled Benefits• Generally not pay or reimburse expensesto receive. You can claim a refund of any tax
incurred for services or items that would In addition to disability pensions and annuities,paid on the excludable amount (subject to the
be reimbursed under Medicare, except you may receive other payments for sickness orstatute of limitations) by filing an amended re-
where Medicare is a secondary payer or injury.turn on Form 1040X for each previous year
the contract makes per diem or other peri-during the retroactive period. Railroad sick pay.    Payments you receive asodic payments without regard to ex-If you receive a lump-sum disability sever- sick pay under the Railroad Unemployment In-penses.ance payment and are later awarded VA disabil- surance Act are taxable and you must includeity benefits, exclude 100% of the severance them in your income. However, do not includebenefit from your income. However, you must Qualified long-term care services. Qualified them in your income if they are for an on-the-jobinclude in your income any lump-sum readjust- long-term care services are: injury.ment or other nondisability severance payment If you received income because of a disabil-• Necessary diagnostic, preventive, thera-you received on release from active duty, even if ity, see Disability Pensions, earlier.peutic, curing, treating, mitigating, and re-you are later given a retroactive disability rating
habilitative services, and maintenance andby the VA. Federal Employees' Compensation Actpersonal care services, and (FECA). Payments received under this Act forSpecial statute of limitations. Generally, personal injury or sickness, including payments• Required by a chronically ill individual andunder the statute of limitations a claim for credit to beneficiaries in case of death, are not taxable.provided pursuant to a plan of care asor refund must be filed within 3 years from the However, you are taxed on amounts you receiveprescribed by a licensed health care prac-time a return was filed. However, if you receive a under this Act as continuation of pay for up to 45titioner.retroactive service-connected disability rating days while a claim is being decided. Report thisdetermination, the statute of limitations is ex- income on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A ortended by a 1-year period beginning on the date Chronically ill individual. A chronically ill in- on line 1 of Form 1040-EZ. Also, pay for sickof the determination. This 1-year extended pe- dividual is one who has been certified by a leave while a claim is being processed is taxableriod applies to claims for credit or refund filed licensed health care practitioner within the previ- and must be included in your income as wages.after June 17, 2008, and does not apply to any ous 12 months as one of the following.
tax year that began more than 5 years before the If part of the payments you receive
• An individual who, for at least 90 days, isdate of the determination. under FECA reduces your social se-
unable to perform at least two activities of curity or equivalent railroad retirement
CAUTION
!
daily living without substantial assistanceExample. You retired in 2003 and receive a benefits received, that part is considered social
due to loss of functional capacity. Activi-pension based on your years of service. On security (or equivalent railroad retirement) bene-
ties of daily living are eating, toileting,August 6, 2009, you receive a determination of fits and may be taxable. For a discussion of the
transferring, bathing, dressing, and conti-service-connected disability retroactive to 2003. taxability of these benefits, see Social security
nence.Generally, you could claim a refund for the taxes and equivalent railroad retirement benefits
paid on your pension for 2006, 2007, and 2008. under Other Income, in Publication 525.• An individual who requires substantial su-However, under the special limitation period,   You can deduct the amount you spend topervision to be protected from threats toyou can also file a claim for 2005 as long as you buy back sick leave for an earlier year to behealth and safety due to severe cognitivefile the claim by August 6, 2010. You cannot file eligible for nontaxable FECA benefits for thatimpairment.a claim for 2003 and 2004 because those tax period. It is a miscellaneous deduction subject toyears began more than 5 years before the deter- the 2%-of-AGI limit on Schedule A (Form 1040).Limit on exclusion. You generally can ex-mination. If you buy back sick leave in the same year youclude from gross income up to $280 a day for used it, the amount reduces your taxable sick2009. See Limit on exclusion, under Long-TermTerrorist attack or military action. Do not leave pay. Do not deduct it separately.include in your income disability payments you Care Insurance Contracts, under Sickness and
receive for injuries resulting directly from a ter- Injury Benefits in Publication 525 for more infor- Other compensation. Many other amounts
rorist or military action. mation. you receive as compensation for sickness or
Page 54 Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings

Page 57 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
injury are not taxable. These include the follow- • The amount of tips you paid out to otherUseful Items
employees through tip pools or tip split-ing amounts. You may want to see: ting, or other arrangements, and the• Compensatory damages you receive for names of the employees to whom youPublicationphysical injury or physical sickness, paid the tips.whether paid in a lump sum or in periodic ❏ 531 Reporting Tip Income
payments.
❏ 1244 Employee's Daily Record of Tips Do not write in your tip diary the• Benefits you receive under an accident or amount of any mandatory serviceand Report to Employerhealth insurance policy on which either charge that your employer adds to a
CAUTION
!
you paid the premiums or your employer customer's bill and then pays to you and treatsForm (and Instructions)
paid the premiums but you had to include as wages. This is part of your wages, not a tip.❏ 4137 Social Security and Medicare Taxthem in your income.
on Unreported Tip Income Electronic tip record. You can use an elec-• Disability benefits you receive for loss of tronic system provided by your employer to re-❏ 4070 Employee's Report of Tips toincome or earning capacity as a result of cord your daily tips. If you do, you must receiveEmployerinjuries under a no-fault car insurance pol- and keep a paper copy of this record.icy.
• Compensation you receive for permanent
loss or loss of use of a part or function of
your body, or for your permanent disfig- Reporting Tips to YourKeeping a Daily Tipurement. This compensation must be
based only on the injury and not on the EmployerRecordperiod of your absence from work. These
benefits are not taxable even if your em- Why report tips to your employer? YouWhy keep a daily tip record? You must keepployer pays for the accident and health must report tips to your employer so that:a daily tip record so you can:plan that provides these benefits.
• Your employer can withhold federal in-• Report your tips accurately to your em-
come tax and social security and Medicareployer,Reimbursement for medical care. A reim- taxes or railroad retirement tax,bursement for medical care is generally not tax- • Report your tips accurately on your taxable. However, it may reduce your medical • Your employer can report the correctreturn, and amount of your earnings to the Social Se-expense deduction. For more information, see
• Prove your tip income if your return is ever curity Administration or Railroad Retire-chapter 21.
questioned. ment Board (which affects your benefits
when you retire or if you become disabled,
or your family's benefits if you die), andHow to keep a daily tip record. There are two
• You can avoid the penalty for not reportingways to keep a daily tip record. You can either:
tips to your employer (explained later).• Write information about your tips in a tip
diary, or6. What tips to report. Report to your employer• Keep copies of documents that show your only cash, check, debit, or credit card tips youtips, such as restaurant bills and credit receive.
card charge slips. If your total tips for any one month from any
Tip Income one job are less than $20, do not report the tipsYou should keep your daily tip record with your
for that month to that employer.personal records. You must keep your records
If you participate in a tip-splitting orfor as long as they are important for administra-
tip-pooling arrangement, report only the tips yoution of the federal tax law. For information on
Introduction receive and retain. Do not report to your em-how long to keep records, see Publication 552,
ployer any portion of the tips you receive thatRecordkeeping for Individuals.This chapter is for employees who receive tips. you pass on to other employees.
All tips you receive are income and are sub-   If you keep a tip diary, you can use Form Do not report the value of any noncash tips,ject to federal income tax. You must include in 4070A, Employee's Daily Record of Tips. To get such as tickets or passes, to your employer. Yougross income all tips you receive directly, Form 4070A, ask the Internal Revenue Service do not pay social security and Medicare taxes orcharged tips paid to you by your employer, and (IRS) or your employer for Publication 1244. railroad retirement tax on these tips.
your share of any tips you receive under a Publication 1244 includes a 1-year supply of
tip-splitting or tip-pooling arrangement. How to report.   If your employer does notForm 4070A. Each day, write in the information
give you any other way to report tips, you canasked for on the form.The value of noncash tips, such as tickets,
use Form 4070. Fill in the information asked forpasses, or other items of value are also income If you do not use Form 4070A, start your on the form, sign and date the form, and give it toand subject to tax. records by writing your name, your employer's your employer. To get a 1-year supply of theReporting your tip income correctly is not name, and the name of the business (if it is form, ask the IRS or your employer for Publica-difficult. You must do three things. different from your employer's name). Then, tion 1244.
each workday, write the date and the following If you do not use Form 4070, give your em-1. Keep a daily tip record. information. ployer a statement with the following informa-
tion.2. Report tips to your employer. • Cash tips you get directly from customers
or from other employees. • Your name, address, and social security3. Report all your tips on your income tax number.• Tips from credit card charge customersreturn.
that your employer pays you. (Also include • Your employer's name, address, and busi-
tips from debit card charge customers.) ness name (if it is different from your em-This chapter will explain these three things and ployer's name).• The value of any noncash tips you get,show you what to do on your tax return if you
such as tickets, passes, or other items ofhave not done the first two. This chapter will also • The month (or the dates of any shorter
value.show you how to treat allocated tips. period) in which you received tips.
Chapter 6 Tip Income Page 55

Page 58 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Uncollected taxes.  You must report If you kept a daily tip record and reported tips• The total tips required to be reported for
on your tax return any social security to your employer as required under the rulesthat period.
and Medicare taxes or railroad retire- explained earlier, add the following tips to the
CAUTION
!
You must sign and date the statement. You ment tax that remained uncollected at the end of amount in box 1 of your Form W-2.
should keep a copy with your personal records. 2009. See Reporting uncollected social security • Cash and charge tips you received thatand Medicare taxes on tips  under ReportingYour employer may require you to report your totaled less than $20 for any month.Tips on Your Tax Return , later. These uncol-tips more than once a month. However, the • The value of noncash tips, such as tickets,lected taxes will be shown in box 12 of your 2009statement cannot cover a period of more than passes, or other items of value.Form W-2 (codes A and B).one calendar month.
Electronic tip statement. Your employer Example. John Allen began working at theTip Rate Determinationcan have you furnish your tip statements elec- Diamond Restaurant (his only employer in 2009)
and Education Programtronically. on June 30 and received $10,000 in wages
during the year. John kept a daily tip recordYour employer may participate in the Tip Rate showing that his tips for June were $18 and hisWhen to report. Give your report for each Determination and Education Program. The pro- tips for the rest of the year totaled $7,000. Hemonth to your employer by the 10th of the next gram was developed to help employees and was not required to report his June tips to hismonth. If the 10th falls on a Saturday, Sunday, employers understand and meet their tip report- employer, but he reported all of the rest of hisor legal holiday, give your employer the report by ing responsibilities. tips to his employer as required.the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or There are two agreements under the pro- John's Form W-2 from Diamond Restaurantgram: the Tip Rate Determination Agreementlegal holiday. shows $17,000 ($10,000 wages plus $7,000 re-(TRDA) and the Tip Reporting Alternative Com- ported tips) in box 1. He adds the $18 unre-mitment (TRAC). In addition, employers in theExample 1. You must report your tips re- ported tips to that amount and reports $17,018food and beverage industry may be able to getceived in September 2010 by October 12, 2010. as wages on his tax return.approval of an employer-designed EmTRACOctober 10th is a Sunday, the 11th is a legal Reporting social security and Medicareprogram. For information on the EmTRAC pro-holiday, and the 12th is the next day that is not a taxes on tips not reported to your employer.gram, see Notice 2001-1, which is on page 261Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday. If you received $20 or more in cash and chargeof Internal Revenue Bulletin 2001-2 at 
tips in a month from any one job and did notwww.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb01-02.pdf.Example 2. You must report your tips re- report all of those tips to your employer, youIf you are employed in the gaming industry,ceived in October 2010 by November 10, 2010. must report the social security and Medicareyour employer may have a Gaming Industry Tip
taxes on the unreported tips as additional tax onCompliance Agreement Program. See RevenueFinal report. If your employment ends dur- your return. To report these taxes, you must fileProcedure 2007-32, 2007-22 I.R.B. 1322, avail-ing the month, you can report your tips when a return even if you would not otherwise have toable at www.irs.gov/irb/2007-22_IRB/ar13.html.your employment ends. file. You must use Form 1040. (You cannot fileIf you are employed in the food and beverage
Form 1040EZ or Form 1040A.)industry, your employer may participate in anPenalty for not reporting tips. If you do not Use Form 4137 to figure these taxes. EnterAttributed Tip Income Program (ATIP). Seereport tips to your employer as required, you the tax on line 57, Form 1040, and attach FormRevenue Procedure 2006-30, 2006-31 I.R.B.
may be subject to a penalty equal to 50% of the 4137 to your return.110 available at www.irs.gov/irs/2006-31_IRB/
social security and Medicare taxes or railroad ar11.html. If you are subject to the Railroad Re-retirement tax you owe on the unreported tips. Your employer can provide you with a copy tirement Tax Act, you cannot use Formof any applicable agreement. To find out more(For information about these taxes, see Report- 4137 to pay railroad retirement tax on
CAUTION
!about these agreements, visit www.irs.gov anding social security and Medicare taxes on tips unreported tips. To get railroad retirement credit,type ªrestaurant tip reportingº in the Keywordnot reported to your employer  under Reporting you must report tips to your employer.search box. You may also call 1-800-829-4933Tips on Your Tax Return , later.) The penalty or visit www.irs.gov/localcontacts for the IRS Reporting uncollected social security andamount is in addition to the taxes you owe. Taxpayer Assistance Center in your area; or Medicare taxes on tips. If your employerYou can avoid this penalty if you can show send an email to TIP.Program@irs.gov and re- could not collect all the social security and Medi-reasonable cause for not reporting the tips to quest information on this program. care taxes or railroad retirement tax you owe onyour employer. To do so, attach a statement to tips reported for 2009, the uncollected taxes will
your return explaining why you did not report be shown in box 12 of your Form W-2 (codes A
them. and B). You must report these amounts as addi-
tional tax on your return. You may have uncol-Reporting Tips on Your
Giving your employer money for taxes. lected taxes if your regular pay was not enough
Your regular pay may not be enough for your for your employer to withhold all the taxes youTax Return
owe and you did not give your employer enoughemployer to withhold all the taxes you owe on
money to pay the rest of the taxes.your regular pay plus your reported tips. If this How to report tips.   Report your tips with To report these uncollected taxes, you musthappens, you can give your employer money your wages on line 1 of Form 1040EZ or line 7 of file a return even if you would not otherwise haveuntil the close of the calendar year to pay the Form 1040A or Form 1040. to file. You must use Form 1040. (You cannot filerest of the taxes.
Form 1040EZ or Form 1040A.) Include the taxesIf you do not give your employer enough What tips to report. You must report all tips in your total tax amount on line 60, and writemoney, your employer will apply your regular you received in 2009 on your tax return, includ- ªUTº and the total of the uncollected taxes on thepay and any money you give to the taxes in the ing both cash tips and noncash tips. Any tips you dotted line next to line 60.following order. reported to your employer for 2009 are included
in the wages shown in box 1 of your Form W-2.1. All taxes on your regular pay. Add to the amount in box 1 only the tips you did
2. Social security and Medicare taxes or rail- not report to your employer. Allocated Tipsroad retirement tax on your reported tips. If you received $20 or more in cash and
charge tips in a month and did not3. Federal, state, and local income taxes on If your employer allocated tips to you, they are
report all of those tips to your em-your reported tips. shown separately in box 8 of your Form W-2.
CAUTION
!
ployer, see Reporting social security and Medi- They are not included in box 1 with your wagesAny taxes that remain unpaid can be col- care taxes on tips not reported to your employer, and reported tips. If box 8 is blank, this discus-lected by your employer from your next later. sion does not apply to you.paycheck. If withholding taxes remain uncol-
lected at the end of the year, you may be subject If you did not keep a daily tip record as What are allocated tips? These are tips that
to a penalty for underpayment of estimated required and an amount is shown in your employer assigned to you in addition to the
taxes. See Publication 505, Tax Withholding box 8 of your Form W-2, see Allocated tips you reported to your employer for the year.
CAUTION
!
and Estimated Tax, for more information. Tips, later. Your employer will have done this only if:
Page 56 Chapter 6 Tip Income

Page 59 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• You worked in a restaurant, cocktail reside inside or outside the United States and return. If you can, use Form 8814, Parents' Elec-
lounge, or similar business that must allo- tion To Report Child's Interest and Dividends,whether or not you receive a Form 1099 from the
cate tips to employees, for this purpose.foreign payer.
For more information about the tax on invest-• The tips you reported to your employer
ment income of children and the parents' elec-were less than your share of 8% of food
tion, see chapter 31.and drink sales, and
Beneficiary of an estate or trust. Interest• You did not participate in your employer's Introduction
Attributed Tip Income Program (ATIP). you receive as a beneficiary of an estate or trustThis chapter discusses the following topics. is generally taxable income. You should receive
a Schedule K-1 (Form 1041), Beneficiary's• Different types of interest income.How were your allocated tips figured? The Share of Income, Deductions, Credits, etc., fromtips allocated to you are your share of an amount • What interest is taxable and what interest the fiduciary. Your copy of Schedule K-1 and itsfigured by subtracting the reported tips of all is nontaxable. instructions will tell you where to report the in-employees from 8% (or an approved lower rate)
come on your Form 1040.• When to report interest income.of food and drink sales (other than carryout
sales and sales with a service charge of 10% or Social security number (SSN). You must• How to report interest income on your taxmore). Your share of that amount was figured give your name and SSN to any person requiredreturn.using either a method provided by an em- by federal tax law to make a return, statement,ployer-employee agreement or a method pro- or other document that relates to you. This in-In general, any interest you receive or that isvided by IRS regulations based on employees' cludes payers of interest.credited to your account and can be withdrawnsales or hours worked. For information about the
is taxable income. Exceptions to this rule areexact allocation method used, ask your em- SSN for joint account. If the funds in a jointdiscussed later in this chapter.ployer. account belong to one person, list that person's
You may be able to deduct expenses you name first on the account and give that person'sMust you report your allocated tips on your have in earning this income on Schedule A SSN to the payer. (For information on who ownsreturn? You must report allocated tips on your (Form 1040) if you itemize your deductions. See the funds in a joint account, see Joint accounts,tax return unless either of the following excep- chapter 28. later.) If the joint account contains combinedtions applies. funds, give the SSN of the person whose name
• You kept a daily tip record, or other evi- is listed first on the account. This is because onlyUseful Itemsdence that is as credible and as reliable as one name and SSN can be shown on FormYou may want to see:a daily tip record, as required under rules 1099.explained earlier. These rules apply both to joint ownership byPublication
a married couple and to joint ownership by other• Your tip record is incomplete, but it shows
❏ 537 Installment Salesthat your actual tips were more than the individuals. For example, if you open a joint
tips you reported to your employer plus savings account with your child using funds be-❏ 550 Investment Income and Expensesthe allocated tips. longing to the child, list the child's name first on
❏ 1212 Guide to Original Issue Discount the account and give the child's SSN.If either exception applies, report your actual tips (OID) Instrumentson your return. Do not report the allocated tips. Custodian account for your child. If your
See What tips to report under Reporting Tips on child is the actual owner of an account that isForm (and Instructions)Your Tax Return, earlier. recorded in your name as custodian for the child,
❏ Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040) give the child's SSN to the payer. For example,How to report allocated tips. If you must Interest and Ordinary Dividends you must give your child's SSN to the payer ofreport allocated tips on your return, add the interest on an account owned by your child,❏ 8815 Exclusion of Interest From Seriesamount in box 8 of your Form W-2 to the amount even though the interest is paid to you as custo-EE and I U.S. Savings Bondsin box 1. Report the total as wages on line 7 of dian.Issued After 1989Form 1040. (You cannot file Form 1040EZ or
Form 1040A.) Penalty for failure to supply SSN. If you❏ 8818 Optional Form To RecordBecause social security and Medicare taxes do not give your SSN to the payer of interest,Redemption of Series EE and Iwere not withheld from the allocated tips, you you may have to pay a penalty. See Failure toU.S. Savings Bonds Issued Aftermust report those taxes as additional tax on your supply social security number under Penalties in1989return. Complete Form 4137, and include the chapter 1. Backup withholding also may apply.allocated tips on line 1 of the form. See Report-
Backup withholding. Your interest income ising social security and Medicare taxes on tips
not reported to your employer  under Reporting generally not subject to regular withholding.
Tips on Your Tax Return, earlier. However, it may be subject to backup withhold-
General Information ing to ensure that income tax is collected on the
income. Under backup withholding, the payer of
A few items of general interest are covered here. interest must withhold, as income tax, 28% of
the amount you are paid.Recordkeeping. You should keep a Backup withholding may also be required iflist showing sources and amounts of the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) has deter-interest received during the year. Also,
RECORDS mined that you underreported your interest or7. keep the forms you receive that show your inter- dividend income. For more information, seeest income (Forms 1099-INT, for example) as Backup Withholding in chapter 4.an important part of your records.
Reporting backup withholding. If backupInterest Income withholding is deducted from your interest in-Tax on investment income of certain chil-
come, the payer must give you a Form 1099-INTdren. Part of a child's 2009 investment income
for the year that indicates the amount withheld.may be taxed at the parent's tax rate. If so, Form
The Form 1099-INT will show any backup with-8615, Tax for Certain Children With InvestmentReminder
holding as ªFederal income tax withheld.ºIncome of More Than $1,900, must be com-
pleted and attached to the child's tax return. IfForeign-source income. If you are a U.S. citi- Joint accounts. If two or more persons hold
not, Form 8615 is not required and the child'szen with interest income from sources outside property (such as a savings account or bond) as
income is taxed at his or her own tax rate.the United States (foreign income), you must joint tenants, tenants by the entirety, or tenants
Some parents can choose to include thereport that income on your tax return unless it is in common, each person's share of any interest
child's interest and dividends on the parent'sexempt by U.S. law. This is true whether you from the property is determined by local law.
Chapter 7 Interest Income Page 57

Page 60 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you have to file. This is an information-reporting Interest subject to penalty for early with-
Income from property given to a child. drawal. If you withdraw funds from a deferredrequirement and does not change the ex-
Property you give as a parent to your child under interest account before maturity, you may haveempt-interest dividends into taxable income.
the Model Gifts of Securities to Minors Act, the to pay a penalty. You must report the total
Uniform Gifts to Minors Act, or any similar law amount of interest paid or credited to your ac-Note. Exempt-interest dividends paid from
becomes the child's property. count during the year, without subtracting thespecified private activity bonds may be subject
Income from the property is taxable to the penalty. See Penalty on early withdrawal of sav-to the alternative minimum tax. See Alternativechild, except that any part used to satisfy a legal ings in chapter 1 of Publication 550 for moreMinimum Tax  in chapter 30 for more informa-obligation to support the child is taxable to the information on how to report the interest andtion. Chapter 1 of Publication 550 contains aparent or guardian having that legal obligation. deduct the penalty.discussion on private activity bonds under State
or Local Government Obligations.Savings account with parent as trustee. Money borrowed to invest in certificate of
Interest income from a savings account opened deposit. The interest you pay on money bor-Interest on VA dividends. Interest on insur-for a child who is a minor, but placed in the name rowed from a bank or savings institution to meetance dividends that you leave on deposit withand subject to the order of the parents as trust- the minimum deposit required for a certificate ofthe Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) is notees, is taxable to the child if, under the law of the deposit from the institution and the interest youtaxable. This includes interest paid on dividendsstate in which the child resides, both of the earn on the certificate are two separate items.on converted United States Government Lifefollowing are true. You must report the total interest you earn onInsurance and on National Service Life Insur- the certificate in your income. If you itemize• The savings account legally belongs to the ance policies. deductions, you can deduct the interest you paychild.
as investment interest, up to the amount of yourIndividual retirement arrangements (IRAs).• The parents are not legally permitted to net investment income. See Interest ExpensesInterest on a Roth IRA generally is not taxable.use any of the funds to support the child. in chapter 3 of Publication 550.Interest on a traditional IRA is tax deferred. You
generally do not include it in your income until Example. You deposited $5,000 with aForm 1099-INT. Interest income is generally you make withdrawals from the IRA. See chap- bank and borrowed $5,000 from the bank toreported to you on Form 1099-INT, or a similar ter 17. make up the $10,000 minimum deposit requiredstatement, by banks, savings and loans, and
to buy a 6-month certificate of deposit. The cer-other payers of interest. This form shows you the
tificate earned $575 at maturity in 2009, but youinterest you received during the year. Keep this
received only $265, which represented the $575form for your records. You do not have to attach
you earned minus $310 interest charged on yourTaxable Interestit to your tax return.
$5,000 loan. The bank gives you a FormReport on your tax return the total amount of
Taxable interest includes interest you receive 1099-INT for 2009 showing the $575 interestinterest income that you receive for the tax year.
you earned. The bank also gives you a state-from bank accounts, loans you make to others,
Interest not reported on Form 1099-INT. ment showing that you paid $310 interest forand other sources. The following are someEven if you do not receive Form 1099-INT, you 2009. You must include the $575 in your in-sources of taxable interest.must still report all of your taxable interest in- come. If you itemize your deductions on Sched-
come. For example, you may receive distributive Dividends that are actually interest. Certain ule A (Form 1040), you can deduct $310, subject
shares of interest from partnerships or S corpo- distributions commonly called dividends are ac- to the net investment income limit.
rations. This interest is reported to you on tually interest. You must report as interest
Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) or Schedule K-1 so-called ªdividendsº on deposits or on share Gift for opening account. If you receive non-(Form 1120S). accounts in: cash gifts or services for making deposits or for
opening an account in a savings institution, youNominees. Generally, if someone receives • Cooperative banks, may have to report the value as interest.interest as a nominee for you, that person will
• Credit unions,give you a Form 1099-INT showing the interest For deposits of less than $5,000, gifts or
received on your behalf. services valued at more than $10 must be re-• Domestic building and loan associations,
If you receive a Form 1099-INT that includes ported as interest. For deposits of $5,000 or• Domestic savings and loan associations,amounts belonging to another person, see the more, gifts or services valued at more than $20
discussion on nominee distributions under How must be reported as interest. The value is deter-• Federal savings and loan associations,
To Report Interest Income in chapter 1 of Publi- mined by the cost to the financial institution.and
cation 550, or Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040)
• Mutual savings banks.instructions. Example. You open a savings account at
your local bank and deposit $800. The accountIncorrect amount. If you receive a Form earns $20 interest. You also receive a $15 cal-The ªdividendsº will be shown as interest income1099-INT that shows an incorrect amount (or culator. If no other interest is credited to youron Form 1099-INT.other incorrect information), you should ask the account during the year, the Form 1099-INT youissuer for a corrected form. The new Form receive will show $35 interest for the year. YouMoney market funds. Money market funds1099-INT you receive will be marked ªCor- must report $35 interest income on your taxpay dividends and are offered by nonbank finan-rected.º return.cial institutions, such as mutual funds and stock
Form 1099-OID. Reportable interest income brokerage houses. Generally, amounts you re-
may also be shown on Form 1099-OID, Original Interest on insurance dividends. Interest onceive from money market funds should be re-
Issue Discount. For more information about insurance dividends left on deposit with an in-ported as dividends, not as interest.
amounts shown on this form, see Original Issue surance company that can be withdrawn annu-
Discount (OID), later in this chapter. ally is taxable to you in the year it is credited toCertificates of deposit and other deferred
your account. However, if you can withdraw itinterest accounts. If you open any of theseExempt-interest dividends. Exempt-interest only on the anniversary date of the policy (oraccounts, interest may be paid at fixed intervalsdividends you receive from a mutual fund or other specified date), the interest is taxable inof 1 year or less during the term of the account.other regulated investment company are not in- the year that date occurs.You generally must include this interest in yourcluded in your taxable income. (However, see income when you actually receive it or are enti-Information-reporting requirement , next.) Ex- tled to receive it without paying a substantial Prepaid insurance premiums. Any increaseempt-interest dividends should be shown in box penalty. The same is true for accounts that ma- in the value of prepaid insurance premiums,8 of Form 1099-INT. ture in 1 year or less and pay interest in a single advance premiums, or premium deposit funds is
payment at maturity. If interest is deferred for interest if it is applied to the payment of premi-Information-reporting requirement. Al-
more than 1 year, see Original Issue Discount ums due on insurance policies or made avail-though exempt-interest dividends are not tax-
able for you to withdraw.able, you must show them on your tax return if (OID), later.
Page 58 Chapter 7 Interest Income

Page 61 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
U.S. obligations. Interest on U.S. obligations, Bonds traded flat. If you buy a bond at a Series EE and series I bonds. Interest on
such as U.S. Treasury bills, notes, and bonds, discount when interest has been defaulted or these bonds is payable when you redeem the
issued by any agency or instrumentality of the when the interest has accrued but has not been bonds. The difference between the purchase
United States is taxable for federal income tax paid, the transaction is described as trading a price and the redemption value is taxable inter-
purposes. bond flat. The defaulted or unpaid interest is not est.
income and is not taxable as interest if paid later. Series EE bonds. Series EE bonds wereInterest on tax refunds. Interest you receive When you receive a payment of that interest, it is
first offered in January 1980. They have a matur-on tax refunds is taxable income. a return of capital that reduces the remaining
ity period of 30 years.cost basis of your bond. Interest that accrues
Interest on condemnation award. If the con- after the date of purchase, however, is taxable Before July 1980, series E bonds were is-demning authority pays you interest to compen- interest income for the year it is received or sued. The original 10-year maturity period ofsate you for a delay in payment of an award, the accrued. See Bonds Sold Between Interest series E bonds has been extended to 40 yearsinterest is taxable. Dates, later, for more information. for bonds issued before December 1965 and 30
years for bonds issued after November 1965.Below-market loans. In general, a be-Installment sale payments. If a contract for
Paper series EE and series E bonds are issuedlow-market loan is a loan on which no interest isthe sale or exchange of property provides for
at a discount. The face value is payable to you atcharged or on which interest is charged at a ratedeferred payments, it also usually provides for
below the applicable federal rate. See Be- maturity. Electronic series EE bonds are issuedinterest payable with the deferred payments.
low-Market Loans  in chapter 1 of Publication at their face value. The face value plus accruedThat interest is taxable when you receive it. If
550 for more information.little or no interest is provided for in a deferred interest is payable to you at maturity.
payment contract, part of each payment may be Owners of paper series E and EE bonds can
treated as interest. See Unstated Interest and convert them to electronic bonds. These con-U.S. Savings BondsOriginal Issue Discount in Publication 537, In- verted bonds do not retain the denomination
stallment Sales. listed on the paper certificate but are posted atThis section provides tax information on U.S.
savings bonds. It explains how to report the their purchase price (with accrued interest).Interest on annuity contract. Accumulated interest income on these bonds and how to treat Series I bonds. Series I bonds were firstinterest on an annuity contract you sell before its transfers of these bonds. offered in 1998. These are inflation-indexedmaturity date is taxable.
For other information on U.S. savings bonds issued at their face amount with a matur-
Usurious interest. Usurious interest is inter- bonds, write to: ity period of 30 years. The face value plus all
est charged at an illegal rate. This is taxable as accrued interest is payable to you at maturity.
interest unless state law automatically changes For series EE and I: Reporting options for cash method tax-it to a payment on the principal. Bureau of the Public Debt payers. If you use the cash method of report-Division of Customer Assistance
ing income, you can report the interest on seriesInterest income on frozen deposits. Ex- P.O. Box 7012
EE, series E, and series I bonds in either of theclude from your gross income interest on frozen Parkersburg, WV 26106-7012
deposits. A deposit is frozen if, at the end of the following ways.
year, you cannot withdraw any part of the de- For series HH/H: 1. Method 1. Postpone reporting the interestposit because: Bureau of the Public Debt until the earlier of the year you cash orDivision of Customer Assistance• The financial institution is bankrupt or in- dispose of the bonds or the year they ma-P.O. Box 2186solvent, or ture. (However, see Savings bonds traded,Parkersburg, WV 26106-2186 later.) • The state where the institution is located
Note. Series E bonds issued in 1979 ma-Or, on the Internet, visit:has placed limits on withdrawals because
tured in 2009. If you have used method 1,www.treasurydirect.gov/indiv/prod-other financial institutions in the state are
you generally must report the interest onucts/products.htm.bankrupt or insolvent.
these bonds on your 2009 return.
Accrual method taxpayers. If you use an ac-The amount of interest you must exclude is 2. Method 2. Choose to report the increasecrual method of accounting, you must reportthe interest that was credited on the frozen de- in redemption value as interest each year.interest on U.S. savings bonds each year as itposits minus the sum of:
accrues. You cannot postpone reporting interest You must use the same method for all series EE,• The net amount you withdrew from these until you receive it or until the bonds mature. series E, and series I bonds you own. If you dodeposits during the year, and Accrual methods of accounting are explained in not choose method 2 by reporting the increase
chapter 1 under Accounting Methods.• The amount you could have withdrawn as in redemption value as interest each year, you
of the end of the year (not reduced by any must use method 1.Cash method taxpayers. If you use the cashpenalty for premature withdrawals of a method of accounting, as most individual tax- If you plan to cash your bonds in thetime deposit). payers do, you generally report the interest on same year that you will pay for higher
U.S. savings bonds when you receive it. TheIf you receive a Form 1099-INT for interest in- education expenses, you may want to
TIP
cash method of accounting is explained in chap-come on deposits that were frozen at the end of use method 1 because you may be able to
ter 1 under Accounting Methods . But see Re-2009, see Frozen deposits under How To Re- exclude the interest from your income. To learn
porting options for cash method taxpayers, later.port Interest Income in chapter 1 of Publication how, see Education Savings Bond Program ,
550, for information about reporting this interest later.Series HH bonds.  These bonds were issuedincome exclusion on your tax return. at face value. Interest is paid twice a year by Change from method 1. If you want todirect deposit to your bank account. If you are aThe interest you exclude is treated as credited change your method of reporting the interestcash method taxpayer, you must report interestto your account in the following year. You must from method 1 to method 2, you can do soon these bonds as income in the year you re-include it in income in the year you can withdraw without permission from the IRS. In the year ofceive it.it. change you must report all interest accrued toSeries HH bonds were first offered in 1980; date and not previously reported for all yourExample. $100 of interest was credited on they were last offered in August 2004. Before
bonds.your frozen deposit during the year. You with- 1980, series H bonds were issued. Series H
Once you choose to report the interest eachdrew $80 but could not withdraw any more as of bonds are treated the same as series HH bonds.
year, you must continue to do so for all seriesthe end of the year. You must include $80 in If you are a cash method taxpayer, you must
EE, series E, and series I bonds you own and foryour income and exclude $20 from your income report the interest when you receive it.
any you get later, unless you request permissionfor the year. You must include the $20 in your Series H bonds have a maturity period of 30
income for the year you can withdraw it. years. Series HH bonds mature in 20 years. to change, as explained next.
Chapter 7 Interest Income Page 59

Page 62 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 7-1. These rules are also shown inTable 7-1. Who Pays the Tax on U.S. Savings
Table 7-1.Bond Interest Keep for Your Records
Ownership transferred. If you bought series
E, series EE, or series I bonds entirely with yourIF ... THEN the interest must be reported by ...
own funds and had them reissued in your
you buy a bond in your name and the name of you. co-owner's name or beneficiary's name alone,
another person as co-owners, using only your you must include in your gross income for the
own funds year of reissue all interest that you earned on
these bonds and have not previously reported.you buy a bond in the name of another person, the person for whom you bought the bond. But, if the bonds were reissued in your namewho is the sole owner of the bond
alone, you do not have to report the interest
you and another person buy a bond as both you and the other co-owner, in proportion accrued at that time.
co-owners, each contributing part of the to the amount each paid for the bond. This same rule applies when bonds (other
purchase price than bonds held as community property) are
transferred between spouses or incident to di-you and your spouse, who live in a community you and your spouse. If you file separate vorce.property state, buy a bond that is community returns, both you and your spouse generally
property report one-half of the interest. Purchased jointly. If you and a co-owner
each contributed funds to buy series E, series
EE, or series I bonds jointly and later have the
bonds reissued in the co-owner's name alone,Change from method 2. To change from If you use a private delivery service, send the you must include in your gross income for themethod 2 to method 1, you must request permis- signed copy to the address below. year of reissue your share of all the interestsion from the IRS. Permission for the change is earned on the bonds that you have not previ-automatically granted if you send the IRS a Internal Revenue Service ously reported. The former co-owner does notstatement that meets all the following require- Attention: CC:IT&A (Automatic have to include in gross income at the time ofments. Rulings Branch) reissue his or her share of the interest earned
Room 5336 that was not reported before the transfer. This1. You have typed or printed the following
1111 Constitution Avenue, NW interest, however, as well as all interest earnednumber at the top: ª131º.
Washington, DC 20224 after the reissue, is income to the former2. It includes your name and social security co-owner.Instead of filing this statement, you can re-number under ª131º. This income-reporting rule also applies whenquest permission to change from method 2 to
the bonds are reissued in the name of your3. It includes the year of change (both the method 1 by filing Form 3115, Application for
former co-owner and a new co-owner. But thebeginning and ending dates). Change in Accounting Method. In that case,
new co-owner will report only his or her share offollow the form instructions for an automatic4. It identifies the savings bonds for which the interest earned after the transfer.change. No user fee is required.you are requesting this change. If bonds that you and a co-owner bought
jointly are reissued to each of you separately in5. It includes your agreement to: Co-owners. If a U.S. savings bond is issued in
the same proportion as your contribution to thethe names of co-owners, such as you and youra. Report all interest on any bonds ac- purchase price, neither you nor your co-ownerchild or you and your spouse, interest on thequired during or after the year of has to report at that time the interest earnedbond is generally taxable to the co-owner whochange when the interest is realized before the bonds were reissued.bought the bond.upon disposition, redemption, or final
One co-owner's funds used.  If you usedmaturity, whichever is earliest, and Example 1. You and your spouse eachyour funds to buy the bond, you must pay the tax spent an equal amount to buy a $1,000 seriesb. Report all interest on the bonds ac- on the interest. This is true even if you let the EE savings bond. The bond was issued to youquired before the year of change when other co-owner redeem the bond and keep all and your spouse as co-owners. You both post-the interest is realized upon disposition, the proceeds. Under these circumstances, the pone reporting interest on the bond. You laterredemption, or final maturity, whichever co-owner who redeemed the bond will receive a have the bond reissued as two $500 bonds, oneis earliest, with the exception of the in- Form 1099-INT at the time of redemption and in your name and one in your spouse's name. Atterest reported in prior tax years. must provide you with another Form 1099-INT that time neither you nor your spouse has toshowing the amount of interest from the bond report the interest earned to the date of reissue.You must attach this statement to your tax that is taxable to you. The co-owner who re-return for the year of change, which you must file deemed the bond is a ªnominee.º See Nominee Example 2. You bought a $1,000 series EEby the due date (including extensions). distributions under How To Report Interest In- savings bond entirely with your own funds. TheYou can have an automatic extension of 6 come in chapter 1 of Publication 550 for more bond was issued to you and your spouse asmonths from the due date of your return for the information about how a person who is a nomi- co-owners. You both postpone reporting interestyear of change (excluding extensions) to file the nee reports interest income belonging to an- on the bond. You later have the bond reissuedstatement with an amended return. On the state- other person. as two $500 bonds, one in your name and one inment, type or print ªFiled pursuant to section
your spouse's name. You must report half theBoth co-owners' funds used. If you and301.9100-2.º To get this extension, you must
interest earned to the date of reissue.the other co-owner each contribute part of thehave filed your original return for the year of the
bond's purchase price, the interest is generallychange by the due date (including extensions). Transfer to a trust. If you own series E, seriestaxable to each of you, in proportion to theBy the date you file the original state- EE, or series I bonds and transfer them to aamount each of you paid.ment with your return, you must also trust, giving up all rights of ownership, you must
Community property. If you and yoursend a signed copy to the address be- include in your income for that year the interest
spouse live in a community property state andlow. earned to the date of transfer if you have not
hold bonds as community property, one-half of already reported it. However, if you are consid-
the interest is considered received by each ofInternal Revenue Service ered the owner of the trust and if the increase in
you. If you file separate returns, each of youAttention: CC:IT&A (Automatic Rulings value both before and after the transfer contin-
generally must report one-half of the bond inter-Branch) ues to be taxable to you, you can continue to
est. For more information about communityP.O. Box 7604 defer reporting the interest earned each year.
property, see Publication 555, Community Prop-Benjamin Franklin Station You must include the total interest in your in-
erty.Washington, DC 20044 come in the year you cash or dispose of the
Page 60 Chapter 7 Interest Income

Page 63 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
bonds or the year the bonds finally mature, 1099-INT will not be reduced by amounts The issue date of a bond may be earlier
whichever is earlier. than the date the bond is purchasedpreviously included in income.
because the issue date assigned to aThe same rules apply to previously unre-
CAUTION
! • You received the bond from a decedent. bond is the first day of the month in which it isported interest on series EE or series E bonds if The interest shown on your Form purchased.the transfer to a trust consisted of series HH or
1099-INT will not be reduced by any inter-series H bonds you acquired in a trade for the
est reported by the decedent before death,series EE or series E bonds. See Savings bonds Beneficiary. You can designate any individualor on the decedent's final return, or by thetraded, later. (including a child) as a beneficiary of the bond.estate on the estate's income tax return.
Verification by IRS. If you claim the exclu-Decedents. The manner of reporting interest • Ownership of the bond was transferred. sion, the IRS will check it by using bond redemp-income on series E, series EE, or series I bonds, The interest shown on your Form tion information from the Department of theafter the death of the owner, depends on the 1099-INT will not be reduced by interest Treasury.accounting and income-reporting methods pre- that accrued before the transfer.viously used by the decedent. This is explained Qualified expenses. Qualified higher edu-
in chapter 1 of Publication 550. • You were named as a co-owner and the cational expenses are tuition and fees required
other co-owner contributed funds to buy for you, your spouse, or your dependent (for
Savings bonds traded. If you postponed re- whom you claim an exemption) to attend anthe bond. The interest shown on your
porting the interest on your series EE or series E eligible educational institution.Form 1099-INT will not be reduced by the
bonds, you did not recognize taxable income amount you received as nominee for the Qualified expenses include any contributionwhen you traded the bonds for series HH or other co-owner. (See Co-owners, earlier in you make to a qualified tuition program or to aseries H bonds, unless you received cash in the Coverdell education savings account.this chapter, for more information abouttrade. (You cannot trade series I bonds for se- the reporting requirements.) Qualified expenses do not include expensesries HH bonds. After August 31, 2004, you can-
for room and board or for courses involvingnot trade any other series of bonds for series HH • You received the bond in a taxable distri-
sports, games, or hobbies that are not part of abonds.) Any cash you received is income up to bution from a retirement or profit-sharing degree or certificate granting program.the amount of the interest earned on the bonds plan. The interest shown on your Form
traded. When your series HH or series H bonds 1099-INT will not be reduced by the inter- Eligible educational institutions. These
mature, or if you dispose of them before matur- institutions include most public, private, andest portion of the amount taxable as a
ity, you report as interest the difference between nonprofit universities, colleges, and vocationaldistribution from the plan and not taxabletheir redemption value and your cost. Your cost schools that are accredited and are eligible toas interest. (This amount is generallyis the sum of the amount you paid for the traded participate in student aid programs run by theshown on Form 1099-R, Distributionsseries EE or series E bonds plus any amount U.S. Department of Education.From Pensions, Annuities, Retirement oryou had to pay at the time of the trade. Profit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insurance Reduction for certain benefits. You must
Contracts, etc., for the year of distribution.) reduce your qualified higher educational ex-Example.  In 2004, you traded series EE
penses by all of the following tax-free benefits.bonds (on which you postponed reporting the
For more information on including the correctinterest) for $2,500 in series HH bonds and $223 1. Tax-free part of scholarships and fellow-amount of interest on your return, see How Toin cash. You reported the $223 as taxable in- ships (see Scholarships and fellowships inReport Interest Income , later. Publication 550come in 2004, the year of the trade. At the time chapter 12).includes examples showing how to report theseof the trade, the series EE bonds had accrued
amounts.interest of $523 and a redemption value of 2. Expenses used to figure the tax-free por-
$2,723. You hold the series HH bonds until ma- tion of distributions from a Coverdell ESA.Interest on U.S. savings bonds is ex-turity, when you receive $2,500. You must report empt from state and local taxes. The 3. Expenses used to figure the tax-free por-$300 as interest income in the year of maturity. Form 1099-INT you receive will indi- tion of distributions from a qualified tuition
TIPThis is the difference between their redemption cate the amount that is for U.S. savings bond program.value, $2,500, and your cost, $2,200 (the interest in box 3.amount you paid for the series EE bonds). (It is 4. Any tax-free payments (other than gifts or
also the difference between the accrued interest inheritances) received for educational ex-
of $523 on the series EE bonds and the $223 penses, such asEducation Savings 
cash received on the trade.)
a. Veterans' educational assistance bene-Bond Program
Choice to report interest in year of trade. fits,
You could have chosen to treat all of the previ- You may be able to exclude from income all or b. Qualified tuition reductions, orously unreported accrued interest on the series part of the interest you receive on the redemp-
EE or series E bonds traded for series HH bonds c. Employer-provided educational assis-tion of qualified U.S. savings bonds during the
as income in the year of the trade. If you made tance.year if you pay qualified higher educational ex-
this choice, it is treated as a change from penses during the same year. This exclusion ismethod 1. See Change from method 1  under 5. Any expense used in figuring the Americanknown as the Education Savings Bond Program.Series EE and series I bonds, earlier. Opportunity, Hope, and lifetime learningYou do not qualify for this exclusion if your credits.filing status is married filing separately.Form 1099-INT for U.S. savings bonds inter-
est. When you cash a bond, the bank or other Amount excludable. If the total proceedsForm 8815. Use Form 8815 to figure your
payer that redeems it must give you a Form (interest and principal) from the qualified U.S.exclusion. Attach the form to your Form 1040 or1099-INT if the interest part of the payment you savings bonds you redeem during the year areForm 1040A.receive is $10 or more. Box 3 of your Form not more than your adjusted qualified higher
Qualified U.S. savings bonds. A qualified1099-INT should show the interest as the differ- educational expenses for the year, you may be
U.S. savings bond is a series EE bond issuedence between the amount you received and the able to exclude all of the interest. If the proceeds
amount paid for the bond. However, your Form after 1989 or a series I bond. The bond must be are more than the expenses, you may be able to
1099-INT may show more interest than you issued either in your name (sole owner) or in exclude only part of the interest.
have to include on your income tax return. For your and your spouse's names (co-owners). To determine the excludable amount, multi-example, this may happen if any of the following You must be at least 24 years old before the ply the interest part of the proceeds by a fraction.are true. bond's issue date. For example, a bond bought The numerator of the fraction is the qualified
by a parent and issued in the name of his or her• You chose to report the increase in the higher educational expenses you paid during
child under age 24 does not qualify for the exclu-redemption value of the bond each year. the year. The denominator of the fraction is the
The interest shown on your Form sion by the parent or child. total proceeds you received during the year.
Chapter 7 Interest Income Page 61

Page 64 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. In February 2009, Mark and return of your capital investment, rather thanU.S. Treasury Bills, interest income, by reducing your basis in theJoan, a married couple, cashed a qualified se-
Notes, and Bonds bond. See Accrued interest on bonds  underries EE U.S. savings bond they bought in April
How To Report Interest Income  in chapter 1 of1996. They received proceeds of $8,124 repre-
Treasury bills, notes, and bonds are direct debts Publication 550 for information on reporting thesenting principal of $5,000 and interest of
(obligations) of the U.S. Government. payment.$3,124. In 2009, they paid $4,000 of their daugh-
ter's college tuition. They are not claiming an Taxation of interest. Interest income fromeducation credit for that amount, and their InsuranceTreasury bills, notes, and bonds is subject todaughter does not have any tax-free educational federal income tax, but is exempt from all stateassistance. They can exclude $1,538 ($3,124 × Life insurance proceeds paid to you as benefi-and local income taxes. You should receive($4,000 ÷  $8,124)) of interest in 2009. They ciary of the insured person are usually not tax-Form 1099-INT showing the amount of interest able. But if you receive the proceeds inmust pay tax on the remaining $1,586 ($3,124 − (in box 3) that was paid to you for the year. installments, you must usually report a part of$1,538) interest. Payments of principal and interest generally each installment payment as interest income.Modified adjusted gross income limit. will be credited to your designated checking or For more information about insurance pro-savings account by direct deposit through theThe interest exclusion is limited if your modified ceeds received in installments, see PublicationTreasuryDirect  system.adjusted gross income (modified AGI) is: 525, Taxable and Nontaxable Income.
Treasury bills. These bills generally have a• $69,950 to $84,950 for taxpayers filing sin-
4-week, 13-week, 26-week, or 52-week maturitygle or head of household, and Annuity. If you buy an annuity with life insur-
period. They are issued at a discount in the ance proceeds, the annuity payments you re-• $104,900 to $134,900 for married taxpay- amount of $100 and multiples of $100. The dif- ceive are taxed as pension and annuity incomeers filing jointly or for a qualifying ference between the discounted price you pay from a nonqualified plan, not as interest income.widow(er) with dependent child. for the bills and the face value you receive at See chapter 10 for information on pension and
maturity is interest income. Generally, you re-You do not qualify for the interest exclusion if annuity income from nonqualified plans.
port this interest income when the bill is paid atyour modified AGI is equal to or more than the
maturity.upper limit for your filing status. State or Local
Treasury notes and bonds. TreasuryModified AGI, for purposes of this exclusion, Government Obligationsnotes have maturity periods of more than 1 year,is adjusted gross income (Form 1040A, line 21
ranging up to 10 years. Maturity periods foror Form 1040, line 37) figured before the interest Interest on a bond used to finance governmentTreasury bonds are longer than 10 years. Bothexclusion, and modified by adding back any: operations generally is not taxable if the bond isof these Treasury issues generally are issued in issued by a state, the District of Columbia, adenominations of $100 to $1 million. Both notes1. Foreign earned income exclusion, possession of the United States, or any of theirand bonds generally pay interest every 62. Foreign housing exclusion and deduction, political subdivisions.months. Generally, you report this interest for
Bonds issued after 1982 (including tribal ec-the year paid. For more information, see U.S.3. Exclusion of income for bona fide residents
onomic development bonds issued after Febru-Treasury Bills, Notes, and Bonds in chapter 1 ofof American Samoa,
ary 17, 2009) by an Indian tribal government arePublication 550.4. Exclusion for income from Puerto Rico, treated as issued by a state. Interest on these
For other information on Treasury bonds is generally tax exempt if the bonds are5. Exclusion for adoption benefits received notes or bonds, write to: part of an issue of which substantially all of theunder an employer's adoption assistance
 proceeds are to be used in the exercise of anyprogram, Bureau of The Public Debt essential government function.
P.O. Box 70156. Deduction for tuition and fees, For information on federally guaranteedParkersburg, WV 26106-7015 bonds, mortgage revenue bonds, arbitrage7. Deduction for student loan interest, and
bonds, private activity bonds, qualified tax creditOr, on the Internet, visit: www.8. Deduction for domestic production activi- bonds, and Build America bonds, see State ortreasurydirect.gov/write.htmties. Local Government Obligations  in chapter 1 of
Publication 550.Use the worksheet in the instructions for line
9, Form 8815, to figure your modified AGI. If you For information on series EE, series I, and Information reporting requirement. If youclaim any of the exclusion or deduction items series HH savings bonds, see U.S. Savings must file a tax return, you are required to showlisted above (except items 6, 7 and 8), add the Bonds, earlier. any tax-exempt interest you received on youramount of the exclusion or deduction (except
return. This is an information-reporting require-any deduction for tuition and fees, student loan Treasury inflation-protected securities
ment only. It does not change tax-exempt inter-(TIPS). These securities pay interest twice ainterest, or domestic production activities) to the
est to taxable interest.year at a fixed rate, based on a principal amountamount on line 5 of the worksheet, and enter the
that is adjusted to take into account inflation andtotal on Form 8815, line 9, as your modified AGI.
deflation. For the tax treatment of these securi-If you have investment interest expense in- Original Issue
ties, see Inflation-Indexed Debt Instrumentscurred to earn royalties and other investment Discount (OID)under Original Issue Discount (OID), in Publica-income, see Education Savings Bond Program
tion 550.in chapter 1 of Publication 550. Original issue discount (OID) is a form of inter-
est. You generally include OID in your income asRecordkeeping. If you claim the inter-
Bonds Sold Between it accrues over the term of the debt instrument,est exclusion, you must keep a written
whether or not you receive any payments fromrecord of the qualified U.S. savings Interest Dates
RECORDS
the issuer.bonds you redeem. Your record must include
the serial number, issue date, face value, and A debt instrument generally has OID whenIf you sell a bond between interest payment
the instrument is issued for a price that is lessdates, part of the sales price represents interesttotal redemption proceeds (principal and inter-
than its stated redemption price at maturity. OIDaccrued to the date of sale. You must report thatest) of each bond. You can use Form 8818,
is the difference between the stated redemptionpart of the sales price as interest income for theOptional Form To Record Redemption of Series
price at maturity and the issue price.year of sale.EE and I U.S. Savings Bonds Issued After 1989,
to record this information. You should also keep All debt instruments that pay no interestIf you buy a bond between interest payment
bills, receipts, canceled checks, or other docu- before maturity are presumed to be issued at adates, part of the purchase price represents
mentation that shows you paid qualified higher discount. Zero coupon bonds are one exampleinterest accrued before the date of purchase.
of these instruments.educational expenses during the year. When that interest is paid to you, treat it as a
Page 62 Chapter 7 Interest Income

Page 65 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The OID accrual rules generally do not apply stated interest that you must include in your More information. See chapter 1 of Publica-
to short-term obligations (those with a fixed ma- tion 550 for more information about OID andincome. A copy of Form 1099-OID will be sent to
turity date of 1 year or less from date of issue). related topics, such as market discount bonds.the IRS. Do not file your copy with your return.
See Discount on Short-Term Obligations  in Keep it for your records.
chapter 1 of Publication 550. In most cases, you must report the entire
amount in boxes 1 and 2 of Form 1099-OID asDe minimis OID. You can treat the discount interest income. But see Refiguring OID shown When To Reportas zero if it is less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025) on Form 1099-OID,  later in this discussion, forof the stated redemption price at maturity multi- more information. Interest Incomeplied by the number of full years from the date of
original issue to maturity. This small discount is Form 1099-OID not received. If you had OID When to report your interest income depends onknown as ªde minimisº OID. whether you use the cash method or an accrualfor the year but did not receive a Form
method to report income.1099-OID, see www.irs.gov, which lists totalExample 1. You bought a 10-year bond with
OID on certain debt instruments and has infor-a stated redemption price at maturity of $1,000, Cash method. Most individual taxpayers usemation that will help you figure OID. If your debtissued at $980 with OID of $20. One-fourth of the cash method. If you use this method, youinstrument is not listed, consult the issuer for1% of $1,000 (stated redemption price) times 10 generally report your interest income in the yearfurther information about the accrued OID for(the number of full years from the date of original in which you actually or constructively receive it.the year.issue to maturity) equals $25. Because the $20 However, there are special rules for reportingdiscount is less than $25, the OID is treated as Nominee. If someone else is the holder of the discount on certain debt instruments. Seezero. (If you hold the bond at maturity, you will record (the registered owner) of an OID instru- U.S. Savings Bonds  and Original Issue Dis-recognize $20 ($1,000 − $980) of capital gain.) ment that belongs to you and receives a Form count, earlier.
1099-OID on your behalf, that person must give
Example 2. The facts are the same as in you a Form 1099-OID. Example. On September 1, 2007, youExample 1, except that the bond was issued at loaned another individual $2,000 at 12%, com-$950. The OID is $50. Because the $50 discount Refiguring OID shown on Form 1099-OID. pounded annually. You are not in the businessis more than the $25 figured in Example 1, you You must refigure the OID shown in box 1 or box of lending money. The note stated that principalmust include the OID in income as it accrues 6 of Form 1099-OID if either of the following and interest would be due on August 31, 2009.over the term of the bond. apply. In 2009, you received $2,508.80 ($2,000 princi-
Debt instrument bought after original is- pal and $508.80 interest). If you use the cash• You bought the debt instrument after itssue. If you buy a debt instrument with de method, you must include in income on youroriginal issue and paid a premium or anminimis OID at a premium, the discount is not 2009 return the $508.80 interest you received inacquisition premium.includible in income. If you buy a debt instrument that year.
• The debt instrument is a stripped bond orwith de minimis OID at a discount, the discount Constructive receipt. You constructivelya stripped coupon (including certain zerois reported under the market discount rules. See receive income when it is credited to your ac-coupon instruments).Market Discount Bonds in chapter 1 of Publica- count or made available to you. You do not needtion 550. For information about figuring the correct to have physical possession of it. For example,
amount of OID to include in your income, see you are considered to receive interest, divi-Exceptions to reporting OID. The OID rules
Figuring OID on Long-Term Debt Instruments in dends, or other earnings on any deposit or ac-discussed in this chapter do not apply to the
Publication 1212. count in a bank, savings and loan, or similarfollowing debt instruments. 
financial institution, or interest on life insurance
Refiguring periodic interest shown on Form1. Tax-exempt obligations. (However, see policy dividends left to accumulate, when they
1099-OID. If you disposed of a debt instrumentStripped tax-exempt obligations under are credited to your account and subject to your
or acquired it from another holder during theStripped Bonds and Coupons in chapter 1 withdrawal. This is true even if they are not yet
year, see Bonds Sold Between Interest Dates ,of Publication 550). entered in your passbook.
earlier, for information about the treatment of You constructively receive income on the2. U.S. savings bonds. periodic interest that may be shown in box 2 of deposit or account even if you must:
Form 1099-OID for that instrument.3. Short-term debt instruments (those with a • Make withdrawals in multiples of evenfixed maturity date of not more than 1 year amounts,from the date of issue). Certificates of deposit (CDs). If you buy a
• Give a notice to withdraw before makingCD with a maturity of more than 1 year, you must4. Obligations issued by an individual before the withdrawal,include in income each year a part of the totalMarch 2, 1984. interest due and report it in the same manner as • Withdraw all or part of the account to with-5. Loans between individuals, if all the follow- other OID. draw the earnings, oring are true. This also applies to similar deposit arrange-
• Pay a penalty on early withdrawals, unlessments with banks, building and loan associa-a. The lender is not in the business of the interest you are to receive on an earlytions, etc., including:lending money. withdrawal or redemption is substantially
• Time deposits, less than the interest payable at maturity.b. The amount of the loan, plus the
amount of any outstanding prior loans • Bonus plans,
between the same individuals, is Accrual method. If you use an accrual• Savings certificates,$10,000 or less. method, you report your interest income when• Deferred income certificates, you earn it, whether or not you have received it.c. Avoiding any federal tax is not one of
Interest is earned over the term of the debtthe principal purposes of the loan. • Bonus savings certificates, and
instrument.• Growth savings certificates.
Form 1099-OID. The issuer of the debt instru- Example. If, in the previous example, youBearer CDs. CDs issued after 1982 gener-ment (or your broker, if you held the instrument use an accrual method, you must include theally must be in registered form. Bearer CDs arethrough a broker) should give you Form interest in your income as you earn it. You wouldCDs that are not in registered form. They are not1099-OID, Original Issue Discount, or a similar report the interest as follows: 2007, $80; 2008,issued in the depositor's name and are transfer-statement, if the total OID for the calendar year $249.60; and 2009, $179.20.able from one individual to another.is $10 or more. Form 1099-OID will show, in box
Banks must provide the IRS and the person1, the amount of OID for the part of the year that Coupon bonds. Interest on coupon bonds is
redeeming a bearer CD with a Form 1099-INT.you held the bond. It also will show, in box 2, the taxable in the year the coupon becomes due and
Chapter 7 Interest Income Page 63

Page 66 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
payable. It does not matter when you mail the bond premium amortization for the accrual Form 1099-INT. Your taxable interest income,
coupon for payment. except for interest from U.S. savings bonds andperiod over the qualified stated interest for
Treasury obligations, is shown in box 1 of Formthe period (see Bond Premium Amortiza-
1099-INT. Add this amount to any other taxabletion in chapter 3 of Publication 550), or
interest income you received. You must report3. You received tax-exempt interest from pri- all of your taxable interest income even if you doHow To Report vate activity bonds issued after August 7, not receive a Form 1099-INT. Contact your fi-1986. nancial institution if you do not receive a FormInterest Income
1099-INT by February 15.Schedule B. You must complete Schedule If you forfeited interest income because ofGenerally, you report all of your taxable interest B (Form 1040A or 1040), if you file Form 1040 the early withdrawal of a time deposit, the de-income on Form 1040, line 8a; Form 1040A, line and any of the following apply.8a; or Form 1040EZ, line 2. ductible amount will be shown on Form
You cannot use Form 1040EZ if your interest 1099-INT in box 2. See Penalty on early with-1. Your taxable interest income is more than
income is more than $1,500. Instead, you must drawal of savings  in chapter 1 of Publication$1,500.
use Form 1040A or Form 1040. 550.
2. You are claiming the interest exclusion Box 3 of Form 1099-INT shows the amountForm 1040A. You must complete Schedule B under the Education Savings Bond Pro- of interest income you received from U.S. sav-(Form 1040A or 1040), if you file Form 1040A gram (discussed earlier). ings bonds, Treasury bills, Treasury notes, andand any of the following are true.
Treasury bonds. Add the amount shown in box 33. You had a foreign account or you received• Your taxable interest income is more than to any other taxable interest income you re-a distribution from, or were a grantor of, or$1,500. ceived, unless part of the amount in box 3 wastransferor to, a foreign trust.
previously included in your interest income. If• You are claiming the interest exclusion 4. You received interest from a part of the amount shown in box 3 was previ-under the Education Savings Bond Pro- seller-financed mortgage, and the buyer ously included in your interest income, see U.S.gram (discussed earlier). used the property as a home. savings bond interest previously reported, later.
• You received interest from a Box 4 of Form 1099-INT (federal income tax5. You received a Form 1099-INT for U.S.seller-financed mortgage, and the buyer withheld) will contain an amount if you weresavings bond interest that includesused the property as a home. subject to backup withholding. Report theamounts you reported before 2009.
• You received a Form 1099-INT for U.S. amount from box 4 on Form 1040EZ, line 7; on
6. You received, as a nominee, interest thatsavings bond interest that includes Form 1040A, line 38; or on Form 1040, line
actually belongs to someone else.amounts you reported before 2009. 61(federal income tax withheld).
Box 5 of Form 1099-INT shows investment7. You received a Form 1099-INT for interest• You received, as a nominee, interest that
expenses you may be able to deduct as anon frozen deposits.actually belongs to someone else.
itemized deduction. See chapter 28  for more8. You received a Form 1099-INT for interest• You received a Form 1099-INT for interest information about investment expenses.on a bond that you bought between inter-on frozen deposits. If there are entries in boxes 6 and 7 of Formest payment dates. 1099-INT, you must file Form 1040. You may be• You are reporting OID in an amount less
9. You are reporting OID in an amount less able to take a credit for the amount shown in boxthan the amount shown on Form
6 (foreign tax paid) unless you deduct thisthan the amount shown on Form1099-OID.
amount on Schedule A of Form 1040 as ªOther1099-OID.• You received a Form 1099-INT for interest taxes.º To take the credit, you may have to fileon a bond that you bought between inter- 10. Statement (2) in the preceding list under Form 1116, Foreign Tax Credit. For more infor-est payment dates. Form 1040 is true. mation, see Publication 514, Foreign Tax Credit
• You acquired taxable bonds after 1987 for Individuals.On Part I, line 1, list each payer's name and the
and choose to reduce interest income amount received from each. If you received a U.S. savings bond interest previously re-from the bonds by any amortizable bond Form 1099-INT or Form 1099-OID from a bro- ported. If you received a Form 1099-INT forpremium (see Bond Premium Amortization kerage firm, list the brokerage firm as the payer. U.S. savings bond interest, the form may showin chapter 3 of Publication 550). interest you do not have to report. See FormReporting tax-exempt interest. Total your
• You had a foreign account or you received 1099-INT for U.S. savings bonds interest , ear-tax-exempt interest (such as interest or accrued
a distribution from, or were a grantor of, or lier, under U.S. Savings Bonds.OID on certain state and municipal bonds) and
transferor to, a foreign trust. On Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040), Part I,exempt-interest dividends from a mutual fund as
line 1, report all the interest shown on your Formshown in box 8 of Form 1099-INT. Add thisList each payer's name and the amount of inter-
1099-INT. Then follow these steps.amount to any other tax-exempt interest youest income received from each payer on line 1. If
received. Report the total on line 8b of Formyou received a Form 1099-INT or Form 1. Several lines above line 2, enter a subtotal1040A or 1040. If you file Form 1040EZ, enter1099-OID from a brokerage firm, list the broker- of all interest listed on line 1.age firm as the payer. ªTEIº and the amount in the space to the left of
2. Below the subtotal enter ªU.S. Savingsline 2. Do not add tax-exempt interest in the totalYou cannot use Form 1040A if you must use Bond Interest Previously Reportedº andon Form 1040EZ, line 2.Form 1040, as described next. enter amounts previously reported or inter-Box 9 shows the tax-exempt interest subject
Form 1040. You must use Form 1040 instead est accrued before you received the bond.to the alternative minimum tax on Form 6251,of Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ if: Alternative Minimum Tax ÐIndividuals. It is al- 3. Subtract these amounts from the subtotal
ready included in the amount in box 8. Do not and enter the result on line 2.1. You forfeited interest income because of
add the amount in box 9 to, or subtract from, thethe early withdrawal of a time deposit,
amount in box 8.
More information. For more information2. You acquired taxable bonds after 1987,
Do not report interest from an individ- about how to report interest income, see chapteryou choose to reduce interest income from
ual retirement account (IRA) as 1 of Publication 550 or the instructions for thethe bonds by any amortizable bond pre-
tax-exempt interest. form you must file.mium, and you are deducting the excess of
CAUTION
!
Page 64 Chapter 7 Interest Income

Page 67 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Reporting tax withheld. If tax is withheld
from your dividend income, the payer must giveGeneral Information you a Form 1099-DIV that indicates the amount
withheld.8. This section discusses general rules for divi-
dend income. Nominees. If someone receives distribu-
tions as a nominee for you, that person will giveTax on investment income of certain chil- you a Form 1099-DIV, which will show distribu-dren. Part of a child's 2009 investment income tions received on your behalf.Dividends and may be taxed at the parent's tax rate. If it is,
Form 8615, Tax for Certain Children With In- Form 1099-MISC. Certain substitute pay-vestment Income of More Than $1,900, must be ments in lieu of dividends or tax-exempt interestOther Corporate completed and attached to the child's tax return. that are received by a broker on your behalfIf not, Form 8615 is not required and the child's must be reported to you on Form 1099-MISC,income is taxed at his or her own tax rate.Distributions Miscellaneous Income, or a similar statement.Some parents can choose to include the See Reporting Substitute Payments under Shortchild's interest and dividends on the parent's Sales in chapter 4 of Publication 550 for morereturn if certain requirements are met. If you can, information about reporting these payments.use Form 8814, Parents' Election To Report
Reminder Child's Interest and Dividends, for this purpose. Incorrect amount shown on a Form 1099. IfFor more information about the tax on invest- you receive a Form 1099 that shows an incorrectment income of children and the parents' elec-Foreign income. If you are a U.S. citizen with amount (or other incorrect information), yoution, see chapter 31.dividend income from sources outside the should ask the issuer for a corrected form. The
United States (foreign income), you must report new Form 1099 you receive will be marked ªCor-Beneficiary of an estate or trust. Dividends
that income on your tax return unless it is ex- rected.ºand other distributions you receive as a benefi-
empt by U.S. law. This is true whether you re- ciary of an estate or trust are generally taxable
Dividends on stock sold. If stock is sold,income. You should receive a Schedule K-1side inside or outside the United States and
exchanged, or otherwise disposed of after a(Form 1041), Beneficiary's Share of Income,whether or not you receive a Form 1099 from the dividend is declared, but before it is paid, theDeductions, Credits, etc., from the fiduciary.foreign payer. owner of record (usually the payee shown on theYour copy of Schedule K-1 and its instructions
dividend check) must include the dividend inwill tell you where to report the income on your
income.Form 1040.
Social security number (SSN).  You must Dividends received in January. If a mutualIntroduction give your name and SSN (or individual taxpayer fund (or other regulated investment company) or
identification number (ITIN)) to any person re-This chapter discusses the tax treatment of: real estate investment trust (REIT) declares a
quired by federal tax law to make a return, state- dividend (including any exempt-interest divi-• Ordinary dividends, ment, or other document that relates to you. This dend or capital gain distribution) in October,
includes payers of dividends. If you do not give• Capital gain distributions, November, or December payable to sharehold-
your SSN or ITIN to the payer of dividends, you ers of record on a date in one of those months• Nondividend distributions, and may have to pay a penalty. but actually pays the dividend during January of
For more information on SSNs and ITINs,• Other distributions you may receive from a the next calendar year, you are considered to
see Social security number (SSN) in chapter 7.corporation or a mutual fund. have received the dividend on December 31.
You report the dividend in the year it was de-Backup withholding. Your dividend incomeThis chapter also explains how to report divi- clared.is generally not subject to regular withholding.
dend income on your tax return. However, it may be subject to backup withhold-
ing to ensure that income tax is collected on the  Dividends are distributions of money, stock,
income. Under backup withholding, the payer ofor other property paid to you by a corporation.
dividends must withhold, as income tax, 28% of Ordinary DividendsYou also may receive dividends through a part- the amount you are paid.nership, an estate, a trust, or an association that Backup withholding may also be required if Ordinary (taxable) dividends are the most com-is taxed as a corporation. However, some the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) has deter- mon type of distribution from a corporation. Theyamounts you receive that are called dividends mined that you underreported your interest or are paid out of the earnings and profits of aare actually interest income. (See Dividends that dividend income. For more information, see corporation and are ordinary income to you. This
are actually interest  under Taxable Interest in Backup Withholding in chapter 4. means they are not capital gains. You can as-
chapter 7.) sume that any dividend you receive on commonStock certificate in two or more names. If or preferred stock is an ordinary dividend unlessMost distributions are paid in cash (or two or more persons hold stock as joint tenants, the paying corporation tells you otherwise. Ordi-check). However, distributions can consist of tenants by the entirety, or tenants in common, nary dividends will be shown in box 1a of themore stock, stock rights, other property, or serv- each person's share of any dividends from the Form 1099-DIV you receive.stock is determined by local law.ices.
Form 1099-DIV. Most corporations use Form Qualified DividendsUseful Items 1099-DIV, Dividends and Distributions, to show
you the distributions you received from themYou may want to see: Qualified dividends are the ordinary dividendsduring the year. Keep this form with your rec- that are subject to the same 0% or 15% maxi-ords. You do not have to attach it to your taxPublication mum tax rate that applies to net capital gain.return. They should be shown in box 1b of the Form❏ 514 Foreign Tax Credit for Individuals 1099-DIV you receive.Dividends not reported on Form 1099-DIV.
❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses Qualified dividends are subject to the 15%Even if you do not receive Form 1099-DIV, you
rate if the regular tax rate that would apply ismust still report all of your taxable dividend in-❏ 564 Mutual Fund Distributions 25% or higher. If the regular tax rate that wouldcome. For example, you may receive distributive
apply is lower than 25%, qualified dividends areshares of dividends from partnerships or S cor-Form (and Instructions) subject to the 0% rate.porations. These dividends are reported to you
❏ Schedule B (Form 1040A or 1040) on Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) and Schedule K-1 To qualify for the 0% or 15% maximum rate,
Interest and Ordinary Dividends (Form 1120S). all of the following requirements must be met.
Chapter 8 Dividends and Other Corporate Distributions Page 65

Page 68 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• The dividends must have been paid by a Fund because you held the ABC Mutual Fund • Dividends from a corporation that is a
U.S. corporation or a qualified foreign cor- tax-exempt organization or farmer's coop-stock for less than 61 days.
poration. (See Qualified foreign corpora- erative during the corporation's tax year inHolding period reduced where risk of losstion later.) which the dividends were paid or duringis diminished. When determining whether the corporation's previous tax year.• The dividends are not of the type listed you met the minimum holding period discussed
later under Dividends that are not qualified • Dividends paid by a corporation on em-earlier, you cannot count any day during which
dividends. ployer securities which are held on theyou meet any of the following conditions.
date of record by an employee stock own-• You meet the holding period (discussed 1. You had an option to sell, were under a ership plan (ESOP) maintained by thatnext). contractual obligation to sell, or had made corporation.
(and not closed) a short sale of substan- • Dividends on any share of stock to thetially identical stock or securities.Holding period. You must have held the stock extent that you are obligated (whetherfor more than 60 days during the 121-day period 2. You were grantor (writer) of an option to under a short sale or otherwise) to makethat begins 60 days before the ex-dividend date. buy substantially identical stock or securi- related payments for positions in substan-The ex-dividend date is the first date following ties. tially similar or related property.the declaration of a dividend on which the buyer
3. Your risk of loss is diminished by holdingof a stock is not entitled to receive the next • Payments in lieu of dividends, but only if
one or more other positions in substantiallydividend payment. Instead, the seller will get the you know or have reason to know that the
similar or related property.dividend. payments are not qualified dividends.
When counting the number of days you held For information about how to apply condition • Payments shown in Form 1099-DIV, boxthe stock, include the day you disposed of the 1b, from a foreign corporation to the extent(3), see Regulations section 1.246-5.stock, but not the day you acquired it. See the you know or have reason to know the pay-examples later. ments are not qualified dividends.Qualified foreign corporation. A foreign cor-
Exception for preferred stock. In the case poration is a qualified foreign corporation if it
of preferred stock, you must have held the stock meets any of the following conditions. 
more than 90 days during the 181-day period Table 8-1. Income Tax Treaties
1. The corporation is incorporated in a U.S.that begins 90 days before the ex-dividend date
possession.if the dividends are due to periods totaling more Income tax treaties the United States has
with the following countries satisfythan 366 days. If the preferred dividends are due 2. The corporation is eligible for the benefits requirement (2) under Qualified foreignto periods totaling less than 367 days, the hold- of a comprehensive income tax treaty with corporation.ing period in the previous paragraph applies. the United States that the Treasury De-
Australia Indonesia Romaniapartment determines is satisfactory for thisExample 1. You bought 5,000 shares of Austria Ireland Russianpurpose and that includes an exchange ofXYZ Corp. common stock on July 9, 2009. XYZ Bangladesh Israel Federationinformation program. For a list of thoseCorp. paid a cash dividend of 10 cents per Barbados Italy Slovaktreaties, seeTable 8-1.share. The ex-dividend date was July 17, 2009. Belgium Jamaica RepublicYour Form 1099-DIV from XYZ Corp. shows 3. The corporation does not meet (1) or (2) Canada Japan Slovenia$500 in box 1a (ordinary dividends) and in box above, but the stock for which the dividend China Kazakhstan South Africa1b (qualified dividends). However, you sold the is paid is readily tradable on an estab- Cyprus Korea Spain5,000 shares on August 12, 2009. You held your lished securities market in the United Czech Latvia Sri Lankashares of XYZ Corp. for only 34 days of the States. See Readily tradable stock, later. Republic Lithuania Sweden121-day period (from July 10, 2009, through
Denmark Luxembourg SwitzerlandAugust 12, 2009). The 121-day period began on Exception. A corporation is not a qualified Egypt Mexico ThailandMay 18, 2009 (60 days before the ex-dividend foreign corporation if it is a passive foreign in-
Estonia Morocco Trinidad anddate), and ended on September 15, 2009. You vestment company during its tax year in which
Finland Netherlands Tobagohave no qualified dividends from XYZ Corp. be- the dividends are paid or during its previous tax
France New Zealand Tunisiacause you held the XYZ stock for less than 61 year.
Germany Norway Turkeydays. Readily tradable stock. Any stock (such as Greece Pakistan Ukraine
common, ordinary stock, or preferred stock) or Hungary Philippines UnitedExample 2. Assume the same facts as in an American depositary receipt in respect of thatExample 1 except that you bought the stock on Iceland Poland Kingdomstock is considered to satisfy requirement (3) if itJuly 16, 2009 (the day before the ex-dividend India Portugal Venezuelais listed on one of the following securities mar-date), and you sold the stock on September 17,
kets: the New York Stock Exchange, the NAS-2009. You held the stock for 63 days (from July
DAQ Stock Market, the American Stock17, 2009, through September 17, 2009). The
Exchange, the Boston Stock Exchange, the Cin-$500 of qualified dividends shown in box 1b of Dividends Used to Buycinnati Stock Exchange, the Chicago Stock Ex-your Form 1099-DIV are all qualified dividends
change, the Philadelphia Stock Exchange, orbecause you held the stock for 61 days of the More Stock
the Pacific Exchange, Inc.121-day period (from July 17, 2009, through
The corporation in which you own stock maySeptember 15, 2009).
Dividends that are not qualified dividends. have a dividend reinvestment plan. This plan
The following dividends are not qualified divi- lets you choose to use your dividends to buyExample 3. You bought 10,000 shares of
dends. They are not qualified dividends even if (through an agent) more shares of stock in theABC Mutual Fund common stock on July 9,
they are shown in box 1b of Form 1099-DIV. corporation instead of receiving the dividends in2009. ABC Mutual Fund paid a cash dividend of
cash. If you are a member of this type of plan10 cents a share. The ex-dividend date was July • Capital gain distributions. and you use your dividends to buy more stock at17, 2009. The ABC Mutual Fund advises you
• Dividends paid on deposits with mutual a price equal to its fair market value, you stillthat the portion of the dividend eligible to be
savings banks, cooperative banks, credit must report the dividends as income.treated as qualified dividends equals 2 cents per
unions, U.S. building and loan associa-share. Your Form 1099-DIV from ABC Mutual If you are a member of a dividend reinvest-
tions, U.S. savings and loan associations,Fund shows total ordinary dividends of $1,000 ment plan that lets you buy more stock at a price
federal savings and loan associations, andand qualified dividends of $200. However, you less than its fair market value, you must report
similar financial institutions. (Report thesesold the 10,000 shares on August 12, 2009. You as dividend income the fair market value of the
amounts as interest income.)have no qualified dividends from ABC Mutual additional stock on the dividend payment date.
Page 66 Chapter 8 Dividends and Other Corporate Distributions

Page 69 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
corporation. You should receive a Form 3. The distribution is in convertible preferredYou also must report as dividend income any
1099-DIV or other statement from the corpora- stock and has the same result as in (2).service charge subtracted from your cash divi-
tion showing the nondividend distribution. Ondends before the dividends are used to buy the 4. The distribution gives preferred stock toForm 1099-DIV, a nondividend distribution willadditional stock. But you may be able to deduct some common stock shareholders andbe shown in box 3. If you do not receive such athe service charge. See chapter 28  for more common stock to other common stockstatement, you report the distribution as an ordi-information about deducting expenses of pro- shareholders.nary dividend.ducing income. 5. The distribution is on preferred stock. (TheIn some dividend reinvestment plans, you distribution, however, is not taxable if it isBasis adjustment. A nondividend distributioncan invest more cash to buy shares of stock at a an increase in the conversion ratio of con-reduces the basis of your stock. It is not taxedprice less than fair market value. If you choose vertible preferred stock made solely to takeuntil your basis in the stock is fully recovered.to do this, you must report as dividend income into account a stock dividend, stock split,This nontaxable portion is also called a return ofthe difference between the cash you invest and or similar event that would otherwise resultcapital. It is a return of your investment in thethe fair market value of the stock you buy. When in reducing the conversion right.)stock of the company. If you buy stock in afiguring this amount, use the fair market value of corporation in different lots at different times, The term ªstockº includes rights to acquirethe stock on the dividend payment date. and you cannot definitely identify the shares stock, and the term ªshareholderº includes asubject to the nondividend distribution, reduce holder of rights or of convertible securities.the basis of your earliest purchases first.Money Market Funds If you receive taxable stock dividends orWhen the basis of your stock has been re- stock rights, include their fair market value at theduced to zero, report any additional nondividendReport amounts you receive from money market time of the distribution in your income.distribution that you receive as a capital gain.funds as dividend income. Money market funds
Preferred stock redeemable at a premium.Whether you report it as a long-term orare a type of mutual fund and should not be If you hold preferred stock having a redemptionshort-term capital gain depends on how longconfused with bank money market accounts that price higher than its issue price, the differenceyou have held the stock. See Holding Period inpay interest. (the redemption premium) generally is taxablechapter 14.
as a constructive distribution of additional stock
on the preferred stock. For more information,Example. You bought stock in 1996 for
see chapter 1 of Publication 550.$100. In 1999, you received a nondividend dis-
Capital Gain tribution of $80. You did not include this amount
Basis. Your basis in stock or stock rights re-in your income, but you reduced the basis of
ceived in a taxable distribution is their fair marketyour stock to $20. You received a nondividendDistributions
value when distributed. If you receive stock ordistribution of $30 in 2009. The first $20 of this
stock rights that are not taxable to you, seeamount reduced your basis to zero. You reportCapital gain distributions (also called capital
Stocks and Bonds under Basis of Investmentthe other $10 as a long-term capital gain forgain dividends) are paid to you or credited to
Property in chapter 4 of Publication 550 for infor-2009. You must report as a long-term capitalyour account by mutual funds (or other regu-
mation on how to figure their basis.gain any nondividend distribution you receive onlated investment companies) and real estate
this stock in later years.investment trusts (REITs). They will be shown in
Fractional shares. You may not own enoughbox 2a of the Form 1099-DIV you receive from
stock in a corporation to receive a full share ofthe mutual fund or REIT. Liquidating Distributions stock if the corporation declares a stock divi-Report capital gain distributions as long-term
dend. However, with the approval of the share-capital gains regardless of how long you owned  Liquidating distributions, sometimes called liq- holders, the corporation may set up a plan inyour shares in the mutual fund or REIT. uidating dividends, are distributions you receive which fractional shares are not issued, but in-during a partial or complete liquidation of a cor-Undistributed capital gains of mutual funds stead are sold, and the cash proceeds are givenporation. These distributions are, at least in part,and REITs. Some mutual funds and REITs to the shareholders. Any cash you receive forone form of a return of capital. They may be paidkeep their long-term capital gains and pay tax on fractional shares under such a plan is treated asin one or more installments. You will receive athem. You must treat your share of these gains an amount realized on the sale of the fractionalForm 1099-DIV from the corporation showingas distributions, even though you did not actu- shares. You must determine your gain or lossyou the amount of the liquidating distribution inally receive them. However, they are not in- and report it as a capital gain or loss on Sched-box 8 or 9.cluded on Form 1099-DIV. Instead, they are ule D (Form 1040). Your gain or loss is theFor more information on liquidating distribu-reported to you on Form 2439, Notice to Share- difference between the cash you receive and thetions, see chapter 1 of Publication 550.holder of Undistributed Long-Term Capital basis of the fractional shares sold.Gains.
Report undistributed capital gains (box 1a of Example. You own one share of commonForm 2439) as long-term capital gains on stock that you bought on January 3, 2000, forSchedule D (Form 1040), column (f), line 11. $100. The corporation declared a common stockDistributions of StockThe tax paid on these gains by the mutual dividend of 5% on June 30, 2009. The fair mar-fund or REIT is shown in box 2 of Form 2439. and Stock Rights ket value of the stock at the time the stockYou take credit for this tax by including it on dividend was declared was $200. You were paid  Distributions by a corporation of its own stockForm 1040, line 70, and checking box a on that $10 for the fractional-share stock dividend underare commonly known as stock dividends. Stockline. Attach Copy B of Form 2439 to your return, a plan described in the above paragraph. Yourights (also known as ªstock optionsº) are distri-and keep Copy C for your records. figure your gain or loss as follows:butions by a corporation of rights to acquire theBasis adjustment. Increase your basis in corporation's stock. Generally, stock dividends Fair market value of old stock .... . $200.00your mutual fund, or your interest in a REIT, by and stock rights are not taxable to you, and you Fair market value of stock dividendthe difference between the gain you report and do not report them on your return. (cash received) .............. .  +10.00the credit you claim for the tax paid. Fair market value of old stock and
Additional information. For more information Taxable stock dividends and stock rights. stock dividend ............... . $210.00
on the treatment of distributions from mutual Distributions of stock dividends and stock rights Basis (cost) of old stock after thefunds, see Publication 564. are taxable to you if any of the following apply. stock dividend (($200 ÷  $210) ×  $100) $95.24
Basis (cost) of stock dividend (($10 ÷1. You or any other shareholder has the $210) ×  $100) ............... . + 4.76choice to receive cash or other property Total ..................... . $100.00instead of stock or stock rights.Nondividend Cash received ............... . $10.002. The distribution gives cash or other prop- Basis (cost) of stock dividend ..... . − 4.76erty to some shareholders and an increaseDistributions Gain $5.24in the percentage interest in the corpora-
tion's assets or earnings and profits to Because you had held the share of stock forA nondividend distribution is a distribution that is
other shareholders. more than 1 year at the time the stock dividendnot paid out of the earnings and profits of a
Chapter 8 Dividends and Other Corporate Distributions Page 67

Page 70 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
was declared, your gain on the stock dividend is These rules are the same whether the cooper- • Dividends on stock for which you did not
a long-term capital gain. ative paying the dividend is a taxable or meet the holding period. See Holding pe-
tax-exempt cooperative. riod earlier under Qualified Dividends.Scrip dividends. A corporation that de-
clares a stock dividend may issue you a scrip • Dividends on any share of stock to theAlaska Permanent Fund dividends.   Do notcertificate that entitles you to a fractional share. extent that you are obligated (whetherreport these amounts as dividends. Instead, re-The certificate is generally nontaxable when you under a short sale or otherwise) to makeport these amounts on Form 1040, line 21; Formreceive it. If you choose to have the corporation related payments for positions in substan-1040A, line 13; or Form 1040EZ, line 3.sell the certificate for you and give you the pro- tially similar or related property.
ceeds, your gain or loss is the difference be- • Payments in lieu of dividends, but only iftween the proceeds and the portion of your basis you know or have reason to know that thein the corporation's stock that is allocated to the payments are not qualified dividends.certificate. How To Report • Payments shown in Form 1099-DIV, boxHowever, if you receive a scrip certificate
1b, from a foreign corporation to the extentthat you can choose to redeem for cash instead Dividend Income
you know or have reason to know the pay-of stock, the certificate is taxable when you re-
ments are not qualified dividends.ceive it. You must include its fair market value in Generally, you can use either Form 1040 or
income on the date you receive it. Form 1040A to report your dividend income.
If you have qualified dividends, you must fig-Report the total of your ordinary dividends on
ure your tax by completing the Qualified Divi-line 9a of Form 1040 or Form 1040A. Report
dends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet in thequalified dividends on line 9b of Form 1040 or
Form 1040 or 1040A instructions or the Sched-Form 1040A.Other Distributions ule D Tax Worksheet in the Schedule D instruc-  If you receive capital gain distributions, you tions, whichever applies. Enter qualifiedmay be able to use Form 1040A or you mayYou may receive any of the following distribu- dividends on line 2 of the worksheet.have to use Form 1040. See Capital gain distri-tions during the year.
butions only in chapter 16. If you receive nondiv- Investment interest deducted. If you claim
idend distributions required to be reported as a deduction for investment interest, you mayExempt-interest dividends. Exempt-interest
capital gains, you must use Form 1040. You have to reduce the amount of your qualifieddividends you receive from a mutual fund or
cannot use Form 1040EZ if you receive any dividends that are eligible for the 0% or 15% taxother regulated investment company are not in-
dividend income. rate. Reduce it by the amount of qualified divi-cluded in your taxable income. Exempt-interest
dends you choose to include in investment in-dividends should be shown in box 8 of Form
Form 1099-DIV. If you owned stock on which come when figuring the limit on your investment1099-INT.
you received $10 or more in dividends and other interest deduction. This is done on the QualifiedInformation reporting requirement. Al- distributions, you should receive a Form Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet orthough exempt-interest dividends are not tax- 1099-DIV. Even if you do not receive Form the Schedule D Tax Worksheet. For more infor-able, you must show them on your tax return if 1099-DIV, you must report all of your taxable mation about the limit on investment interest,you have to file a return. This is an information dividend income. see Interest Expenses in chapter 23.reporting requirement and does not change the See Form 1099-DIV for more information onexempt-interest dividends to taxable income. Expenses related to dividend income. Youhow to report dividend income.
Alternative minimum tax treatment. Ex- may be able to deduct expenses related to divi-
empt-interest dividends paid from specified pri- dend income if you itemize your deductions onForm 1040A or 1040. You must fill in Sched-
vate activity bonds may be subject to the Schedule A (Form 1040). See chapter 28  forule B (Form 1040A or 1040), Part II, and attach it
alternative minimum tax. See Alternative Mini- general information about deducting expensesto your Form 1040A or 1040, if:
mum Tax in chapter 30 for more information. of producing income.
• Your ordinary dividends (Form 1099-DIV,
box 1a) are more than $1,500, orDividends on insurance policies. Insurance More information. For more information
policy dividends that the insurer keeps and uses about how to report dividend income, see chap-• You received, as a nominee, dividends
to pay your premiums are not taxable. However, ter 1 of Publication 550 or the instructions for thethat actually belong to someone else.
you must report as taxable interest income the form you must file.If your ordinary dividends are more than $1,500,interest that is paid or credited on dividends left you must also complete Schedule B, Part III.with the insurance company.
If dividends on an insurance contract (other List on Schedule B, Part II, line 5, each
than a modified endowment contract) are distrib- payer's name and the amount of ordinary divi-
uted to you, they are a partial return of the dends you received. If your securities are held
premiums you paid. Do not include them in your by a brokerage firm (in ªstreet nameº), list the
gross income until they are more than the total of name of the brokerage firm that is shown on 9.all net premiums you paid for the contract. Re- Form 1099-DIV as the payer. If your stock is
port any taxable distributions on insurance poli- held by a nominee who is the owner of record,
cies on Form 1040, line 21. and the nominee credited or paid you dividends
on the stock, show the name of the nominee and
Rental IncomeDividends on veterans' insurance. Divi- the dividends you received or for which you were
dends you receive on veterans' insurance poli- credited.
cies are not taxable. In addition, interest on Enter on line 6 the total of the amounts listed and Expensesdividends left with the Department of Veterans on line 5. Also enter this total on Form 1040, lineAffairs is not taxable. 9a.
Patronage dividends. Generally, patronage Qualified dividends. Report qualified divi- Introductiondividends you receive in money from a coopera- dends (Form 1099-DIV, box 1b) on line 9b oftive organization are included in your income. Form 1040 or Form 1040A. The amount in box This chapter discusses rental income and ex-Do not include in your income patronage 1b is already included in box 1a. Do not add the penses. It also covers the following topics.dividends you receive on: amount in box 1b to, or substract it from, the
• Personal use of dwelling unit (includingamount in box 1a.• Property bought for your personal use, or vacation home).Do not include any of the following on lines• Capital assets or depreciable property 9b. • Depreciation.bought for use in your business. But you
must reduce the basis (cost) of the items • Qualified dividends you received as a • Limits on rental losses.bought. If the dividend is more than the nominee. See Nominees under How to
• How to report your rental income and ex-adjusted basis of the assets, you must re- Report Dividend Income in chapter 1 of
penses.port the excess as income. Publication 550.
Page 68 Chapter 9 Rental Income and Expenses

Page 71 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you sell or otherwise dispose of your rental receive is rent. Include the payment in your Depreciation. You can begin to depreciate
property, see Publication 544, Sales and Other income in the year you receive it regardless of rental property when it is ready and available for
Dispositions of Assets. your method of accounting. rent. See Placed-in-Service under When Does
If you have a loss from damage to, or theft of, Depreciation Begin and End  in chapter 2 ofExpenses paid by tenant. If your tenant paysrental property, see Publication 547, Casualties, Publication 527.any of your expenses, the payments are rentalDisasters, and Thefts. income. You must include them in your income. Vacant rental property. If you hold propertyIf you rent a condominium or a cooperative You can deduct the expenses if they are deduct- for rental purposes, you may be able to deductapartment, some special rules apply to you even ible rental expenses. See Rental Expenses , your ordinary and necessary expenses (includ-though you receive the same tax treatment as later, for more information. ing depreciation) for managing, conserving, orother owners of rental property. See Publication
maintaining the property while the property is527, Residential Rental Property, for more infor- Property or services. If you receive property
vacant. However, you cannot deduct any loss ofmation. or services, instead of money, as rent, include
rental income for the period the property is va-the fair market value of the property or services
cant.in your rental income.Useful Items
If the services are provided at an agreedYou may want to see: Vacant while listed for sale. If you sell prop-upon or specified price, that price is the fair
erty you held for rental purposes, you can de-market value unless there is evidence to thePublication duct the ordinary and necessary expenses forcontrary.
❏ 527 Residential Rental Property managing, conserving, or maintaining the prop-
Security deposits. Do not include a security erty until it is sold.❏ 534 Depreciating Property Placed in deposit in your income when you receive it if you
Service Before 1987 plan to return it to your tenant at the end of the Uncollected rent. If you are a cash basis tax-
lease. But if you keep part or all of the security payer, do not deduct uncollected rent. Because❏ 535 Business Expenses
deposit during any year because your tenant you do not include it in your income, you cannot❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules does not live up to the terms of the lease, include deduct it.
the amount you keep in your income in that year. If you use an accrual method, you report❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property
If an amount called a security deposit is to be income when you earn it. If you are unable to
used as a final payment of rent, it is advance collect the rent, you may be able to deduct it as aForm (and Instructions)
rent. Include it in your income when you receive business bad debt. See chapter 10 of Publica-❏ 4562 Depreciation and Amortization it. tion 535 for more information about business
bad debts.❏ 6251 Alternative Minimum TaxÐ Rental of property also used as a home. IfIndividuals you rent property that you also use as your
home and you rent it fewer than 15 days during Repairs and Improvements❏ 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitations
the tax year, do not include the rent you receive❏ Schedule E (Form 1040) Supplemental You can deduct the cost of repairs to your rentalin your income and do not deduct rental ex-Income and Loss property. You cannot deduct the cost of im-penses. However, you can deduct on Schedule
provements. Instead, recover the cost of im-A (Form 1040) the interest, taxes, and casualty
provements by taking depreciation (explainedand theft losses that are allowed for nonrental
later).property. See Personal Use of Dwelling Unit
(Including Vacation Home), later.Rental Income Repairs. A repair keeps your property in goodPart interest. If you own a part interest in operating condition. It does not materially add toGenerally, you must include in your gross in- rental property, you must report your part of the the value of your property or substantially pro-come all amounts you receive as rent. Rental rental income from the property. long its life. Repainting your property inside orincome is any payment you receive for the use out, fixing gutters or floors, fixing leaks, plaster-or occupation of property. In addition to amounts ing, and replacing broken windows are exam-you receive as normal rent payments, there are ples of repairs.other amounts that may be rental income. If you make repairs as part of an extensiveRental Expenses
remodeling or restoration of your property, theWhen to report. If you are a cash basis tax- whole job is an improvement.This part discusses expenses of renting prop-payer, you report rental income on your return erty that you ordinarily can deduct from yourfor the year you actually or constructively re- Separate the costs of repairs and im-rental income. It includes information on theceive it. You are a cash basis taxpayer if you provements, and keep accurate rec-expenses you can deduct if you rent part of yourreport income in the year you receive it, regard- ords. You will need to know the cost of
RECORDSproperty, or if you change your property to rentalless of when it was earned. You constructively improvements when you sell or depreciate youruse. Depreciation, which you can also deductreceive income when it is made available to you, property.from your rental income, is discussed later.for example, by being credited to your bank
account. Personal use of rental property. If you Improvements. An improvement adds to the
For more information about when you con- sometimes use your rental property for personal value of property, prolongs its useful life, or
structively receive income, see Accounting purposes, you must divide your expenses be- adapts it to new uses. Improvements include the
Methods in chapter 1. tween rental and personal use. Also, your rental following items.
expense deductions may be limited. See Per- • Putting a recreation room in an unfinishedAdvance rent. Advance rent is any amount sonal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including Vacation basement.you receive before the period that it covers. Home), later.
Include advance rent in your rental income in the • Paneling a den.Part interest. If you own a part interest inyear you receive it regardless of the period cov-
rental property, you can deduct expenses that • Adding a bathroom or bedroom.ered or the method of accounting you use.
you paid according to your percentage of owner- • Putting decorative grillwork on a balcony.ship.Example. You sign a 10-year lease to rent
• Putting up a fence.your property. In the first year, you receive When to deduct. You generally deduct your
$5,000 for the first year's rent and $5,000 as rent rental expenses in the year you pay them. • Putting in new plumbing or wiring.for the last year of the lease. You must include
Pre-rental expenses. You can deduct your • Putting in new cabinets.$10,000 in your income in the first year.
ordinary and necessary expenses for managing, • Putting on a new roof.Payment for canceling a lease. If your tenant conserving, or maintaining rental property from
pays you to cancel a lease, the amount you the time you make it available for rent. • Paving a driveway.
Chapter 9 Rental Income and Expenses Page 69

Page 72 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you make an improvement to property, the To deduct travel expenses, you must held for personal use as an itemized deduction
cost of the improvement must be capitalized. keep records that follow the rules in on Schedule A (Form 1040). Alternatively, some
The capitalized cost can generally be depreci- chapter 26. real estate taxes may be added to your standard
RECORDS
ated as if the improvement were separate prop- deduction. See your tax form instructions.
erty. Tax return preparation. You can deduct, as a Example. Your tax year is the calendarrental expense, the part of tax return preparation year. You moved from your home in May andOther Expenses fees you paid to prepare Schedule E (Form started renting it out on June 1. You can deduct1040), Part I. For example, on your 2009 Sched-Other expenses you can deduct from your rental as rental expenses seven-twelfths of your yearlyule E, you can deduct fees paid in 2009 toincome include advertising, cleaning and main- expenses, such as taxes and insurance.prepare your 2008 Schedule E, Part I. You cantenance, utilities, fire and liability insurance, Starting with June, you can deduct as rentalalso deduct, as a rental expense, any expensetaxes, interest, commissions for the collection of expenses the amounts you pay for items gener-(other than federal taxes and penalties) you paidrent, ordinary and necessary travel and trans- ally billed monthly, such as utilities.to resolve a tax underpayment related to yourportation, and other expenses, discussed next. rental activities.
Insurance premiums paid in advance. If you
pay an insurance premium for more than one
year in advance, for each year of coverage you
Renting Part ofcan deduct the part of the premium payment that Not Rented for Profitwill apply to that year. You cannot deduct the
Propertytotal premium in the year you pay it. If you do not rent your property to make a profit,
Local benefit taxes. Generally, you cannot you can deduct your rental expenses only up to If you rent part of your property, you must divide
deduct charges for local benefits that increase the amount of your rental income. You cannot certain expenses between the part of the prop-the value of your property, such as charges for deduct a loss or carry forward to the next year erty used for rental purposes and the part of theputting in streets, sidewalks, or water and sewer any rental expenses that are more than your property used for personal purposes, as thoughsystems. These charges are nondepreciable rental income for the year. For more information you actually had two separate pieces of prop-capital expenditures, and must be added to the about the rules for an activity not engaged in for erty.basis of your property. However, you can deduct profit, see Not-for-Profit Activities in chapter 1 of You can deduct the expenses related to thelocal benefit taxes that are for maintaining, re- Publication 535. part of the property used for rental purposes,pairing, or paying interest charges for the bene-
fits. such as home mortgage interest, qualified mort-Where to report. Report your not-for-profit gage insurance premiums, and real estateRental of property. You can deduct the rent rental income on Form 1040, line 21. You can taxes, as rental expenses on Schedule E (Formyou pay for property that you use for rental include your mortgage interest and any qualified 1040). You can also deduct as rental expensespurposes. If you buy a leasehold for rental pur- mortgage insurance premiums (if you use the a portion of other expenses that normally areposes, you can deduct an equal part of the cost property as your main home or second home), nondeductible personal expenses, such as ex-each year over the term of the lease. real estate taxes, and casualty losses on the penses for electricity or painting the outside ofappropriate lines of Form 1040, Schedule A, ifRental of equipment. You can deduct the your house.you itemize your deductions. If you do not item-rent you pay for equipment that you use for
There is no change in the types of expensesize your deductions, you can claim state andrental purposes. However, in some cases, lease
deductible for the personal-use part of yourlocal real estate taxes and a net disaster losscontracts are actually purchase contracts. If so,
property. Generally, these expenses may beyou cannot deduct these payments. You can from Form 4684, line 18 (Form 1040 filers only)
deducted only if you itemize your deductions onrecover the cost of purchased equipment on Schedule L (Form 1040A or 1040).
through depreciation. Schedule A (Form 1040).If you itemize, claim your other rental ex-
penses, subject to the rules explained in chapter You cannot deduct any part of the cost of theLocal transportation expenses.  You can
1 of Publication 535, as miscellaneous itemized first phone line even if your tenants have unlim-deduct your ordinary and necessary local trans-
deductions on Form 1040, Schedule A, line 23.portation expenses if you incur them to collect ited use of it.
You can deduct these expenses only if they,rental income or to manage, conserve, or main- You do not have to divide the expenses thattogether with certain other miscellaneous item-tain your rental property. belong only to the rental part of your property.ized deductions, total more than 2% of yourGenerally, if you use your personal car, For example, if you paint a room that you rent, oradjusted gross income.pickup truck, or light van for rental activities, you if you pay premiums for liability insurance incan deduct the expenses using one of two meth- connection with renting a room in your home,ods: actual expenses or the standard mileage your entire cost is a rental expense. If you installrate. For 2009, the standard mileage rate for
a second phone line strictly for your tenants'each mile of business use is 55 cents a mile. For Property Changed use, all of the cost of the second line is deducti-more information, see chapter 26.
ble as a rental expense. You can deduct depre-To deduct car expenses under either to Rental Use ciation, discussed later, on the part of the housemethod, you must keep records that used for rental purposes as well as on the furni-If you change your home or other property (or afollow the rules in chapter 26. In addi-
RECORDS ture and equipment you use for rental purposes.tion, you must complete Form 4562, Part V, and part of it) to rental use at any time other than the
attach it to your tax return. beginning of your tax year, you must divide
How to divide expenses. If an expense is foryearly expenses, such as taxes and insurance,Travel expenses. You can deduct the ordi- between rental use and personal use. both rental use and personal use, such as mort-nary and necessary expenses of traveling away gage interest or heat for the entire house, youYou can deduct as rental expenses only thefrom home if the primary purpose of the trip was must divide the expense between the rental usepart of the expense that is for the part of the yearto collect rental income or to manage, conserve, and the personal use. You can use any reasona-the property was used or held for rental pur-or maintain your rental property. You must prop- ble method for dividing the expense. It may beposes.erly allocate your expenses between rental and reasonable to divide the cost of some items (forYou cannot deduct depreciation or insurancenonrental activities. You cannot deduct the cost
example, water) based on the number of peoplefor the part of the year the property was held forof traveling away from home if the primary pur-
using them. The two most common methods forpersonal use. However, you can include thepose of the trip was to improve your property.
dividing an expense are based on (1) the num-home mortgage interest, qualified mortgage in-You recover the cost of improvements by taking
ber of rooms in your home, and (2) the squaresurance premiums, and real estate tax ex-depreciation. For information on travel ex-
footage of your home.penses for the part of the year the property waspenses, see chapter 26.
Page 70 Chapter 9 Rental Income and Expenses

Page 73 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
See What Is a Day of Personal Use, later. Use As Main Home Before or After
If a dwelling unit is used for personal pur-Personal Use of Renting
poses on a day it is rented at a fair rental price,
For purposes of determining whether a dwellingdo not count that day as a day of rental use inDwelling Unit 
unit was used as a home, you may not have toapplying (2) above. Instead, count it as a day of
count days you used the property as your mainpersonal use in applying both (1) and (2) above.(Including Vacation
home before or after renting it or offering it forHowever, this rule does not apply when dividing
expenses between rental and personal use. rent as days of personal use. Do not count themHome)
as days of personal use if:
If you have any personal use of a dwelling unit Fair rental price. A fair rental price for your • You rented or tried to rent the property for(including a vacation home) that you rent, you property generally is the amount of rent that a 12 or more consecutive months.must divide your expenses between rental use person who is not related to you would be willing
and personal use. See What Is a Day of Per- • You rented or tried to rent the property forto pay. The rent you charge is not a fair rental
sonal Use and How To Divide Expenses, later. a period of less than 12 consecutiveprice if it is substantially less than the rents
 If you used a dwelling unit for personal months and the period ended becausecharged for other properties that are similar to
purposes, it may be considered a ªdwelling unit you sold or exchanged the property.your property in your area.
used as a home.º If it is, you cannot deduct
This special rule does not apply when dividingrental expenses that are more than your rental
expenses between rental and personal use.income for that dwelling unit. See Dwelling Unit ExamplesUsed as Home  and How To Figure Rental In-
come and Deductions, later. If your dwelling unit The following examples show how to determine What Is a Day
is not considered a dwelling unit used as a whether you used your rental property as a of Personal Usehome, you can deduct rental expenses that are home.
more than rental income for the unit subject to A day of personal use of a dwelling unit is anycertain limits. See Limits on Rental Losses , Example 1. You converted the basement of day that the unit is used by any of the followinglater. your home into an apartment with a bedroom, a persons.bathroom, and a small kitchen. You rented theException for minimal rental use. If you use basement apartment at a fair rental price to 1. You or any other person who has an inter-the dwelling unit as a home and you rent it fewer college students during the regular school year. est in it, unless you rent it to another ownerthan 15 days during the year, that period is not You rented to them on a 9-month lease (273 as his or her main home under a sharedtreated as rental activity. Do not include any of days). You figured 10% of the total days rented equity financing agreement (defined later).the rent in your income and do not deduct any of to others at a fair rental price is 27 days. However, see Use as Main Home Beforethe rental expenses. To determine if you use a During June (30 days), your brothers stayed or After Renting under Dwelling Unit Useddwelling unit as a home, see Dwelling Unit Used
with you and lived in the basement apartment as Home, earlier.as Home, later.
rent free.
2. A member of your family or a member ofDwelling unit.  A dwelling unit includes a Your basement apartment was used as a the family of any other person who ownshouse, apartment, condominium, mobile home, home because you used it for personal pur-
an interest in it, unless the family memberboat, vacation home, or similar property. It also poses for 30 days. Rent-free use by your broth-
uses the dwelling unit as his or her mainincludes all structures or other property belong- ers is considered personal use. Your personal
home and pays a fair rental price. Familying to the dwelling unit. A dwelling unit has basic use (30 days) is more than the greater of 14
includes only your spouse, brothers andliving accommodations, such as sleeping space, days or 10% of the total days it was rented (27
sisters, half-brothers and half-sisters, an-a toilet, and cooking facilities. days).
cestors (parents, grandparents, etc.), and   A dwelling unit does not include property
used solely as a hotel, motel, inn, or similar lineal descendants (children, grandchild-Example 2. You rented the guest bedroom
establishment. Property is used solely as a ho- ren, etc.).in your home at a fair rental price during the local
tel, motel, inn, or similar establishment if it is college's homecoming, commencement, and 3. Anyone under an arrangement that letsregularly available for occupancy by paying cus- football weekends (a total of 27 days). Your you use some other dwelling unit.tomers and is not used by an owner as a home sister-in-law stayed in the room, rent free, for the
during the year. 4. Anyone at less than a fair rental price.last 3 weeks (21 days) in July. You figured 10%
of the total days rented to others at a fair rental
Example. You rent a room in your home price is 3 days. Main home. If the other person or member ofthat is always available for short-term occu- The room was used as a home because you the family in (1) or (2) above has more than onepancy by paying customers. You do not use the used it for personal purposes for 21 days. That is home, his or her main home is ordinarily the oneroom yourself, and you allow only paying cus- more than the greater of 14 days or 10% of the he or she lived in most of the time.tomers to use the room. The room is used solely 27 days it was rented (3 days).as a hotel, motel, inn, or similar establishment
Shared equity financing agreement. This isand is not a dwelling unit. Example 3. You own a condominium apart- an agreement under which two or more personsment in a resort area. You rented it at a fair rental acquire undivided interests for more than 50Dwelling Unit price for a total of 170 days during the year. For years in an entire dwelling unit, including the12 of those days, the tenant was not able to useUsed as Home land, and one or more of the co-owners is enti-the apartment and allowed you to use it even tled to occupy the unit as his or her main homethough you did not refund any of the rent. YourThe tax treatment of rental income and ex- upon payment of rent to the other co-owner orfamily actually used the apartment for 10 ofpenses for a dwelling unit that you also use for owners.those days. Therefore, the apartment is treatedpersonal purposes depends on whether you use
as having been rented for 160 (170 − 10) days.it as a home. (See How To Figure Rental Income Donation of use of property. You use aYou figured 10% of the total days rented toand Deductions, later.) dwelling unit for personal purposes if:others at a fair rental price is 16 days. YourYou use a dwelling unit as a home during the
family also used the apartment for 7 other daystax year if you use it for personal purposes more • You donate the use of the unit to a charita-
during the year.than the greater of: ble organization,
You used the apartment as a home because • The organization sells the use of the unit1. 14 days, or you used it for personal purposes for 17 days. at a fund-raising event, andThat is more than the greater of 14 days or 10%2. 10% of the total days it is rented to others
• The ªpurchaserº uses the unit.of the 160 days it was rented (16 days).at a fair rental price.
Chapter 9 Rental Income and Expenses Page 71

Page 74 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Any day that the unit is available for rent how you figure your rental income and deduc-Examples
but not actually rented is not a day of tions depends on how many days the unit was
The following examples show how to determine rental use. rented at a fair rental price.
days of personal use.
Rented fewer than 15 days. If you use aExample. Your beach cottage was avail-Example 1. You and your neighbor are dwelling unit as a home and you rent it fewerable for rent from June 1 through August 31 (92co-owners of a condominium at the beach. Last than 15 days during the year, do not include anydays). Your family uses the cottage during theyear, you rented the unit to vacationers when- rental income in your income. Also, you cannotlast 2 weeks in May (14 days). You were unableever possible. The unit was not used as a main deduct any expenses as rental expenses.to find a renter for the first week in August (7home by anyone. Your neighbor used the unit days). The person who rented the cottage forfor 2 weeks last year; you did not use it at all. July allowed you to use it over a weekend (2 Rented 15 days or more. If you use a dwell-Because your neighbor has an interest in the days) without any reduction in or refund of rent. ing unit as a home and rent it 15 days or moreunit, both of you are considered to have used the The cottage was not used at all before May 17 or during the year, include all your rental income inunit for personal purposes during those 2 after August 31. your income. See How To Report Rental Incomeweeks. and Expenses, later. If you had a net profit fromYou figure the part of the cottage expenses
the rental property for the year (that is, if yourto treat as rental expenses as follows.Example 2. You and your neighbors are rental income is more than the total of yourco-owners of a house under a shared equity • The cottage was used for rental a total of rental expenses, including depreciation), deductfinancing agreement. Your neighbors live in the 85 days (92 − 7). The days it was avail- all of your rental expenses. However, if you hadhouse and pay you a fair rental price. able for rent but not rented (7 days) are a net loss, your deduction for certain rental ex-
not days of rental use. The July weekend penses is limited.Even though your neighbors have an interest
(2 days) you used it is rental use because To figure your deductible rental expensesin the house, the days your neighbors live there
you received a fair rental price for the and any carryover to next year, use Worksheetare not counted as days of personal use by you.
weekend. 9-1 at the end of this chapter.This is because your neighbors rent the house
as their main home under a shared equity fi- • You used the cottage for personal pur-
nancing agreement. poses for 14 days (the last 2 weeks in
May).
Example 3. You own a rental property that Depreciation• The total use of the cottage was 99 daysyou rent to your son. Your son does not own any
(14 days personal use + 85 days rentalinterest in this property. He uses it as his main You recover the cost of income producing prop-use).home and pays you a fair rental price. erty through yearly tax deductions. You do this
• Your rental expenses are 85/99 (86%) of by depreciating the property; that is, by deduct-Your son's use of the property is not personal
the cottage expenses. ing some of the cost on the tax return each year.use by you because your son is using it as his
Three basic factors determine how much de-main home, he owns no interest in the property,
When determining whether you used the cot- preciation you can deduct. They are: (1) yourand he is paying you a fair rental price.
tage as a home, the July weekend (2 days) you basis in the property, (2) the recovery period for
used it is personal use even though you re- the property, and (3) the depreciation methodExample 4. You rent your beach house to
ceived a fair rental price for the weekend. There- used. You cannot simply deduct your mortgageJoshua. Joshua rents his house in the moun-
fore, you had 16 days of personal use and 83 or principal payments, or the cost of furniture,tains to you. You each pay a fair rental price.
days of rental use for this purpose. Because you fixtures and equipment, as an expense.You are using your house for personal pur- used the cottage for personal purposes more You can deduct depreciation only on the partposes on the days that Joshua uses it because than 14 days and more than 10% of the days of of your property used for rental purposes. De-your house is used by Joshua under an arrange- rental use (8 days), you used it as a home. If you preciation reduces your basis for figuring gain orment that allows you to use his house. have a net loss, you may not be able to deduct loss on a later sale or exchange. 
all of the rental expenses. See Property Used as You may have to use Form 4562 to figure
a Home in the following discussion. and report your depreciation. See How To Re-Days Used for Repairs and port Rental Income and Expenses, later.
Maintenance How To Figure Rental
Claiming the correct amount of depreciation.Any day that you spend working substantially full Income and Deductions You should claim the correct amount of depreci-time repairing and maintaining (not improving)
ation each tax year. Even if you did not claimyour property is not counted as a day of personal How you figure your rental income and deduc-
depreciation that you were entitled to deduct,use. Do not count such a day as a day of per- tions depends on whether you used the dwelling
you must still reduce your basis in the propertysonal use even if family members use the prop- unit as a home (see Dwelling Unit Used as
by the full amount of depreciation that you coulderty for recreational purposes on the same day. Home, earlier) and, if you used it as a home,
have deducted.how many days the property was rented at a fair
If you deducted an incorrect amount of de-rental price.How To Divide Expenses preciation for property in any year, you may be
able to make a correction by filing Form 1040X,If you use a dwelling unit for both rental and Amended U.S Individual Income Tax Return. IfProperty Not Used as a Homepersonal purposes, divide your expenses be- you are not allowed to make the correction on antween the rental use and the personal use based amended return, you can change your account-If you do not use a dwelling unit as a home,on the number of days used for each purpose. ing method to claim the correct amount of depre-report all the rental income and deduct all theYou can deduct expenses for the rental use of ciation. See Claiming the correct amount ofrental expenses. See How To Report Rentalthe unit under the rules explained in How To depreciation in chapter 2 of Publication 527 forIncome and Expenses, later.Figure Rental Income and Deductions, later. more information. Your deductible rental expenses can be When dividing your expenses, follow these Changing your accounting method to de-more than your gross rental income. However,rules. duct unclaimed depreciation. To changesee Limits on Rental Losses, later.
• Any day that the unit is rented at a fair your accounting method, you generally must file
rental price is a day of rental use even if Form 3115, Application for Change in Account-
you used the unit for personal purposes ing Method, to get the consent of the IRS. InProperty Used as a Home
that day. This rule does not apply when some instances, that consent is automatic. For
determining whether you used the unit as If you use a dwelling unit as a home during the more information, see chapter 1 of Publication
a home. year (see Dwelling Unit Used as Home, earlier), 946.
Page 72 Chapter 9 Rental Income and Expenses

Page 75 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Land. You cannot depreciate the cost of land Generally, any loss from an activity subject • $12,500 for married individuals who file
because land generally does not wear out, be- to the at-risk rules is allowed only to the extent of separate returns for the tax year and lived
come obsolete, or get used up. The costs of the total amount you have at risk in the activity at apart from their spouses at all times during
clearing, grading, planting, and landscaping are the end of the tax year. You are considered at the tax year, and
usually all part of the cost of land and cannot be risk in an activity to the extent of cash and the • $25,000 for a qualifying estate reduced bydepreciated. adjusted basis of other property you contributed the special allowance for which the surviv-to the activity and certain amounts borrowed for ing spouse qualified.More information. See Publication 527 for use in the activity. See Publication 925 for more
more information about depreciating rental information. If your modified adjusted gross incomeproperty and see Publication 946 for more infor-
(MAGI) is $100,000 or less ($50,000 or less ifmation about depreciation.
Passive Activity Limits married filing separately), you can deduct your
loss up to the amount specified above. If yourOther Rules About Generally, all rental real estate activities (except MAGI is more than $100,000 (more than
those meeting the exception for real estate pro- $50,000 if married filing separately), your spe-Depreciable Property fessionals, below) are passive activities. For this cial allowance is limited to 50% of the difference
purpose, a rental activity is an activity fromIn addition to the rules about what methods you between $150,000 ($75,000 if married filing sep-
which you receive income mainly for the use ofcan use, there are other rules you should be arately) and your MAGI.
tangible property, rather than for services.aware of with respect to depreciable property. Generally, if your MAGI is $150,000 or more
($75,000 or more if you are married filing sepa-Limits on passive activity deductions andGain from disposition. If you dispose of rately), there is no special allowance.credits.  Deductions for losses from passivedepreciable property at a gain, you may have to
activities are limited. You generally cannot offsetreport, as ordinary income, all or part of the gain. More information. See Publication 925 forincome, other than passive income, with lossesSee Publication 544, Sales and Other Disposi- more information on the passive loss limits, in-from passive activities. Nor can you offset taxestions of Assets. cluding information on the treatment of unusedon income, other than passive income, with disallowed passive losses and credits and theAlternative minimum tax. If you use acceler- credits resulting from passive activities. Any ex- treatment of gains and losses realized on theated depreciation, you may have to file Form cess loss or credit is carried forward to the next disposition of a passive activity.6251. Accelerated depreciation can be deter- tax year.
mined under MACRS, ACRS, and any other For a detailed discussion of these rules, see
method that allows you to deduct more depreci- Publication 925.
ation than you could deduct using a straight line You may have to complete Form 8582 to
method. figure the amount of any passive activity loss for How To Report
the current tax year for all activities and the
amount of the passive activity loss allowed on Rental Income
your tax return.
and ExpensesLimits on Exception for real estate professionals.
Rental activities in which you materially partici- If you rent buildings, rooms, or apartments, andRental Losses pated during the year are not passive activities provide only heat and light, trash collection, etc.,
if, for that year, you were a real estate profes- you normally report your rental income and ex-Rental real estate activities are generally con- sional. For a detailed discussion of the require- penses on Schedule E, Part I. However, do notsidered passive activities, and the amount of ments, see Publication 527. For a detailed use that schedule to report a not-for-profit activ-loss you can deduct is limited. Generally, you discussion of material participation, see Publica- ity. See Not Rented for Profit, earlier. cannot deduct losses from rental real estate tion 925.activities unless you have income from other
Providing substantial services. If you pro-passive activities. However, you may be able to
vide substantial services that are primarily fordeduct rental losses without regard to whether
Losses From Rental Real Estate your tenant's convenience, such as regularyou have income from other passive activities if
cleaning, changing linen, or maid service, reportActivitiesyou ªmateriallyº or ªactivelyº participated in your
your rental income and expenses on Schedulerental activity. See Passive Activity Limits, later. If you or your spouse actively participated in a C (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From Business, orLosses from passive activities are first sub- passive rental real estate activity, you can de- Schedule C-EZ, Net Profit From Business (Soleject to the at-risk rules. At-risk rules limit the duct up to $25,000 of loss from the activity from Proprietorship). Use Form 1065, U.S. Return ofamount of deductible losses from holding most your nonpassive income. This special allowance Partnership Income, if your rental activity is areal property placed in service after 1986. is an exception to the general rule disallowing partnership (including a partnership with your
losses in excess of income from passive activi-Exception. If your rental losses are less than spouse unless it is a qualified joint venture).
ties. Similarly, you can offset credits from the$25,000, and you actively participated in the Substantial services do not include the furnish-
activity against the tax on up to $25,000 ofrental activity, the passive activity limits probably ing of heat and light, cleaning of public areas,
nonpassive income after taking into account anydo not apply to you. See Losses From Rental trash collection, etc. For information, see Publi-
losses allowed under this exception.Real Estate Activities, later. cation 334, Tax Guide for Small Business. You
also may have to pay self-employment tax onProperty used as a home. If you used the Active participation. You actively partici- your rental income using Schedule SE (Formrental property as a home during the year, the pated in a rental real estate activity if you (and 1040), Self-Employment Tax.passive activity rules do not apply to that home. your spouse) owned at least 10% of the rental
Instead, you must follow the rules explained property and you made management decisions Form 1098. If you paid $600 or more of mort-
under Personal Use of Dwelling Unit (Including or arranged for others to provide services (such gage interest on your rental property to any one
Vacation Home), earlier. as repairs) in a significant and bona fide sense. person, you should receive a Form 1098, Mort-
Management decisions include approving new gage Interest Statement, or similar statement
tenants, deciding on rental terms, approving ex- showing the interest you paid for the year. If youAt-Risk Rules penditures, and similar decisions. and at least one other person (other than your
spouse if you file a joint return) were liable for, The at-risk rules place a limit on the amount you Maximum special allowance. The maximum and paid interest on the mortgage, and the othercan deduct as losses from activities often de- special allowance is: person received the Form 1098, report yourscribed as tax shelters. Losses from holding real
share of the interest on Schedule E (Formproperty (other than mineral property) placed in • $25,000 for single individuals and married
1040), line 13. Attach a statement to your returnservice before 1987 are not subject to the at-risk individuals filing a joint return for the tax
showing the name and address of the otherrules. year,
Chapter 9 Rental Income and Expenses Page 73

Page 76 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet 9-1. Worksheet for Figuring Rental Deductions for a Dwelling
Unit Used as a Home Keep for Your Records
Use this worksheet only if you answer ªyesº to all of the following questions.
• Did you use the dwelling unit as a home this year? (See Dwelling Unit Used as Home.)
• Did you rent the dwelling unit at a fair rental price 15 days or more this year?
• Is the total of your rental expenses and depreciation more than your rental income?
PART I. Rental Use Percentage
A. Total days available for rent at fair rental price ............................... . A.
B. Total days available for rent (line A) but not rented ............................ . B.
C. Total days of rental use. Subtract line B from line A ........................... . C.
D. Total days of personal use (including days rented at less than fair rental price) ........ . D.
E. Total days of rental and personal use. Add lines C and D ...................... . E.
F. Percentage of expenses allowed for rental. Divide line C by line E ................ . F.
PART II. Allowable Rental Expenses
1. Enter rents received ............................................................... . 1.
2a. Enter the rental portion of deductible home mortgage interest and qualified 
mortgage insurance premiums (see instructions) .............................. . 2a.
b. Enter the rental portion of real estate taxes .................................. . b.
c. Enter the rental portion of deductible casualty and theft losses (see instructions) ........ . c.
d. Enter direct rental expenses (see instructions) ............................... . d.
e. Fully deductible rental expenses. Add lines 2a±2d. Enter here and 
on the appropriate lines on Schedule E (see instructions) ...................................... . 2e.
3. Subtract line 2e from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0- .......................................... . 3.
4a. Enter the rental portion of expenses directly related to operating or maintaining 
the dwelling unit (such as repairs, insurance, and utilities) ....................... . 4a.
b. Enter the rental portion of excess mortgage interest and qualified mortgage insurance 
premiums (see instructions) ............................................ . b.
c. Carryover of operating expenses from 2008 worksheet ......................... . c.
d. Add lines 4a±4c .................................................... . d.
e. Allowable expenses. Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 4d (see instructions) ........................ . 4e.
5. Subtract line 4e from line 3. If zero or less, enter -0- .......................................... . 5.
6a. Enter the rental portion of excess casualty and theft losses (see instructions) .......... . 6a.
b. Enter the depreciation for the rental portion of the dwelling unit .................... . b.
c. Carryover of excess casualty losses and depreciation from 2008 worksheet ........... . c.
d. Add lines 6a±6c .................................................... . d.
e. Allowable excess casualty and theft losses and depreciation. Enter the smaller of 
line 5 or line 6d (see instructions) ...................................................... . 6e.
Part III. Carryover of Unallowed Expenses to Next Year
7a. Operating expenses to be carried over to next year. Subtract line 4e from line 4d ................... . 7a.
b. Excess casualty and theft losses and depreciation to be carried over to next year. 
Subtract line 6e from line 6d .......................................................... . b.
Page 74 Chapter 9 Rental Income and Expenses

Page 77 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet 9-1 Instructions. Worksheet for Figuring Rental Deductions for
a Dwelling Unit Used as a Home Keep for Your Records
Caution. Use the percentage determined in Part I, line F, to figure the rental portions to enter on lines 2a ±2c, 4a±4b, and 6a±6b of 
Part II.
Line 2a. Figure the mortgage interest on the dwelling unit that you could deduct on Schedule A (as if you were itemizing your
deductions) if you had not rented the unit. Do not include interest on a loan that did not benefit the dwelling unit. For example,
do not include interest on a home equity loan used to pay off credit cards or other personal loans, buy a car, or pay college
tuition. Include interest on a loan used to buy, build, or improve the dwelling unit, or to refinance such a loan. Include the rental
portion of this interest in the total you enter on line 2a of the worksheet.
Figure the qualified mortgage insurance premiums on the dwelling unit that you could deduct on line 13 of Schedule A, if you
had not rented the unit. See page A-7 of the Schedule A instructions. However, figure your adjusted gross income (Form 1040,
line 38) without your rental income and expenses from the dwelling unit. See Line 4b below to deduct the part of the qualified
mortgage insurance premiums not allowed because of the adjusted gross income limit. Include the rental portion of the amount
from Schedule A, line 13, in the total you enter on line 2a of the worksheet.
Note. Do not file this Schedule A or use it to figure the amount to deduct on line 13 of that schedule. Instead, figure the
personal portion on a separate Schedule A. If you have deducted mortgage interest or qualified mortgage insurance premiums
on the dwelling unit on other forms, such as Schedule C or F, remember to reduce your Schedule A deduction by that amount.
Line 2c. Figure the casualty and theft losses related to the dwelling unit that you could deduct on Schedule A if you had not rented the
dwelling unit. To do this, complete Section A of Form 4684, Casualties and Thefts, treating the losses as personal losses. If
any of the loss is due to a federally declared disaster, see the Instructions for Form 4684. On Form 4684, line 20, enter 10% of
your adjusted gross income figured without your rental income and expenses from the dwelling unit. Enter the rental portion of
the result from Form 4684, line 22, on line 2c of this worksheet.
Note. Do not file this Form 4684 or use it to figure your personal losses on Schedule A. Instead, figure the personal portion
on a separate Form 4684.
Line 2d. Enter the total of your rental expenses that are directly related only to the rental activity. These include interest on loans used
for rental activities other than to buy, build, or improve the dwelling unit. Also include rental agency fees, advertising, office
supplies, and depreciation on office equipment used in your rental activity.
Line 2e. You can deduct the amounts on lines 2a, 2b, 2c, and 2d as rental expenses on Schedule E even if your rental expenses are
more than your rental income. Enter the amounts on lines 2a, 2b, 2c, and 2d on the appropriate lines of Schedule E.
Line 4b. On line 2a, you entered the rental portion of the mortgage interest and qualified mortgage insurance premiums you could
deduct on Schedule A if you had not rented the dwelling unit. If you had additional mortgage interest and qualified mortgage
insurance premiums that would not be deductible on Schedule A because of limits imposed on them, enter on line 4b of this
worksheet the rental portion of those excess amounts. Do not include interest on a loan that did not benefit the dwelling unit (as
explained in the line 2a instructions).
Line 4e. You can deduct the amounts on lines 4a, 4b, and 4c as rental expenses on Schedule E only to the extent they are not more
than the amount on line 4e.*
Line 6a. To find the rental portion of excess casualty and theft losses, use the Form 4684 you prepared for line 2c of this worksheet.
A. Enter the amount from Form 4684, line 10 ............................... .
B. Enter the rental portion of line A ...................................... .
C. Enter the amount from line 2c of this worksheet ........................... .
D. Subtract line C from line B. Enter the result here and on line 6a of this worksheet .... .
Line 6e. You can deduct the amounts on lines 6a, 6b, and 6c as rental expenses on Schedule E only to the extent they are not more
than the amount on line 6e.*
*Allocating the limited deduction. If you cannot deduct all of the amount on line 4d or 6d this year, you can allocate the allowable deduction in any way you wish among
the expenses included on line 4d or 6d. Enter the amount you allocate to each expense on the appropriate line of Schedule E, Part I.
person. In the left margin of Schedule E, next to Schedule E. The figures in the ªTotalsº column • Depreciation, including the special depre-
line 13, enter ªSee attached.º ciation allowance, on property placed inon that Schedule E should be the combined
service during 2009,totals of all Schedules E.
Page 2 of Schedule E is used to report in-Schedule E (Form 1040) • Depreciation on listed property (such as acome or loss from partnerships, S corporations, car), regardless of when it was placed inestates, trusts, and real estate mortgage invest-Use Schedule E (Form 1040), Part I, to report service, orment conduits. If you need to use Schedule E,your rental income and expenses. List your total • Any other car expenses, including thepage 2, use page 2 of the same Schedule E youincome, expenses, and depreciation for each standard mileage rate or lease expenses.used to enter the combined totals in Part I. Also,rental property. Be sure to answer the question
include the amount from line 26 (Part I) in theon line 2. Otherwise, figure your depreciation on your own
ªTotal income or (loss)º on line 41 (Part V).If you have more than three rental or royalty worksheet. You do not have to attach these
On Schedule E, page 1, line 20, enter theproperties, complete and attach as many computations to your return. 
depreciation you are claiming for each property.Schedules E as are needed to list the properties.
You must complete and attach Form 4562 forComplete lines 1 and 2 for each property. How-
ever, fill in the ªTotalsº column on only one rental activities only if you are claiming:
Chapter 9 Rental Income and Expenses Page 75

Page 78 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs). amounts deferred in an eligible tax-exempt or-
Information on the tax treatment of amounts you ganization plan when they are distributed or
receive from an IRA is in chapter 17. otherwise made available to you.
10. This chapter covers the tax treatment of ben-Civil service retirement benefits. If you efits under eligible section 457 plans, but it doesare retired from the federal government (either not cover the treatment of deferrals. For infor-regular or disability retirement), see Publication mation on deferrals under section 457 plans,721, Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service Retirement see Retirement Plan Contributions under Em-Retirement Benefits. Publication 721 also covers the infor- ployee Compensation in Publication 525, Tax-mation that you need if you are the survivor or able and Nontaxable Income.beneficiary of a federal employee or retiree whoPlans, Pensions, For general information on these deferreddied. compensation plans, see Section 457 Deferred
Compensation Plans in Publication 575.and Annuities Useful Items
Disability pensions. If you retired on disabil-You may want to see:
ity, you generally must include in income any
disability pension you receive under a plan thatPublication
is paid for by your employer. You must reportWhat's New for 2009 ❏ 575 Pension and Annuity Income your taxable disability payments as wages on
line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A until you❏ 721 Tax Guide to U.S. Civil ServiceWaiver of required minimum distribution reach minimum retirement age. Minimum retire-Retirement Benefits(RMD) rules for certain retirement plans and ment age generally is the age at which you canIRAs for 2009. No RMD is required from most ❏ 939 General Rule for Pensions and first receive a pension or annuity if you are notdefined contribution retirement plans or IRAs for Annuities disabled.2009. For more information, see Waiver of re-
You may be entitled to a tax credit ifquired minimum distributions (RMDs) for 2009 , Form (and Instructions)
you were permanently and totally dis-under Rollovers, later. ❏ W-4P Withholding Certificate for Pension abled when you retired. For informa-
TIPor Annuity Payments tion on the credit for the elderly or the disabled,
see chapter 33.❏ 1099-R Distributions From Pensions,
Annuities, Retirement or Beginning on the day after you reach mini-Reminder Profit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, mum retirement age, payments you receive are
Insurance Contracts, etc. taxable as a pension or annuity. Report the
Hurricane and disaster-related tax relief. payments on Form 1040, lines 16a and 16b, or❏ 4972 Tax on Lump-Sum DistributionsSpecial rules apply to retirement funds received on Form 1040A, lines 12a and 12b.
by qualified individuals who suffered an eco- ❏ 5329 Additional Taxes on Qualified Plans Disability payments for injuries in-nomic loss as a result of: (Including IRAs) and Other curred as a direct result of a terroristTax-Favored Accounts• Hurricane Katrina, Rita, or Wilma, attack directed against the United
TIP
States (or its allies) are not included in income.• The storms that began on May 4, 2007, in
For more information about payments to survi-the Kansas disaster area, or
vors of terrorist attacks, see Publication 3920,
• The severe storms in the Midwestern dis- Tax Relief for Victims of Terrorist Attacks.General Informationaster areas in 2008. For more information on how to report disa-
bility pensions, including military and certainFor more information on these special rules, see Designated Roth accounts. A designated government disability pensions, see chapter 5.Hurricane-Related Relief, Relief for Kansas Dis- Roth account is a separate account createdaster Area, and Relief for Midwestern Disaster under a qualified Roth contribution program to Retired public safety officers. An eligible re-Areas in Publication 575, Pension and Annuity which participants may elect to have part or all of tired public safety officer can elect to excludeIncome. their elective deferrals to a 401(k) or 403(b) plan from income distributions of up to $3,000 made
designated as Roth contributions. Elective de- directly from a government retirement plan to
ferrals that are designated as Roth contributions the provider of accident, health, or long-term
are included in your income. However, qualified disability insurance. See Insurance Premiums
distributions are not included in your income. for Retired Public Safety Officers  in PublicationIntroduction
See Publication 575 for more information. 575 for more information.This chapter discusses the tax treatment of dis-
More than one program. If you receive bene-tributions you receive from: Railroad retirement benefits. Part of any rail-
fits from more than one program under a single road retirement benefits you receive is treated• An employee pension or annuity from a trust or plan of your employer, such as a pension for tax purposes like social security benefits, andqualified plan, plan and a profit-sharing plan, you may have to part is treated like an employee pension. For
figure the taxable part of each pension or annu-• A disability retirement, and information about railroad retirement benefits
ity contract separately. Your former employer or treated as social security benefits, see Publica-• A purchased commercial annuity. the plan administrator should be able to tell you tion 915, Social Security and Equivalent Rail-
if you have more than one pension or annuity road Retirement Benefits. For information about
contract.What is not covered in this chapter. The railroad retirement benefits treated as an em-
following topics are not discussed in this chap- ployee pension, see Railroad Retirement Bene-Section 457 deferred compensation plans. fits in Publication 575.ter. If you work for a state or local government or for
The General Rule. This is the method gen- a tax-exempt organization, you may be able to Withholding and estimated tax. The payer
erally used to determine the tax treatment of participate in a section 457 deferred compensa- of your pension, profit-sharing, stock bonus, an-
pension and annuity income from nonqualified tion plan. If your plan is an eligible plan, you are nuity, or deferred compensation plan will with-
plans (including commercial annuities). For a not taxed currently on pay that is deferred under hold income tax on the taxable parts of amounts
qualified plan, you generally cannot use the the plan or on any earnings from the plan's paid to you. You can tell the payer how much to
General Rule unless your annuity starting date investment of the deferred pay. You are gener- withhold, or not to withhold, by filing Form W-4P.
is before November 19, 1996. For more informa- ally taxed on amounts deferred in an eligible If you choose not to have tax withheld, or you do
tion about the General Rule, see Publication state or local government plan only when they not have enough tax withheld, you may have to
939, General Rule for Pensions and Annuities. are distributed from the plan. You are taxed on pay estimated tax.
Page 76 Chapter 10 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities

Page 79 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you receive an eligible rollover distribution, More than one annuity. If you receive more rest of the amount you receive is generally tax-
you cannot choose not to have tax withheld. than one annuity and at least one of them is not able. You figure the tax-free part of the payment
20% will generally be withheld, but no tax will be fully taxable, enter the total amount received using either the Simplified Method or the Gen-
withheld on a direct rollover of an eligible rollover from all annuities on Form 1040, line 16a, or eral Rule. Your annuity starting date and
distribution. See Direct rollover option  under Form 1040A, line 12a, and enter the taxable part whether or not your plan is qualified determine
Rollovers, later. on Form 1040, line 16b, or Form 1040A, line which method you must or may use.
12b. If all the annuities you receive are fullyFor more information, see Pensions and An- If your annuity starting date is after Novem-
taxable, enter the total of all of them on Formnuities under Withholding in chapter 4. ber 18, 1996, and your payments are from a
1040, line 16b, or Form 1040A, line 12b. qualified plan, you must use the Simplified
Qualified plans for self-employed individu- Method. Generally, you must use the GeneralJoint return. If you file a joint return and youals. Qualified plans set up by self-employed Rule if your annuity is paid under a nonqualifiedand your spouse each receive one or more pen-individuals are sometimes called Keogh or H.R. plan, and you cannot use this method if yoursions or annuities, report the total of the pen-10 plans. Qualified plans can be set up by sole annuity is paid under a qualified plan.sions and annuities on Form 1040, line 16a, orproprietors, partnerships (but not a partner), and If you had more than one partly taxable pen-Form 1040A, line 12a, and report the taxablecorporations. They can cover self-employed sion or annuity, figure the tax-free part and thepart on Form 1040, line 16b, or Form 1040A, linepersons, such as the sole proprietor or partners, taxable part of each separately.12b.as well as regular (common-law) employees. If your annuity is paid under a qualified planDistributions from a qualified plan are usually and your annuity starting date is after July 1,fully taxable because most recipients have no
1986, and before November 19, 1996, you couldcost basis. If you have an investment (cost) in
have chosen to use either the General Rule orthe plan, however, your pension or annuity pay- Cost (Investment in the the Simplified Method.ments from a qualified plan are taxed under the
Simplified Method. For more information about Contract)
Exclusion limit. Your annuity starting datequalified plans, see Publication 560, Retirement
determines the total amount of annuity pay-Plans for Small Business. Before you can figure how much, if any, of a
ments that you can exclude from your taxabledistribution from your pension or annuity plan is
income over the years. Once your annuity start-Purchased annuities. If you receive pension taxable, you must determine your cost (your
ing date is determined, it does not change. If youor annuity payments from a privately purchased investment in the contract) in the pension or
calculate the taxable portion of your annuity pay-annuity contract from a commercial organiza- annuity. Your total cost in the plan includes the
ments using the simplified method worksheet,tion, such as an insurance company, you gener- total premiums, contributions, or other amounts
the annuity starting date determines the recov-ally must use the General Rule to figure the you paid. This includes the amounts your em-
ery period for your cost. That recovery periodtax-free part of each annuity payment. For more ployer contributed that were taxable to you when
begins on your annuity starting date and is notinformation about the General Rule, get Publica- paid. Cost does not include any amounts you
affected by the date you first complete the work-tion 939. Also, see Variable Annuities in Publica- deducted or were excluded from your income.
sheet.tion 575 for the special provisions that apply to From this total cost, subtract any refunds of
these annuity contracts. premiums, rebates, dividends, unrepaid loans Exclusion limited to cost. If your annuity
that were not included in your income, or other starting date is after 1986, the total amount ofLoans. If you borrow money from your retire- tax-free amounts that you received by the later annuity income that you can exclude over thement plan, you must treat the loan as a nonperi- of the annuity starting date or the date on which years as a recovery of the cost cannot exceedodic distribution from the plan unless certain you received your first payment. your total cost. Any unrecovered cost at your (orexceptions apply. This treatment also applies to Your annuity starting date is the later of the the last annuitant's) death is allowed as a mis-any loan under a contract purchased under your first day of the first period for which you received cellaneous itemized deduction on the final returnretirement plan, and to the value of any part of a payment, or the date the plan's obligations of the decedent. This deduction is not subject toyour interest in the plan or contract that you became fixed. the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit.pledge or assign. This means that you must
Designated Roth accounts. Your cost ininclude in income all or part of the amount bor- Exclusion not limited to cost. If your an-
these accounts is your designated Roth contri-rowed. Even if you do not have to treat the loan nuity starting date is before 1987, you can con-
butions that were included in your income asas a nonperiodic distribution, you may not be tinue to take your monthly exclusion for as long
wages subject to applicable withholding require-able to deduct the interest on the loan in some as you receive your annuity. If you chose a joint
ments.situations. For details, see Loans Treated as and survivor annuity, your survivor can continue
Distributions in Publication 575. For information to take the survivor's exclusion figured as of the
Foreign employment contributions. If youon the deductibility of interest, see chapter 23. annuity starting date. The total exclusion may be
worked in a foreign country and contributions more than your cost.
were made to your retirement plan, special rulesTax-free exchange. No gain or loss is recog-
apply in determining your cost. See Publicationnized on an exchange of an annuity contract for Simplified Method575.another annuity contract if the insured or annui-
tant remains the same. However, if an annuity Under the Simplified Method, you figure thecontract is exchanged for a life insurance or tax-free part of each annuity payment by divid-endowment contract, any gain due to interest ing your cost by the total number of anticipatedaccumulated on the contract is ordinary income. Taxation of Periodic monthly payments. For an annuity that is pay-See Transfers of Annuity Contracts in Publica- able for the lives of the annuitants, this numbertion 575 for more information about exchanges Payments is based on the annuitants' ages on the annuityof annuity contracts. starting date and is determined from a table. For
any other annuity, this number is the number ofFully taxable payments. Generally, if you did
monthly annuity payments under the contract.How To Report not pay any part of the cost of your employee
pension or annuity and your employer did not
If you file Form 1040, report your total annuity on Who must use the Simplified Method. Youwithhold part of the cost from your pay while you
line 16a and the taxable part on line 16b. If your must use the Simplified Method if your annuityworked, the amounts you receive each year are
pension or annuity is fully taxable, enter it on line starting date is after November 18, 1996, andfully taxable. You must report them on your
16b; do not make an entry on line 16a. you both:income tax return.
If you file Form 1040A, report your total an-
1. Receive pension or annuity payments fromnuity on line 12a and the taxable part on line Partly taxable payments. If you paid part of
a qualified employee plan, qualified em-12b. If your pension or annuity is fully taxable, the cost of your pension or annuity, you are not
ployee annuity, or a tax-sheltered annuityenter it on line 12b; do not make an entry on line taxed on the part of the pension or annuity you
(403(b)) plan, and12a. receive that represents a return of your cost. The
Chapter 10 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities Page 77

Page 80 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2.  On your annuity starting date, you were Worksheet 10-A. Simplified Methodeither under age 75, or entitled to less than Worksheet for Bill Smith Keep for Your Records
5 years of guaranteed payments.
1. Enter the total pension or annuity payments received this year.
Guaranteed payments. Your annuity contract Also, add this amount to the total for Form 1040, line 16a, or Form
provides guaranteed payments if a minimum 1040A, line 12a ................................... . 1. 14,400
number of payments or a minimum amount (for 2. Enter your cost in the plan (contract) at the
example, the amount of your investment) is pay- annuity starting date plus any death benefit
able even if you and any survivor annuitant do exclusion*. See Cost (Investment in the
not live to receive the minimum. If the minimum Contract) earlier ..................... . 2. 31,000
amount is less than the total amount of the Note: If your annuity starting date was before
payments you are to receive, barring death, dur- this year and you completed this worksheet
ing the first 5 years after payments begin (fig- last year, skip line 3 and enter the amount from
ured by ignoring any payment increases), you line 4 of last year's worksheet on line 4 below
are entitled to less than 5 years of guaranteed (even if the amount of your pension or annuity
payments. has changed). Otherwise, go to line 3.
3. Enter the appropriate number from Table 1
How to use the Simplified Method. Com- below. But if your annuity starting date was
plete the Simplified Method Worksheet in Publi- after 1997 and the payments are for your life
cation 575 to figure your taxable annuity for and that of your beneficiary, enter the
2009. appropriate number from Table 2 below .... . 3. 310
4. Divide line 2 by the number on line 3 ...... . 4. 100Single-life annuity.  If your annuity is pay-
5. Multiply line 4 by the number of months forable for your life alone, use Table 1 at the bottom
which this year's payments were made. If yourof the worksheet to determine the total number
annuity starting date was before 1987, enterof expected monthly payments. Enter on line 3
this amount on line 8 below and skip lines 6, 7,the number shown for your age at the annuity
10, and 11. Otherwise, go to line 6 ........ . 5. 1,200starting date.
6. Enter any amounts previously recovered taxMultiple-lives annuity. If your annuity is free in years after 1986. This is the amountpayable for the lives of more than one annuitant, shown on line 10 of your worksheet for lastuse Table 2 at the bottom of the worksheet to year ............................. . 6. -0-determine the total number of expected monthly 7. Subtract line 6 from line 2 .............. . 7. 31,000payments. Enter on line 3 the number shown for 8. Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 7 ...................... . 8. 1,200the combined ages of you and the youngest
9. Taxable amount for year. Subtract line 8 from line 1. Enter thesurvivor annuitant at the annuity starting date.
result, but not less than zero. Also, add this amount to the total forHowever, if your annuity starting date is Form 1040, line 16b, or Form 1040A, line 12b .............. . 9. 13,200before January 1, 1998, do not use Table 2 and Note: If your Form 1099-R shows a larger taxable amount, use thedo not combine the annuitants' ages. Instead amount figured on this line instead. If you are a retired public safetyyou must use Table 1 and enter on line 3 the officer, see Insurance Premiums for Retired Public Safety Officersnumber shown for the primary annuitant's age in Publication 575 before entering an amount on your tax return.on the annuity starting date.
10. Was your annuity starting date before 1987?
Be sure to keep a copy of the com- M Yes. STOP. Do not complete the rest of this worksheet.
pleted worksheet; it will help you figure ú No. Add lines 6 and 8. This is the amount you have recovered tax
your taxable annuity next year.
RECORDS free through 2009. You will need this number if you need to fill out
this worksheet next year ............................. . 10. 1,200
11. Balance of cost to be recovered. Subtract line 10 from line 2. IfExample. Bill Smith, age 65, began receiv-
zero, you will not have to complete this worksheet next year. Theing retirement benefits in 2009, under a joint and
payments you receive next year will generally be fully taxable ... . 11. 29,800survivor annuity. Bill's annuity starting date is
January 1, 2009. The benefits are to be paid for
TABLE 1 FOR LINE 3 ABOVEthe joint lives of Bill and his wife Kathy, age 65.
AND your annuity starting date wasÐBill had contributed $31,000 to a qualified plan
IF the age at annuity before November 19, after November 18,and had received no distributions before the
starting date was... 1996, enter on line 3... 1996, enter on line 3...annuity starting date. Bill is to receive a retire-
55 or under 300 360ment benefit of $1,200 a month, and Kathy is to
56±60 260 310receive a monthly survivor benefit of $600 upon
Bill's death. 61±65 240 260
66±70 170 210Bill must use the Simplified Method to figure
71 or older 120 160his taxable annuity because his payments are
from a qualified plan and he is under age 75.
TABLE 2 FOR LINE 3 ABOVEBecause his annuity is payable over the lives of
IF the combined agesmore than one annuitant, he uses his and
at annuity starting THEN enterKathy's combined ages and Table 2 at the bot-
date were... on line 3...tom of the worksheet in completing line 3 of the
110 or under 410worksheet. His completed worksheet is shown
111±120 360in Worksheet 10-A.
121±130 310Bill's tax-free monthly amount is $100
131±140 260($31,000 ÷  310) as shown on line 4 of the work-
141 or older 210sheet. Upon Bill's death, if Bill has not recovered
the full $31,000 investment, Kathy will also ex-
* A death benefit exclusion (up to $5,000) applied to certain benefits received by employees whoclude $100 from her $600 monthly payment.
died before August 21, 1996.The full amount of any annuity payments re-
ceived after 310 payments are paid must be
included in gross income.
Page 78 Chapter 10 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities

Page 81 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If Bill and Kathy die before 310 payments are Figuring the taxable amount of nonperiodic after 1973 (and any part from participation
made, a miscellaneous itemized deduction will payments. How you figure the taxable before 1974 that you do not report as capital
be allowed for the unrecovered cost on the final amount of a nonperiodic distribution depends on gain) is ordinary income. You may be able to use
income tax return of the last to die. This deduc- whether it is made before the annuity starting the 10-year tax option, discussed later, to figure
tion is not subject to the 2%-of-adjusted- date or on or after the annuity starting date. If it is tax on the ordinary income part.
gross-income limit. made before the annuity starting date, its tax Use Form 4972 to figure the separate tax on
treatment also depends on whether it is made a lump-sum distribution using the optional meth-
Qualified disaster recovery assistance distri- under a qualified or nonqualified plan and, if it is ods. The tax figured on Form 4972 is added to
butions. If you received these distributions, made under a nonqualified plan, whether it fully the regular tax figured on your other income.
see Publication 575 for how to complete Work- discharges the contract, is received under cer- This may result in a smaller tax than you would
sheet 10-A. tain life insurance or endowment contracts, or is pay by including the taxable amount of the distri-
allocable to an investment you made before bution as ordinary income in figuring your regu-Who must use the General Rule. You must August 14, 1982. lar tax.use the General Rule if you receive pension or
Annuity starting date. The annuity startingannuity payments from: How to treat the distribution. If you receive adate is either the first day of the first period for lump-sum distribution, you may have the follow-• A nonqualified plan (such as a private an- which you receive an annuity payment under the ing options for how you treat the taxable part.nuity, a purchased commercial annuity, or contract or the date on which the obligation
a nonqualified employee plan), or under the contract becomes fixed, whichever is • Report the part of the distribution from par-
later. ticipation before 1974 as a capital gain (if• A qualified plan if you are age 75 or older
you qualify) and the part from participationon your annuity starting date and your an- Distribution on or after annuity starting date. after 1973 as ordinary income.nuity payments are guaranteed for at least If you receive a nonperiodic payment from your
5 years. annuity contract on or after the annuity starting • Report the part of the distribution from par-
date, you generally must include all of the pay- ticipation before 1974 as a capital gain (ifAnnuity starting before November 19, ment in gross income. you qualify) and use the 10-year tax option1996. If your annuity starting date is after July to figure the tax on the part from partici-Distribution before annuity starting date. If1, 1986, and before November 19, 1996, you pation after 1973 (if you qualify).you receive a nonperiodic distribution before thehad to use the General Rule for either circum-
annuity starting date from a qualified retirement • Use the 10-year tax option to figure the taxstance just described. You also had to use it for
plan, you generally can allocate only part of it to on the total taxable amount (if you qualify).any fixed-period annuity. If you did not have to
the cost of the contract. You exclude from youruse the General Rule, you could have chosen to • Roll over all or part of the distribution. Seegross income the part that you allocate to theuse it. If your annuity starting date is before July Rollovers, later. No tax is currently due oncost. You include the remainder in your gross2, 1986, you had to use the General Rule unless the part rolled over. Report any part notincome.you could use the Three-Year Rule. rolled over as ordinary income. If you receive a nonperiodic distributionIf you had to use the General Rule (or chose
before the annuity starting date from a plan other • Report the entire taxable part of the distri-to use it), you must continue to use it each year
than a qualified retirement plan, it is allocated bution as ordinary income on your tax re-that you recover your cost.
first to earnings (the taxable part) and then to the turn.
cost of the contract (the tax-free part). This allo-Who cannot use the General Rule. You can-
cation rule applies, for example, to a commercial The first three options are explained in thenot use the General Rule if you receive your
annuity contract you bought directly from the following discussions.pension or annuity from a qualified plan and
issuer.none of the circumstances described in the pre-
Electing optional lump-sum treatment. YouFor more information, see Figuring the Tax-ceding discussions apply to you. See Who must
can choose to use the 10-year tax option orable Amount , under Taxation of Nonperiodicuse the Simplified Method, earlier.
capital gain treatment only once after 1986 forPayments, in Publication 575.
any plan participant. If you make this choice, youMore information. For complete information
cannot use either of these optional treatmentson using the General Rule, including the actua- Lump-Sum Distributions for any future distributions for the participant.rial tables you need, see Publication 939.
A lump-sum distribution is the distribution or Taxable and tax-free parts of the distribution.payment in 1 tax year of a plan participant's The taxable part of a lump-sum distribution is theentire balance from all of the employer's quali- employer's contributions and income earned onfied plans of one kind (for example, pension,Taxation of your account. You may recover your cost in theprofit-sharing, or stock bonus plans). A distribu- lump sum and any net unrealized appreciationtion from a nonqualified plan (such as a privatelyNonperiodic Payments (NUA) in employer securities tax free.purchased commercial annuity or a section 457
Cost. In general, your cost is the total of:deferred compensation plan of a state or localNonperiodic distributions are also known as
government or tax-exempt organization) cannotamounts not received as an annuity. They in- • The plan participant's nondeductible con-qualify as a lump-sum distribution.clude all payments other than periodic payments tributions to the plan,The participant's entire balance from a planand corrective distributions. Examples of
• The plan participant's taxable costs of anydoes not include certain forfeited amounts. Itnonperiodic payments are cash withdrawals,
life insurance contract distributed,also does not include any deductible voluntarydistributions of current earnings, certain loans,
employee contributions allowed by the plan afterand the value of annuity contracts transferred • Any employer contributions that were tax-1981 and before 1987. For more informationwithout full and adequate consideration. able to the plan participant, andabout distributions that do not qualify as
• Repayments of any loans that were tax-Corrective distributions of excess plan con- lump-sum distributions, see Distributions that do
able to the plan participant.tributions. Generally, if the contributions not qualify  under Lump-Sum Distributions  in
made for you during the year to certain retire- Publication 575. You must reduce this cost by amounts previ-ment plans exceed certain limits, the excess is If you receive a lump-sum distribution from a ously distributed tax free.taxable to you. To correct an excess, your plan qualified employee plan or qualified employee
Net unrealized appreciation (NUA). Themay distribute it to you (along with any income annuity and the plan participant was born before
NUA in employer securities (box 6 of Formearned on the excess). For information on plan January 2, 1936, you may be able to elect op-
1099-R) received as part of a lump-sum distribu-contribution limits and how to report corrective tional methods of figuring the tax on the distribu-
tion is generally tax free until you sell or ex-distributions of excess contributions, see Retire- tion. The part from active participation in the plan
change the securities. (For more information,ment Plan Contributions under Employee Com- before 1974 may qualify as capital gain subject
see Distributions of employer securities underpensation in Publication 525. to a 20% tax rate. The part from participation
Chapter 10 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities Page 79

Page 82 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Taxation of Nonperiodic Payments  in Publica- well as beneficiaries. The waiver also applies to receive it, the rollover period is extended for the
tion 575.) those individuals who turn 70 1/2 in 2009 and period during which the distribution is in a frozen
delay their 2009 RMD until April 1, 2010. This deposit in a financial institution.)
waiver does not apply to RMDs for 2008, even The IRS may waive the 60-day requirement
for individuals who turned 70 1/2 in 2008 and where the failure to do so would be againstCapital Gain Treatment
chose to take the 2008 RMD by April 1, 2009. equity or good conscience, such as in the event
Capital gain treatment applies only to the tax- If you received a distribution in 2009 that of a casualty, disaster, or other event beyond
able part of a lump-sum distribution resulting would otherwise be an RMD, you generally can your reasonable control.
from participation in the plan before 1974. The roll over that amount into an eligible retirement The administrator of a qualified plan must
amount treated as capital gain is taxed at a 20% plan within 60 days of the distribution. The plan give you a written explanation of your distribu-
rate. You can elect this treatment only once for administrator is permitted, but not required to tion options within a reasonable period of time
any plan participant, and only if the plan partici- offer a direct rollover of that amount. Also, the before making an eligible rollover distribution.
pant was born before January 2, 1936. distribution is not subject to the 20% income tax Qualified domestic relations order (QDRO).Complete Part II of Form 4972 to choose the withholding requirement. You may be able to roll over tax free all or part of20% capital gain election. For more information, For 2009 RMDs, the 60-day rollover period a distribution from a qualified retirement plansee Capital Gain Treatment under Lump-Sum was extended so that it ended on November 30, that you receive under a QDRO. If you receiveDistributions in Publication 575. 2009, or 60 days after the distribution was re- the distribution as an employee's spouse or for-ceived, whichever was later. mer spouse (not as a nonspousal beneficiary),
the rollover rules apply to you as if you were theRollover of nontaxable amounts. You may10-Year Tax Option employee. You can roll over the distribution frombe able to roll over the nontaxable part of a
the plan into a traditional IRA or to anotherdistribution (such as your after-tax contributions)The 10-year tax option is a special formula used
eligible retirement plan. See Publication 575 formade to another qualified retirement plan that isto figure a separate tax on the ordinary income
more information on benefits received under aa qualified employee plan or a 403(b) plan, or topart of a lump-sum distribution. You pay the tax
QDRO.a traditional or Roth IRA. The transfer must beonly once, for the year in which you receive the
made either through a direct rollover to a quali-distribution, not over the next 10 years. You can Rollover by surviving spouse. You may befied plan or 403(b) plan that separately accountselect this treatment only once for any plan par- able to roll over tax free all or part of a distribu-for the taxable and nontaxable parts of the rollo-ticipant, and only if the plan participant was born tion from a qualified retirement plan you receivever or through a rollover to a traditional or Rothbefore January 2, 1936. as the surviving spouse of a deceased em-IRA.The ordinary income part of the distribution is ployee. The rollover rules apply to you as if youIf you roll over only part of a distribution thatthe amount shown in box 2a of the Form 1099-R were the employee. You can roll over a distribu-includes both taxable and nontaxable amounts,given to you by the payer, minus the amount, if tion into a qualified retirement plan or a tradi-the amount you roll over is treated as comingany, shown in box 3. You also can treat the tional or Roth IRA. For a rollover to a Roth IRA,first from the taxable part of the distribution.capital gain part of the distribution (box 3 of see Rollovers to Roth IRAs, later.Any after-tax contributions that you roll overForm 1099-R) as ordinary income for the A distribution paid to a beneficiary other thaninto your traditional IRA, become part of your10-year tax option if you do not choose capital the employee's surviving spouse is generally notbasis (cost) in your IRAs. To recover your basisgain treatment for that part. an eligible rollover distribution. However, seewhen you take distributions from your IRA, youComplete Part III of Form 4972 to choose the Rollovers by nonspouse beneficiary, next.must complete Form 8606 for the year of the10-year tax option. You must use the special
Rollovers by nonspouse beneficiary. If youdistribution. For more information, see the FormTax Rate Schedule shown in the instructions for
are a designated beneficiary (other than a sur-8606 instructions.Part III to figure the tax. Publication 575 illus-
viving spouse) of a deceased employee, youtrates how to complete Form 4972 to figure the Direct rollover option. You can choose to may be able to roll over tax free all or a portion ofseparate tax. have any part or all of an eligible rollover distri- a distribution you receive from an eligible retire-bution paid directly to another qualified retire- ment plan of the employee. The distributionment plan that accepts rollover distributions or to must be a direct trustee-to-trustee transfer toa traditional or Roth IRA. If you choose the direct your traditional or Roth IRA that was set up toRollovers rollover option, or have an automatic rollover, no receive the distribution. The transfer will betax will be withheld from any part of the distribu- treated as an eligible rollover distribution and theIf you withdraw cash or other assets from a tion that is directly paid to the trustee of the other receiving plan will be treated as an inheritedqualified retirement plan in an eligible rollover plan. IRA. For information on inherited IRAs, see Pub-distribution, you can defer tax on the distribution lication 590, Individual Retirement Arrange-Payment to you option. If an eligible rolloverby rolling it over to another qualified retirement ments (IRAs).distribution is paid to you, 20% generally will beplan or a traditional IRA.
withheld for income tax. However, the fullFor this purpose, the following plans are Retirement bonds. If you redeem retirement
amount is treated as distributed to you evenqualified retirement plans. bonds purchased under a qualified bond
though you actually receive only 80%. You gen- purchase plan, you can roll over the proceeds• A qualified employee plan. erally must include in income any part (including that exceed your basis tax free into an IRA as
the part withheld) that you do not rollover within• A qualified employee annuity. discussed in Publication 590 or qualified em-
60 days to another qualified retirement plan or to ployer plan.• A tax-sheltered annuity plan (403(b) plan). a traditional or Roth IRA. (See Pensions and
Designated Roth accounts. You can rollAnnuities under Withholding in chapter 4.)• An eligible state or local government sec- over an eligible rollover distribution from a desig-tion 457 deferred compensation plan. If you decide to roll over an amount nated Roth account only into another desig-
equal to the distribution before with- nated Roth account or a Roth IRA. If you want to
holding, your contribution to the new
CAUTION
!Eligible rollover distributions. Generally, an roll over the part of the distribution that is not
plan or IRA must include other money (for exam-eligible rollover distribution is any distribution of included in income, you must make a direct
ple, from savings or amounts borrowed) to re-all or any part of the balance to your credit in a rollover of the entire distribution or you can roll
place the amount withheld.qualified retirement plan. For information about over the entire amount (or any portion) to a Roth
exceptions to eligible rollover distributions, see IRA. For more information on rollovers from des-Time for making rollover. You generallyPublication 575. ignated Roth accounts, see Publication 575.must complete the rollover of an eligible rollover
Waiver of required minimum distributions distribution paid to you by the 60th day following Rollovers to Roth IRAs. You can roll over
(RMDs) for 2009. For 2009, you are not re- the day on which you receive the distribution distributions directly from a qualified retirement
quired to take an RMD from your IRA or most from your employer's plan. (If an amount distrib- plan (other than a designated Roth account) to a
defined contribution retirement plans. This uted to you becomes a frozen deposit in a finan- Roth IRA if, for the tax year of the distribution,
waiver applies to participants in these plans as cial institution during the 60-day period after you both of the following requirements are met.
Page 80 Chapter 10 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities

Page 83 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Your modified adjusted gross income for • A qualified employee plan, • From a qualified retirement plan to the ex-
Roth IRA purposes (explained in chapter 2 tent you have deductible medical ex-• A qualified employee annuity plan,of Publication 590) is not more than penses (medical expenses that exceed
• A tax-sheltered annuity plan, or$100,000. 7.5% of your adjusted gross income),
whether or not you itemize your deduc-• An eligible state or local government sec-• You are not a married individual filing a
tions for the year,tion 457 deferred compensation plan (toseparate return.
the extent that any distribution is attributa- • From an employer plan under a writtenYou must include in your gross income distribu- ble to amounts the plan received in a di- election that provides a specific scheduletions from a qualified retirement plan (other than rect transfer or rollover from one of the for distribution of your entire interest if, asa designated Roth account) that you would have other plans listed here or an IRA).
of March 1, 1986, you had separated fromhad to include in income if you had not rolled
service and had begun receiving pay-them over into a Roth IRA. You do not include in 5% rate on certain early distributions from ments under the election,gross income any part of a distribution from a deferred annuity contracts. If an early with-qualified retirement plan that is a return of contri- • From an employee stock ownership plandrawal from a deferred annuity is otherwise sub-butions to the plan that were taxable to you for dividends on employer securities heldject to the 10% additional tax, a 5% rate maywhen paid. In addition, the 10% tax on early apply instead. A 5% rate applies to distributions by the plan,distributions does not apply. under a written election providing a specific • From a qualified retirement plan due to anschedule for the distribution of your interest inMore information. For more information on IRS levy of the plan, orthe contract if, as of March 1, 1986, you hadthe rules for rolling over distributions, see Publi- begun receiving payments under the election. • From elective deferral accounts undercation 575. On line 4 of Form 5329, multiply the line 3 401(k) or 403(b) plans or similar arrange-
amount by 5% instead of 10%. Attach an expla- ments that are qualified reservist distribu-
nation to your return. tions.
Special Additional Qualified public safety employees. If youExceptions to tax. Certain early distributions
are excepted from the early distribution tax. If are a qualified public safety employee, distribu-
Taxes the payer knows that an exception applies to tions made from a governmental defined benefit
your early distribution, distribution code ª2,º ª3,º pension plan are not subject to the additional taxTo discourage the use of pension funds for pur- or ª4º should be shown in box 7 of your Form on early distributions. You are a qualified publicposes other than normal retirement, the law im- 1099-R and you do not have to report the distri- safety employee if you provide police protection,poses additional taxes on early distributions of bution on Form 5329. If an exception applies but firefighting services, or emergency medicalthose funds and on failures to withdraw the distribution code ª1º (early distribution, no services for a state or municipality, and youfunds timely. Ordinarily, you will not be subject to known exception) is shown in box 7, you must separated from service in or after the year youfile Form 5329. Enter the taxable amount of thethese taxes if you roll over all early distributions attained age 50.distribution shown in box 2a of your Formyou receive, as explained earlier, and begin
1099-R on line 1 of Form 5329. On line 2, enterdrawing out the funds at a normal retirement Qualified reservist distributions. A quali-
the amount that can be excluded and the excep-age, in reasonable amounts over your life ex- fied reservist distribution is not subject to the
tion number shown in the Form 5329 instruc-pectancy. These special additional taxes are the additional tax on early distributions. A qualified
tions.taxes on: reservist distribution is a distribution (a) from
elective deferrals under a section 401(k) orIf distribution code ª1º is incorrectly• Early distributions, and
shown on your Form 1099-R for a dis- 403(b) plan, or a similar arrangement, (b) to an
• Excess accumulation (not receiving mini- tribution received when you were age individual ordered or called to active duty (be-
TIPmum distributions). 591/2 or older, include that distribution on Form cause he or she is a member of a reserve com-
5329. Enter exception number ª12º on line 2. ponent) for a period of more than 179 days or forThese taxes are discussed in the following sec-
tions. an indefinite period, and (c) made during theGeneral exceptions. The tax does not ap- period beginning on the date of the order or callply to distributions that are:If you must pay either of these taxes, report and ending at the close of the active duty period.them on Form 5329. However, you do not have • Made as part of a series of substantially You must have been ordered or called to activeto file Form 5329 if you owe only the tax on early equal periodic payments (made at least duty after September 11, 2001. For more infor-distributions and your Form 1099-R correctly annually) for your life (or life expectancy) mation, see Publication 575.shows a ª1º in box 7. Instead, enter 10% of the or the joint lives (or joint life expectancies)
taxable part of the distribution on Form 1040, Additional exceptions for nonqualified an-of you and your designated beneficiary (if
line 58 and write ªNoº under the heading ªOther from a qualified retirement plan, the pay- nuity contracts. The tax does not apply to
Taxesº to the left of line 58. ments must begin after your separation distributions that are:
from service),Even if you do not owe any of these taxes, • From a deferred annuity contract to theyou may have to complete Form 5329 and at- • Made because you are totally and perma- extent allocable to investment in the con-tach it to your Form 1040. This applies if you nently disabled, or tract before August 14, 1982,meet an exception to the tax on early distribu-
• Made on or after the death of the plantions but box 7 of your Form 1099-R does not • From a deferred annuity contract under a
participant or contract holder.indicate an exception. qualified personal injury settlement,
• From a deferred annuity contract pur-Additional exceptions for qualified retire-
Tax on Early Distributions chased by your employer upon terminationment plans. The tax does not apply to distri-
of a qualified employee plan or qualifiedbutions that are:Most distributions (both periodic and nonperi- employee annuity plan and held by your• From a qualified retirement plan (otherodic) from qualified retirement plans and non- employer until your separation from serv-than an IRA) after your separation fromqualified annuity contracts made to you before ice, orservice in or after the year you reachedyou reach age 591/2 are subject to an additional
age 55 (age 50 for qualified public safety • From an immediate annuity contract (atax of 10%. This tax applies to the part of the
employees),distribution that you must include in gross in- single premium contract providing sub-
come. stantially equal annuity payments that start• From a qualified retirement plan (other
within one year from the date of purchaseFor this purpose, a qualified retirement plan than an IRA) to an alternate payee under
is: a qualified domestic relations order, and are paid at least annually).
Chapter 10 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities Page 81

Page 84 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the year that follows the calendar year in which even if the annuity payments are increased orTax on Excess you reach age 701/2. decreased. See Simplified Method, earlier.
Accumulation In any case, if the annuity starting date isAge 701/2. You reach age 701/2 on the date that after 1986, the total exclusion over the yearsis 6 calendar months after the date of your 70thTo make sure that most of your retirement bene- cannot be more than the cost.birthday.fits are paid to you during your lifetime, rather
For example, if you are retired and your 70th Estate tax deduction. If your annuity was athan to your beneficiaries after your death, the
birthday was on June 30, 2009, you were age joint and survivor annuity that was included inpayments that you receive from qualified retire-
701/2 on December 30, 2009. If your 70th birth- the decedent's estate, an estate tax may havement plans must begin no later than your re-
day was on July 1, 2009, you reached age 701/2 been paid on it. You can deduct the part of thequired beginning date (defined later). The
on January 1, 2010. total estate tax that was based on the annuity.payments each year cannot be less than the
The deceased annuitant must have died afterrequired minimum distribution. Required distributions. By the required be- the annuity starting date. (For details, see sec-ginning date, as explained earlier, you must ei-Required distributions not made. If the tion 1.691(d)-1 of the regulations.) Deduct it inther:actual distributions to you in any year are less equal amounts over your remaining life expec-than the minimum required distribution for that • Receive your entire interest in the plan (for tancy.year, you are subject to an additional tax. The a tax-sheltered annuity, your entire benefit If the decedent died before the annuity start-tax equals 50% of the part of the required mini- accruing after 1986), or ing date of a deferred annuity contract and youmum distribution that was not distributed. receive a death benefit under that contract, the• Begin receiving periodic distributions inFor this purpose, a qualified retirement plan amount you receive (either in a lump sum or asannual amounts calculated to distributeincludes: periodic payments) in excess of the decedent'syour entire interest (for a tax-sheltered an- cost is included in your gross income as income1. A qualified employee plan, nuity, your entire benefit accruing after in respect of a decedent for which you may be1986) over your life or life expectancy or2. A qualified employee annuity plan, able to claim an estate tax deduction.over the joint lives or joint life expectan- You can take the estate tax deduction as an3. An eligible section 457 deferred compen- cies of you and a designated beneficiary itemized deduction on Schedule A, Form 1040.sation plan, or (or over a shorter period). This deduction is not subject to the
4. A tax-sheltered annuity plan (for benefits 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit on miscella-Additional information. For more informa-accruing after 1986). neous deductions. See Publication 559, Survi-tion on this rule, see Tax on Excess Accumula- vors, Executors, and Administrators, for moretion in Publication 575.Waiver. The tax may be waived if you estab- information on the estate tax deduction.
lish that the shortfall in distributions was due to Form 5329. You must file a Form 5329 if
reasonable error and that reasonable steps are you owe a tax because you did not receive a
being taken to remedy the shortfall. See the minimum required distribution from your quali-
instructions for Form 5329 for the procedure to fied retirement plan.
follow if you believe you qualify for a waiver of
this tax.
11.Waiver of RMDs for 2009. For 2009, you are
Survivorsnot required to take an RMD from your IRA or
most defined contribution retirement plans. This
Generally, a survivor or beneficiary reports pen-waiver applies to participants in these plans as Social Securitysion or annuity income in the same way the planwell as beneficiaries. The waiver also applies to
participant would have. However, some specialthose individuals who turn 70 1/2 in 2009 and
rules apply.delay taking their 2009 RMD until April 1, 2010. and Equivalent
This waiver did not apply to RMDs for 2008, Survivors of employees. If you are entitled toeven for individuals who turned 701/2 in 2008 and receive a survivor annuity on the death of an Railroadchose to take their 2008 RMD by April 1, 2009. employee, who died before becoming entitled to
any annuity payments, you can exclude part ofState insurer delinquency proceedings.
Retirementeach annuity payment as a tax-free recovery ofYou might not receive the minimum distribution
the employee's investment in the contract. Youbecause assets are invested in a contract is-
must figure the taxable and tax-free parts of yoursued by an insurance company in state insurer Benefitsannuity payments using the method that appliesdelinquency proceedings. If your payments are
as if you were the employee.reduced below the minimum due to these pro-
ceedings, you should contact your plan adminis- Survivors of retirees. If you receive benefitstrator. Under certain conditions, you will not Introductionas a survivor under a joint and survivor annuity,have to pay the 50% excise tax. include those benefits in income in the same This chapter explains the federal income tax
way the retiree would have included them inRequired beginning date. Unless the rule for rules for social security benefits and equivalent
income. If you receive a survivor annuity be-5% owners applies, you generally must begin to tier 1 railroad retirement benefits. It explains the
cause of the death of a retiree who had reportedreceive distributions from your qualified retire- following topics.
the annuity under the Three-Year Rule and re-ment plan by April 1 of the year that follows the • How to figure whether your benefits arecovered all of the cost tax free, your survivorlater of: taxable.payments are fully taxable.• The calendar year in which you reach age If the retiree was reporting the annuity pay- • How to use the social security benefits701/2, or ments under the General Rule, you must apply worksheet (with examples).
the same exclusion percentage to your initial• The calendar year in which you retire from • How to report your taxable benefits.survivor annuity payment called for in the con-employment with the employer maintain-
tract. The resulting tax-free amount will thening the plan. • How to treat repayments that are more
remain fixed. Any increases in the survivor an- than the benefits you received during theHowever, your plan may require you to begin to nuity are fully taxable. year.receive distributions by April 1 of the year that If the retiree was reporting the annuity pay-follows the year in which you reach age 70 1/2, ments under the Simplified Method, the part of Social security benefits include monthly retire-even if you have not retired. each payment that is tax free is the same as the ment, survivor, and disability benefits. They do
5% owners. If you are a 5% owner, you tax-free amount figured by the retiree at the not include supplemental security income (SSI)
must begin to receive distributions by April 1 of annuity starting date. This amount remains fixed payments, which are not taxable.
Page 82 Chapter 11 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement Benefits

Page 85 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Equivalent tier 1 railroad retirement benefits check whether some of your benefits may be
are the part of tier 1 benefits that a railroad taxable.Are Any of Youremployee or beneficiary would have been enti-
tled to receive under the social security system. Worksheet 11-1. A Quick Way To Check if YourBenefits Taxable?They are commonly called the social security Benefits May be Taxable
equivalent benefit (SSEB) portion of tier 1 bene- To find out whether any of your benefits may be A. Enter the amount from box 5 of allfits. taxable, compare the base amount for your filing your Forms SSA-1099 andIf you received these benefits during 2009, status with the total of: RRB-1099. Include the full amountyou should have received a Form SSA-1099, of any lump-sum benefit paymentsSocial Security Benefit Statement, or Form 1. One-half of your benefits, plus received in 2009, for 2009 andRRB-1099, Payments by the Railroad Retire- earlier years. (If you received more2. All your other income, includingment Board, (Form SSA-1042S, Social Security than one form, combine thetax-exempt interest.Benefit Statement, or Form RRB-1042S, State- amounts from box 5 and enter the
ment for Nonresident Alien Recipients of: Pay- total.) ................. . A.When making this comparison, do not re-ments by the Railroad Retirement Board, if you Note. If the amount on line A is zero or less, stopduce your other income by any exclusions for: here; none of your benefits are taxable this year.are a nonresident alien). These forms show the
• Interest from qualified U.S. savings bonds,amounts received and repaid, and taxes with- B. Enter one-half of the amount on
held for the year. You may receive more than line A .................. . B.• Employer-provided adoption benefits,one of these forms for the same year. You
C. Enter your taxable pensions,• Foreign earned income or foreign housing,should add the amounts shown on all forms you wages, interest, dividends, andorreceive for the year to determine the ªtotalº other taxable income ........ . C.amounts received and repaid, and taxes with- • Income earned by bona fide residents of D. Enter any tax-exempt interestheld for that year. See the Appendix at the end American Samoa or Puerto Rico. income (such as interest onof Publication 915 for more information.
municipal bonds) plus any
exclusions from income (listedNote. When the term ªbenefitsº is used in Figuring total income. To figure the total of earlier) ................. . D.this chapter, it applies to both social security one-half of your benefits plus your other income,
E. Add lines B, C, and D ....... . E.benefits and the SSEB portion of tier 1 railroad use Worksheet 11-1 later in this discussion. If
Note. Compare the amount on line E to your baseretirement benefits. the total is more than your base amount, part of amount for your filing status. If the amount on lineyour benefits may be taxable.What is not covered in this chapter. This E equals or is less than the base amount for your
If you are married and file a joint return forchapter does not cover the tax rules for the filing status, none of your benefits are taxable this
2009, you and your spouse must combine your year. If the amount on line E is more than yourfollowing railroad retirement benefits.
base amount, some of your benefits may beincomes and your benefits to figure whether any• Non-social security equivalent benefit taxable. You need to complete Worksheet 1 inof your combined benefits are taxable. Even if(NSSEB) portion of tier 1 benefits. Publication 915 (or the Social Security Benefitsyour spouse did not receive any benefits, you Worksheet in your tax form instruction booklet). If• Tier 2 benefits. must add your spouse's income to yours to fig- none of your benefits are taxable, but you
ure whether any of your benefits are taxable. otherwise must file a tax return, see Benefits not• Vested dual benefits.
taxable, later, under How To Report YourIf the only income you received during• Supplemental annuity benefits. Benefits.2009 was your social security or the
For information on these benefits, see Publica- SSEB portion of tier 1 railroad retire-
TIP
tion 575, Pension and Annuity Income. ment benefits, your benefits generally are not Example. You and your spouse (both overtaxable and you probably do not have to file aThis chapter also does not cover the tax rules 65) are filing a joint return for 2009 and you bothreturn. If you have income in addition to yourfor foreign social security benefits. These bene- received social security benefits during the year.benefits, you may have to file a return even iffits are taxable as annuities, unless they are In January 2010, you received a Formnone of your benefits are taxable.exempt from U.S. tax or treated as a U.S. social SSA-1099 showing net benefits of $7,500 in box
security benefit under a tax treaty. 5. Your spouse received a Form SSA-1099
Base amount. Your base amount is: showing net benefits of $3,500 in box 5. You
also received a taxable pension of $22,000 andUseful Items • $25,000 if you are single, head of house- interest income of $500. You did not have anyYou may want to see: hold, or qualifying widow(er), tax-exempt interest income. Your benefits are
• $25,000 if you are married filing separately not taxable for 2009 because your income, asPublication
and lived apart from your spouse for all of figured in Worksheet 11-1 on this page, is not❏ 575 Pension and Annuity Income 2009, more than your base amount ($32,000) for mar-
ried filing jointly.❏ 590 Individual Retirement Arrangements • $32,000 if you are married filing jointly, or Even though none of your benefits are tax-(IRAs)
• $-0- if you are married filing separately able, you must file a return for 2009 because❏ 915 Social Security and Equivalent your taxable gross income ($22,500) exceedsand lived with your spouse at any timeRailroad Retirement Benefits the minimum filing requirement amount for yourduring 2009.
filing status.Forms (and Instructions)
Worksheet 11-1.  You can use Worksheet❏ 1040-ES Estimated Tax for Individuals 11-1 to figure the amount of income to compare
with your base amount. This is a quick way to❏ W-4V Voluntary Withholding Request
Chapter 11 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement Benefits Page 83

Page 86 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
tax during the year. For details, see Publication of Publication 590 to figure both your IRA
Filled-in Worksheet 11-1. A Quick Way To Check 505, Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax, or the deduction and your taxable benefits.
if Your Benefits May be Taxable instructions for Form 1040-ES. 2. Situation (1) does not apply and you take
A. Enter the amount from box 5 of an exclusion for interest from qualified U.S.
all your Forms SSA-1099 and savings bonds (Form 8815), for adoption
RRB-1099. Include the full benefits (Form 8839), for foreign earnedamount of any lump-sum benefit How To Report income or housing (Form 2555 or Formpayments received in 2009, for 2555-EZ), or for income earned in Ameri-2009 and earlier years. (If you Your Benefits can Samoa (Form 4563) or Puerto Rico byreceived more than one form,
bona fide residents. In this situation, youcombine the amounts from box 5 If part of your benefits are taxable, you must useand enter the total.) ....... . A. $ 11,000 must use Worksheet 1 in Publication 915Form 1040 or Form 1040A. You cannot useNote. If the amount on line A is zero or less, stop to figure your taxable benefits.Form 1040EZ.here; none of your benefits are taxable this year.
3. You received a lump-sum payment for an
B. Enter one-half of the amount on Reporting on Form 1040. Report your net earlier year. In this situation, also completeline A ................ . B. 5,500 benefits (the amount in box 5 of your Form Worksheet 2 or 3 and Worksheet 4 in Pub-
SSA-1099 or Form RRB-1099) on line 20a andC. Enter your taxable pensions, lication 915. See Lump-sum election be-
wages, interest, dividends, and the taxable part on line 20b. If you are married low.
other taxable income ...... . C.  22,500 filing separately and you lived apart from your
spouse for all of 2009, also enter ªDº to the rightD. Enter any tax-exempt interest Lump-sum election. You must include theof the word ªbenefitsº on line 20a.income (such as interest on taxable part of a lump-sum (retroactive) pay-municipal bonds) plus any
Reporting on Form 1040A. Report your net ment of benefits received in 2009 in your 2009exclusions from income (listed
benefits (the amount in box 5 of your Form income, even if the payment includes benefitsearlier) ............... . D. -0-
SSA-1099 or Form RRB-1099) on line 14a and for an earlier year.E. Add lines B, C, and D ...... . E. $28,000 the taxable part on line 14b. If you are marriedNote. Compare the amount on line E to your base This type of lump-sum benefit paymentfiling separately and you lived apart from youramount for your filing status. If the amount on line should not be confused with thespouse for all of 2009, also enter ªDº to the rightE equals or is less than the base amount for your lump-sum death benefit that both the
TIPof the word ªbenefitsº on line 14a.filing status, none of your benefits are taxable this SSA and RRB pay to many of their beneficiaries.year. If the amount on line E is more than your No part of the lump-sum death benefit is subjectBenefits not taxable. If you are filing Formbase amount, some of your benefits may be
to tax.1040EZ, do not report any benefits on your taxtaxable. You then need to complete Worksheet 1
in Publication 915 (or the Social Security Benefits return. If you are filing Form 1040 or Form Generally, you use your 2009 income to fig-
Worksheet in your tax form instruction booklet). If 1040A, report your net benefits (the amount in ure the taxable part of the total benefits received
none of your benefits are taxable, but you box 5 of your Form SSA-1099 or Form in 2009. However, you may be able to figure theotherwise must file a tax return, see Benefits not RRB-1099) on Form 1040, line 20a, or Form taxable part of a lump-sum payment for an ear-taxable, later, under How To Report Your 1040A, line 14a. Enter -0- on Form 1040, line lier year separately, using your income for theBenefits. 20b, or Form 1040A, line 14b. If you are married earlier year. You can elect this method if it low-
filing separately and you lived apart from your ers your taxable benefits.
spouse for all of 2009, also enter ªDº to the rightWho is taxed. Benefits are included in the Making the election. If you received aof the word ªbenefitsº on Form 1040, line 20a, ortaxable income (to the extent they are taxable) lump-sum benefit payment in 2009 that includesForm 1040A, line 14a.of the person who has the legal right to receive benefits for one or more earlier years, follow thethe benefits. For example, if you and your child instructions in Publication 915 under Lump-Sumreceive benefits, but the check for your child is How Much Is Taxable? Election to see whether making the election willmade out in your name, you must use only your lower your taxable benefits. That discussionpart of the benefits to see whether any benefits If part of your benefits are taxable, how much is also explains how to make the election.are taxable to you. One-half of the part that taxable depends on the total amount of your
belongs to your child must be added to your Because the earlier year's taxable ben-benefits and other income. Generally, the higher
child's other income to see whether any of those efits are included in your 2009 income,that total amount, the greater the taxable part of
benefits are taxable to your child. no adjustment is made to the earlieryour benefits.
CAUTION
!
year's return. Do not file an amended return forRepayment of benefits. Any repayment of Maximum taxable part. Generally, up to 50% the earlier year.benefits you made during 2009 must be sub- of your benefits will be taxable. However, up totracted from the gross benefits you received in 85% of your benefits can be taxable if either of2009. It does not matter whether the repayment the following situations applies to you.was for a benefit you received in 2009 or in an
• The total of one-half of your benefits andearlier year. If you repaid more than the gross Examplesall your other income is more thanbenefits you received in 2009, see Repayments
$34,000 ($44,000 if you are married filingMore Than Gross Benefits, later. The following are a few examples you can usejointly).Your gross benefits are shown in box 3 of as a guide to figure the taxable part of your
Form SSA-1099 or RRB-1099. Your repay- benefits.• You are married filing separately and livedments are shown in box 4. The amount in box 5 with your spouse at any time during 2009.shows your net benefits for 2009 (box 3 minus Example 1. George White is single and files
box 4). Use the amount in box 5 to figure Form 1040 for 2009. He received the followingWhich worksheet to use. A worksheet to fig-whether any of your benefits are taxable. income in 2009:ure your taxable benefits is in the instructions for
Tax withholding and estimated tax. You can your Form 1040 or Form 1040A. You can use Fully taxable pension ............ . $18,600choose to have federal income tax withheld from either that worksheet or Worksheet 1 in Publica- Wages from part-time job ......... .  9,400
your social security benefits and/or the SSEB Taxable interest income .......... . 990tion 915, unless any of the following situations
portion of your tier 1 railroad retirement benefits. Total ...................... . $28,990applies to you.
If you choose to do this, you must complete a
George also received social security benefitsForm W-4V. You can choose withholding at 7%, 1. You contributed to a traditional individual
during 2009. The Form SSA-1099 he received in10%, 15%, or 25% of your total benefit payment. retirement arrangement (IRA) and you or
January 2010 shows $5,980 in box 5. To figureIf you do not choose to have income tax your spouse is covered by a retirement
his taxable benefits, George completes thewithheld, you may have to request additional plan at work. In this situation, you must
worksheet shown here.withholding from other income or pay estimated use the special worksheets in Appendix B
Page 84 Chapter 11 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement Benefits

Page 87 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
17.Add lines 15 and 16 ............. . 2,990 9. If you are:Worksheet 1.
18.Multiply line 1 by 85% (.85) ........ . 5,083 Figuring Your Taxable Benefits • Married filing jointly, enter $32,000
19.Taxable benefits. Enter the smaller of • Single, head of household, qualifyingline 17 or line 18. Also enter this amount1. Enter the total amount from box 5 of ALL widow(er), or married filing separatelyon Form 1040, line 20b, or Form 1040A,your Forms SSA-1099 and RRB-1099. and you lived apart from your spouseline 14b .................... . $2,990Also enter this amount on Form 1040, line for all of 2009, enter $25,000 .... . 32,00020a, or Form 1040A, line 14a ....... . $5,980 Note. If you are married filing separately2. Enter one-half of line 1 ........... . 2,990 and you lived with your spouse at any time
3. Enter the total of the amounts from: The amount on line 19 of George's worksheet in 2009, skip lines 9 through 16; multiply
Form 1040: Lines 7, 8a, 9a, 10 through line 8 by 85% (.85) and enter the result onshows that $2,990 of his social security benefits14, 15b, 16b, 17 through 19, and 21. line 17. Then go to line 18.is taxable. On line 20a of his Form 1040, GeorgeForm 1040A: Lines 7, 8a, 9a, 10, 11b, 10. Is the amount on line 9 less than the
enters his net benefits of $5,980. On line 20b, he12b, and 13 ................. . 28,990 amount on line 8?
4. Enter the amount, if any, from Form enters his taxable benefits of $2,990.
1040 or 1040A, line 8b .......... . -0- No.
STOP None of your benefits are
taxable. Enter -0- on Form 1040, line 20b,5. Form 1040 filers: Enter the total of any Example 2. Ray and Alice Hopkins file a or on Form 1040A, line 14b. If you areexclusions/adjustments for: joint return on Form 1040A for 2009. Ray is married filing separately and you lived• Qualified U.S. savings bond
retired and received a fully taxable pension of apart from your spouse for all of 2009, beinterest (Form 8815, line 14),
sure you entered ªDº to the right of the$15,500. He also received social security bene-• Adoption benefits (Form 8839, line word ªbenefitsº on Form 1040, line 20a, or30), fits, and his Form SSA-1099 for 2009 shows net on Form 1040A, line 14a.• Foreign earned income or housing benefits of $5,600 in box 5. Alice worked during Yes. Subtract line 9 from line 8 ..... .(Form 2555, lines 45 and 50, or the year and had wages of $14,000. She made a 11. Enter $12,000 if married filing jointly;Form 2555-EZ, line 18), and
$9,000 if single, head of household,deductible payment to her IRA account of• Certain income of bona fide qualifying widow(er), or married filingresidents of American $1,000. Ray and Alice have two savings ac- separately and you lived apart from yourSamoa (Form 4563, line 15) counts with a total of $250 in taxable interest spouse for all of 2009 ............ .or Puerto Rico income. They complete Worksheet 1 and find 12. Subtract line 11 from line 10. If zero orForm 1040A filers: Enter the total of less, enter -0- ................. .that none of Ray's social security benefits areany exclusions for qualified U.S.
13. Enter the smaller of line 10 or line 11 .. .savings bond interest (Form 8815, line taxable. On line 3 of the worksheet, they enter
14. Enter one-half of line 13 .......... .14) or for adoption benefits (Form 8839, $29,750 ($15,500 + $14,000 + $250). On Form 15. Enter the smaller of line 2 or line 14 ... .line 30). ................... . -0- 1040A, they enter $5,600 on line 14a and -0- on 16. Multiply line 12 by 85% (.85). If line 12 is6. Add lines 2, 3, 4, and 5 ........... . 31,980 line 14b. zero, enter -0- ................ .7. Form 1040 filers: Enter the amount from
17. Add lines 15 and 16 ............. .Form 1040, lines 23 through 32, and any
Worksheet 1. 18. Multiply line 1 by 85% (.85) ........ .write-in adjustments you entered on the
Figuring Your Taxable Benefitsdotted line next to line 36. 19. Taxable benefits. Enter the smaller of line
17 or line 18. Also enter this amount onForm 1040A filers: Enter the amount
1. Enter the total amount from box 5 of ALL Form 1040, line 20b, or Form 1040A, linefrom Form 1040A, lines 16 and 17 .... . -0-
your Forms SSA-1099 and RRB-1099. 14b ....................... .8. Is the amount on line 7 less than the Also enter this amount on Form 1040, lineamount on line 6? 20a, or Form 1040A, line 14a ....... . $5,600
No.
STOP None of your social security benefits are 2. Enter one-half of line 1 ........... . 2,800 Example 3. Joe and Betty Johnson file a
taxable. Enter -0- on Form 1040, line 20b, or Form 3. Enter the total of the amounts from: joint return on Form 1040 for 2009. Joe is a1040A, line 14b. Form 1040: Lines 7, 8a, 9a, 10 through retired railroad worker and in 2009 received theYes. Subtract line 7 from line 6 ..... . 31,980 14, 15b, 16b, 17 through 19, and 21. social security equivalent benefit (SSEB) portion9. If you are: Form 1040A: Lines 7, 8a, 9a, 10, 11b,
of tier 1 railroad retirement benefits. Joe's Form12b, and 13 ................ . 29,750• Married filing jointly, enter $32,000 RRB-1099 shows $10,000 in box 5. Betty is a4. Enter the amount, if any, from Form• Single, head of household, qualifying 1040 or 1040A, line 8b .......... . -0- retired government worker and receives a fullywidow(er), or married filing separately
5. Form 1040 filers: Enter the total of any taxable pension of $38,000. They had $2,300 inand you lived apart from your spouse
exclusions/adjustments for:for all of 2009, enter $25,000 .... . 25,000 taxable interest income plus interest of $200 on
Note. If you are married filing separately • Qualified U.S. savings bond a qualified U.S. savings bond. The savings bond
and you lived with your spouse at any time interest (Form 8815, line 14), interest qualified for the exclusion. They figurein 2009, skip lines 9 through 16; multiply • Adoption benefits (Form 8839, line their taxable benefits by completing Worksheetline 8 by 85% (.85) and enter the result on 30), 1. On line 3 of the worksheet, they enter $40,300line 17. Then go to line 18. • Foreign earned income or housing ($38,000 + $2,300).10.Is the amount on line 9 less than the (Form 2555, lines 45 and 50, or
amount on line 8? Form 2555-EZ, line 18), and
Worksheet 1.• Certain income of bona fideNo.
STOP None of your benefits are Figuring Your Taxable Benefitsresidents of Americantaxable. Enter -0- on Form 1040, line 20b, Samoa (Form 4563, line 15)or on Form 1040A, line 14b. If you are 1. Enter the total amount from box 5 of ALLor Puerto Ricomarried filing separately and you lived your Forms SSA-1099 and RRB-1099.Form 1040A filers: Enter the total ofapart from your spouse for all of 2009, be Also enter this amount on Form 1040,any exclusion for qualified U.S. savingssure you entered ªDº to the right of the line 20a, or Form 1040A, line 14a ... . $10,000bond interest (Form 8815, line 14) or forword ªbenefitsº on Form 1040, line 20a, or 2. Enter one-half of line 1 .......... . 5,000adoption benefits (Form 8839, line 30) -0-on Form 1040A, line 14a. 3. Enter the total of the amounts from:6. Add lines 2, 3, 4, and 5 ........... . 32,550Yes. Subtract line 9 from line 8 ..... . 6,980 Form 1040: Lines 7, 8a, 9a, 107. Form 1040 filers: Enter the amount from11.Enter $12,000 if married filing jointly; through 14, 15b, 16b, 17 through 19,Form 1040, lines 23 through 32, and any$9,000 if single, head of household, and 21.write-in adjustments you entered on thequalifying widow(er), or married filing Form 1040A: Lines 7, 8a, 9a, 10, 11b,dotted line next to line 36.separately and you lived apart from your 12b, and 13 ............... . 40,300Form 1040A filers: Enter the amount fromspouse for all of 2009 ............ . 9,000 4. Enter the amount, if any, from FormForm 1040A, lines 16 and 17 ....... . 1,00012.Subtract line 11 from line 10. If zero or 1040 or 1040A, line 8b ......... . -0-8. Is the amount on line 7 less than theless, enter -0- ................. . -0- 5. Form 1040 filers: Enter the total of anyamount on line 6?13.Enter the smaller of line 10 or line 11 .. . 6,980 exclusions/adjustments for:
14.Enter one-half of line 13 .......... . 3,490 No.
STOP None of your benefits are taxable. Enter
-0- on Form 1040, line 20b, or Form 1040A, line15.Enter the smaller of line 2 or line 14 ... . 2,990
14b.16.Multiply line 12 by 85% (.85). If line 12 is
Yes. Subtract line 7 from line 6 ..... . 31,550zero, enter -0- ................. . -0-
Chapter 11 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement Benefits Page 85

Page 88 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Deduction $3,000 or less. If this deduction• Qualified U.S. savings bond
interest (Form 8815, line 14), is $3,000 or less, it is subject to theDeductions Related to• Adoption benefits (Form 8839, line 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that applies
30), to certain miscellaneous itemized deductions.Your Benefits• Foreign earned income or housing Claim it on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 23.(Form 2555, lines 45 and 50, or
Form 2555-EZ, line 18), and You may be entitled to deduct certain amounts Deduction more than $3,000. If this deduc-• Certain income of bona fide related to the benefits you receive. tion is more than $3,000, you should figure yourresidents of American tax two ways:Samoa (Form 4563, line 15) Disability payments. You may have receivedor Puerto Rico disability payments from your employer or an 1. Figure your tax for 2009 with the itemizedForm 1040A filers: Enter the total of
insurance company that you included as income deduction included on Schedule A, line 28.any exclusions for qualified U.S.
on your tax return in an earlier year. If yousavings bond interest (Form 8815, line 2. Figure your tax for 2009 in the following14) or for adoption benefits (Form received a lump-sum payment from SSA or steps.8839, line 30) .............. . 200 RRB, and you had to repay the employer or
6. Add lines 2, 3, 4, and 5 .......... . 45,500 insurance company for the disability payments, a. Figure the tax without the itemized de-7. Form 1040 filers: Enter the amount from you can take an itemized deduction for the part duction included on Schedule A, lineForm 1040, lines 23 through 32, and any of the payments you included in gross income inwrite-in adjustments you entered on the 28.the earlier year. If the amount you repay is moredotted line next to line 36.
b. For each year after 1983 for which partthan $3,000, you may be able to claim a taxForm 1040A filers: Enter the amount
from Form 1040A, lines 16 and 17 ... . -0- of the negative figure represents a re-credit instead. Claim the deduction or credit in
8. Is the amount on line 7 less than the the same way explained under Repayments payment of benefits, refigure your tax-
amount on line 6? More Than Gross Benefits, later. able benefits as if your total benefits for
No.
STOP None of your benefits are taxable. Enter the year were reduced by that part of
-0- on Form 1040, line 20b, or Form 1040A, line Legal expenses. You can usually deduct le- the negative figure. Then refigure the
14b. gal expenses that you pay or incur to produce or tax for that year.Yes. Subtract line 7 from line 6 .... . 45,500 collect taxable income or in connection with the
9.  If you are: c. Subtract the total of the refigured taxdetermination, collection, or refund of any tax. amounts in (b) from the total of your• Married filing jointly, enter $32,000 Legal expenses for collecting the taxable
• Single, head of household, qualifying actual tax amounts.part of your benefits are deductible as a miscel-widow(er), or married filing laneous itemized deduction on Schedule A d. Subtract the result in (c) from the resultseparately and you lived apart from
(Form 1040), line 23.your spouse for all of 2009, enter in (a).
$25,000 ................ . 32,000
Note. If you are married filing separately Compare the tax figured in methods (1) andRepayments More Thanand you lived with your spouse at any (2). Your tax for 2009 is the smaller of the twotime in 2009, skip lines 9 through 16; Gross Benefits amounts. If method (1) results in less tax, takemultiply line 8 by 85% (.85) and enter the
the itemized deduction on Schedule A (Formresult on line 17. Then go to line 18. In some situations, your Form SSA-1099 or10. Is the amount on line 9 less than the 1040), line 28. If method (2) results in less tax,Form RRB-1099 will show that the total benefitsamount on line 8? claim a credit for the amount from step 2(c)you repaid (box 4) are more than the gross above on Form 1040, line 70, and enter ªI.R.C.No.
STOP None of your benefits are benefits (box 3) you received. If this occurred, 1341º in the margin to the left of line 70. If bothtaxable. Enter -0- on Form 1040, line your net benefits in box 5 will be a negative
20b, or on Form 1040A, line 14b. If you methods produce the same tax, deduct the re-figure (a figure in parentheses) and none of yourare married filing separately and you payment on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 28.benefits will be taxable. Do not use a worksheetlived apart from your spouse for all of
in this case. If you receive more than one form, a2009, be sure you entered ªDº to the right
negative figure in box 5 of one form is used toof the word ªbenefitsº on Form 1040, line
20a, or on Form 1040A, line 14a. offset a positive figure in box 5 of another form
Yes. Subtract line 9 from line 8 .... . 13,500 for that same year.
11. Enter $12,000 if married filing jointly; If you have any questions about this negative$9,000 if single, head of household, figure, contact your local SSA office or your localqualifying widow(er), or married filing 12.RRB field office.separately and you lived apart from your
spouse for all of 2009 ........... . 12,000
12. Subtract line 11 from line 10. If zero or Joint return. If you and your spouse file a joint
less, enter -0- ................ . 1,500 return, and your Form SSA-1099 or RRB-1099
13. Enter the smaller of line 10 or line 11 . . 12,000 Other Incomehas a negative figure in box 5, but your spouse's
14. Enter one-half of line 13 ......... . 6,000 does not, subtract the amount in box 5 of your15. Enter the smaller of line 2 or line 14 .. . 5,000 form from the amount in box 5 of your spouse's16. Multiply line 12 by 85% (.85). If line 12 is form. You do this to get your net benefits whenzero, enter -0- ............... . 1,275 What's Newfiguring if your combined benefits are taxable.17. Add lines 15 and 16 ............ . 6,275
18. Multiply line 1 by 85% (.85) ....... . 8,500
Example. John and Mary file a joint return19. Taxable benefits. Enter the smaller of Economic recovery payment. Any economic
line 17 or line 18. Also enter this amount for 2009. John received Form SSA-1099 show- recovery payment you received is not taxable for
on Form 1040, line 20b, or Form 1040A, ing $3,000 in box 5. Mary also received Form federal income tax purposes. See the discus-line 14b ................... . $6,275 SSA-1099 and the amount in box 5 was ($500). sion under Other Income.
John and Mary will use $2,500 ($3,000 minus
Cash for clunkers. If you received a voucher$500) as the amount of their net benefits whenMore than 50% of Joe's net benefits are tax-
figuring if any of their combined benefits are to be applied toward the purchase of a qualifiedable because the income on line 8 of the work-
taxable. new vehicle in exchange for the trade in of ansheet ($45,500) is more than $44,000. Joe and
eligible used vehicle, the amount of the voucherBetty enter $10,000 on Form 1040, line 20a, and
Repayment of benefits received in an earlier is not taxable for federal income tax purposes.$6,275 on Form 1040, line 20b.
year. If the total amount shown in box 5 of all See the discussion under Other Income.
of your Forms SSA-1099 and RRB-1099 is a
Unemployment compensation. For 2009,negative figure, you can take an itemized deduc-
you do not have to pay tax on up to $2,400 oftion for the part of this negative figure that repre-
unemployment compensation per recipient. Seesents benefits you included in gross income in
Unemployment Benefits.an earlier year.
Page 86 Chapter 12 Other Income

Page 89 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Generally, you report this income on Sched- 2009-37 available at http://www.irs.gov/irb/
ule C (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From Busi- 2009-36_IRB/ar07.html.Introduction ness, or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040), Net Profit Form 1099-C. If a Federal GovernmentFrom Business . However, if the barter involvesYou must include on your return all items of agency, financial institution, or credit unionan exchange of something other than services,income you receive in the form of money, prop- cancels or forgives a debt you owe of $600 orsuch as in Example 3 below, you may have toerty, and services unless the tax law states that more, you will receive a Form 1099-C, Cancella-use another form or schedule instead.you do not include them. Some items, however, tion of Debt. The amount of the canceled debt isare only partly excluded from income. This shown in box 2.Example 1. You are a self-employed attor-chapter discusses many kinds of income and
ney who performs legal services for a client, a Interest included in canceled debt. If anyexplains whether they are taxable or nontax-
small corporation. The corporation gives you interest is forgiven and included in the amount ofable.
shares of its stock as payment for your services. canceled debt in box 2, the amount of interest
• Income that is taxable must be reported You must include the fair market value of the also will be shown in box 3. Whether or not you
on your tax return and is subject to tax. shares in your income on Schedule C (Form must include the interest portion of the canceled
1040) or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040) in the year debt in your income depends on whether the• Income that is nontaxable may have to be
you receive them. interest would be deductible if you paid it. Seeshown on your tax return but is not tax-
Deductible debt, under Exceptions, later.able. Example 2. You are self-employed and a If the interest would not be deductible (such
member of a barter club. The club uses ªcredit as interest on a personal loan), include in yourThis chapter begins with discussions of the unitsº as a means of exchange. It adds credit income the amount from Form 1099-C, box 2. Iffollowing income items. units to your account for goods or services you the interest would be deductible (such as on a
• Bartering. provide to members, which you can use to business loan), include in your income the net
purchase goods or services offered by other amount of the canceled debt (the amount shown• Canceled debts. members of the barter club. The club subtracts in box 2 less the interest amount shown in box
• Sales parties at which you are the host or credit units from your account when you receive 3).
hostess. goods or services from other members. You Discounted mortgage loan. If your financialmust include in your income the value of the• Life insurance proceeds. institution offers a discount for the early paymentcredit units that are added to your account, even of your mortgage loan, the amount of the dis-• Partnership income. though you may not actually receive goods or count is canceled debt. You must include theservices from other members until a later tax• S Corporation income. canceled amount in your income.year.
• Recoveries (including state income tax re- Mortgage relief upon sale or other disposi-
funds). Example 3. You own a small apartment tion. If you are personally liable for a mortgage
building. In return for 6 months rent-free use of (recourse debt), and you are relieved of the• Rents from personal property. an apartment, an artist gives you a work of art mortgage when you dispose of the property, you
• Repayments. she created. You must report as rental income may realize gain or loss up to the fair market
on Schedule E (Form 1040), Supplemental In- value of the property. To the extent the mort-• Royalties. come and Loss, the fair market value of the gage discharge exceeds the fair market value of
• Unemployment benefits. artwork, and the artist must report as income on the property, it is income from discharge of in-
Schedule C (Form 1040) or Schedule C-EZ debtedness unless it qualifies for exclusion• Welfare and other public assistance bene- (Form 1040) the fair rental value of the apart- under Excluded debt, later. Report any incomefits. ment. from discharge of indebtedness on nonbusiness
These discussions are followed by brief discus- debt that does not qualify for exclusion as otherForm 1099-B from barter exchange. If yousions of other income items. income on Form 1040, line 21.exchanged property or services through a barter
You may be able to exclude part of theexchange, Form 1099-B, Proceeds From BrokerUseful Items mortgage relief on your principal resi-and Barter Exchange Transactions, or a similar
You may want to see: dence. See Excluded debt, later.statement from the barter exchange should be
TIP
sent to you by February 16, 2010. It should show If you are not personally liable for a mortgagePublication the value of cash, property, services, credits, or (nonrecourse debt), and you are relieved of thescrip you received from exchanges during 2009. mortgage when you dispose of the property❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income The IRS also will receive a copy of Form 1099-B. (such as through foreclosure or repossession),❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of that relief is included in the amount you realize.Assets You may have a taxable gain if the amount you
realize exceeds your adjusted basis in the prop-❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses,
erty. Report any gain on nonbusiness propertyCanceled DebtsIncluding Capital Gains and Losses
as a capital gain.
❏ 4681 Canceled Debts, Foreclosures, See Publication 4681 for more information.Generally, if a debt you owe is canceled or
Repossessions, and forgiven, other than as a gift or bequest, you Stockholder debt. If you are a stockholder inAbandonments must include the canceled amount in your in- a corporation and the corporation cancels orcome. You have no income from the canceled forgives your debt to it, the canceled debt is adebt if it is intended as a gift to you. A debt constructive distribution that is generally divi-includes any indebtedness for which you are dend income to you. For more information, seeliable or which attaches to property you hold. Publication 542, Corporations.Bartering If the debt is a nonbusiness debt, report the If you are a stockholder in a corporation andcanceled amount on Form 1040, line 21. If it is a you cancel a debt owed to you by the corpora-Bartering is an exchange of property or services. business debt, report the amount on Schedule C tion, you generally do not realize income. This isYou must include in your income, at the time (Form 1040) or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040) (or because the canceled debt is considered as areceived, the fair market value of property or on Schedule F (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From contribution to the capital of the corporationservices you receive in bartering. If you ex- Farming, if the debt is farm debt and you are a equal to the amount of debt principal that youchange services with another person and you farmer). canceled.both have agreed ahead of time on the value of If the debt is a business debt, you may be
the services, that value will be accepted as fair able to elect to recognize the canceled debt in Repayment of canceled debt. If you included
market value unless the value can be shown to income over a 5 tax year period. For information a canceled amount in your income and later pay
be otherwise. on this election, see Revenue Procedure the debt, you may be able to file a claim for
Chapter 12 Other Income Page 87

Page 90 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
refund for the year the amount was included in debt is treated as a purchase price adjustment you can exclude part of each installment from
income. You can file a claim on Form 1040X if and reduces your basis in the property. your income.
the statute of limitations for filing a claim is still To determine the excluded part, divide theExcluded debt. Do not include a canceledopen. The statute of limitations generally does amount held by the insurance company (gener-debt in your gross income in the following situa-not end until 3 years after the due date of your ally the total lump sum payable at the death oftions.original return. the insured person) by the number of install-
ments to be paid. Include anything over this• The debt is canceled in a bankruptcy case
excluded part in your income as interest.under title 11 of the U.S. Code. See Publi-Exceptions cation 908, Bankruptcy Tax Guide. Surviving spouse. If your spouse died
There are several exceptions to the inclusion of before October 23, 1986, and insurance pro-• The debt is canceled when you are insol-
canceled debt in income. These are explained ceeds paid to you because of the death of yourvent. However, you cannot exclude any
next. spouse are received in installments, you canamount of canceled debt that is more than
exclude up to $1,000 a year of the interest in-the amount by which you are insolvent.Student loans. Certain student loans contain cluded in the installments. If you remarry, youSee Publication 908. a provision that all or part of the debt incurred to can continue to take the exclusion.attend the qualified educational institution will be • The debt is qualified farm debt and is can-
canceled if you work for a certain period of time celed by a qualified person. See chapter 3 Surrender of policy for cash. If you surren-
in certain professions for any of a broad class of of Publication 225, Farmer's Tax Guide. der a life insurance policy for cash, you must
employers. include in income any proceeds that are more• The debt is qualified real property busi-You do not have income if your student loan than the cost of the life insurance policy. Inness debt. See chapter 5 of Publicationis canceled after you agreed to this provision general, your cost (or investment in the contract)334. and then performed the services required. To is the total of premiums that you paid for the life
qualify, the loan must have been made by: • The cancellation is intended as a gift. insurance policy, less any refunded premiums,
rebates, dividends, or unrepaid loans that were• The debt is qualified principal residence1. The Federal Government, a state or local not included in your income.indebtedness. See Publication 525 for ad-government, or an instrumentality, agency,  You should receive a Form 1099-R showingditional information.or subdivision thereof, the total proceeds and the taxable part. Report
these amounts on lines 16a and 16b of Form2. A tax-exempt public benefit corporation
1040 or lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A.that has assumed control of a state,
county, or municipal hospital, and whose More information. For more information, seeemployees are considered public employ- Host or Hostess Life Insurance Proceeds in Publication 525.ees under state law, or
If you host a party or event at which sales are3. An educational institution Endowment Contractmade, any gift or gratuity you receive for giving
the event is a payment for helping a direct sellera. Under an agreement with an entity de- Proceedsmake sales. You must report this item as incomescribed in (1) or (2) that provided the
at its fair market value.funds to the institution to make the loan, An endowment contract is a policy under whichYour out-of-pocket party expenses are sub-or you are paid a specified amount of money on aject to the 50% limit for meal and entertainment certain date unless you die before that date, inb. As part of a program of the institution expenses. These expenses are deductible as which case, the money is paid to your desig-designed to encourage students to miscellaneous itemized deductions subject to nated beneficiary. Endowment proceeds paid inserve in occupations or areas with un- the 2%-of-AGI limit on Schedule A (Form 1040), a lump sum to you at maturity are taxable only ifmet needs and under which the serv- but only up to the amount of income you receive the proceeds are more than the cost of theices provided are for or under the for giving the party. policy. To determine your cost, subtract anydirection of a governmental unit or a For more information about the 50% limit for amount that you previously received under thetax-exempt section 501(c)(3) organiza- meal and entertainment expenses, see chapter contract and excluded from your income fromtion. Section 501(c)(3) organizations 26. the total premiums (or other consideration) paidare defined in chapter 24.
for the contract. Include the part of the lump sum
payment that is more than your cost in yourA loan to refinance a qualified student loan
income.also will qualify if it was made by an educational
Life Insuranceinstitution or a tax-exempt 501(a) organization
under its program designed as described in Accelerated DeathProceeds(3)(b) above.
Benefits
Education loan repayment assistance. Life insurance proceeds paid to you because of
Education loan repayments made to you by the Certain amounts paid as accelerated death ben-the death of the insured person are not taxable
National Health Service Corps Loan Repayment efits under a life insurance contract or viaticalunless the policy was turned over to you for a
Program (NHSC Loan Repayment Program) or settlement before the insured's death are ex-price. This is true even if the proceeds were paid
a state education loan repayment program eligi- cluded from income if the insured is terminally orunder an accident or health insurance policy or
ble for funds under the Public Health Service Act chronically ill.an endowment contract. However, interest in-
are not taxable if you agree to provide primary come received as a result of life insurance pro- Viatical settlement. This is the sale or assign-health services in health professional shortage ceeds may be taxable. ment of any part of the death benefit under a lifeareas.
insurance contract to a viatical settlement pro-Proceeds not received in installments. If
Deductible debt. You do not have income vider. A viatical settlement provider is a persondeath benefits are paid to you in a lump sum or
from the cancellation of a debt if your payment of who regularly engages in the business of buyingother than at regular intervals, include in your
the debt would be deductible. This exception or taking assignment of life insurance contractsincome only the benefits that are more than the
applies only if you use the cash method of ac- on the lives of insured individuals who are termi-amount payable to you at the time of the insured
counting. For more information, see chapter 5 of nally or chronically ill and who meets the require-person's death. If the benefit payable at death is
Publication 334, Tax Guide for Small Business. ments of section 101(g)(2)(B) of the Internalnot specified, you include in your income the
Revenue Code.benefit payments that are more than the presentPrice reduced after purchase. Generally, if value of the payments at the time of death.the seller reduces the amount of debt you owe Exclusion for terminal illness.   Accelerated
for property you purchased, you do not have Proceeds received in installments. If you re- death benefits are fully excludable if the insured
income from the reduction. The reduction of the ceive life insurance proceeds in installments, is a terminally ill individual. This is a person who
Page 88 Chapter 12 Other Income

Page 91 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
has been certified by a physician as having an share of the partnership's income, deductions, Federal income tax refund. Refunds of fed-
illness or physical condition that can reasonably credits, and tax preference items. eral income taxes are not included in your in-
be expected to result in death within 24 months come because they are never allowed as aKeep Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) forfrom the date of the certification. deduction from income.your records. Do not attach it to your
Form 1040.
RECORDS State tax refund. If you received a state orExclusion for chronic illness. If the insured
local income tax refund (or credit or offset) inis a chronically ill individual who is not terminally For more information on partnerships, see
2009, you generally must include it in income ifill, accelerated death benefits paid on the basis Publication 541, Partnerships.
you deducted the tax in an earlier year. Theof costs incurred for qualified long-term care
payer should send Form 1099-G, Certain Gov-Qualified joint venture. If you and yourservices are fully excludable. Accelerated death
ernment Payments, to you by February 1, 2010.spouse each materially participate as the onlybenefits paid on a per diem  or other periodic
The IRS also will receive a copy of the Formmembers of a jointly owned and operated busi-basis are excludable up to a limit. This limit
1099-G. If you file Form 1040, use the State andness, and you file a joint return for the tax year,applies to the total of the accelerated death
Local Income Tax Refund worksheet in the 2009you can make a joint election to be treated as abenefits and any periodic payments received
Form 1040 instructions for line 10 to figure thequalified joint venture instead of a partnership.from long-term care insurance contracts. For
amount (if any) to include in your income. SeeTo make this election, you must divide all itemsinformation on the limit and the definitions of
Publication 525 for when you must use anotherof income, gain, loss, deduction, and credit at-chronically ill individual, qualified long-term care
worksheet.tributable to the business between you and yourservices, and long-term care insurance con-
If you could choose to deduct for a tax yearspouse in accordance with your respective inter-tracts, see Long-Term Care Insurance Con-
either:ests in the venture. Each of you must file atracts under Sickness and Injury Benefits in
separate Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (FormPublication 525. • State and local income taxes, or1040).
Exception. The exclusion does not apply to • State and local general sales taxes, then
any amount paid to a person (other than the the maximum refund that you may have to in-insured) who has an insurable interest in the life clude in income is limited to the excess of the taxof the insured because the insured: S Corporation Income you chose to deduct for that year over the tax
• Is a director, officer, or employee of the you did not choose to deduct for that year. For
person, or In general, an S corporation does not pay tax on examples, see Publication 525.
its income. Instead, the income, losses, deduc-• Has a financial interest in the person's tions, and credits of the corporation are passed Mortgage interest refund. If you received abusiness. through to the shareholders based on each refund or credit in 2009 of mortgage interest paid
shareholder's pro rata share. in an earlier year, the amount should be shown
Form 8853. To claim an exclusion for acceler- in box 3 of your Form 1098, Mortgage Interest
Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S). An S corpora-ated death benefits made on a per diem or other Statement. Do not subtract the refund amount
tion must file a return on Form 1120S, U.S.periodic basis, you must file Form 8853, Archer from the interest you paid in 2009. You may
Income Tax Return for an S Corporation, andMSAs and Long-term Care Insurance Con- have to include it in your income under the rules
send Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S) to eachtracts, with your return. You do not have to file explained in the following discussions.
shareholder. In addition, the S corporation willForm 8853 to exclude accelerated death bene-
send each shareholder a copy of the Share- Interest on recovery. Interest on any of thefits paid on the basis of actual expenses in-
holder's Instructions for Schedule K-1 (Form amounts you recover must be reported as inter-curred.
1120S) to help each shareholder report his or est income in the year received. For example,
her share of the S corporation's income, losses, report any interest you received on state or localPublic Safety Officer Killed credits, and deductions. income tax refunds on Form 1040, line 8a.
in the Line of Duty Keep Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S) for Recovery and expense in same year. If theyour records. Do not attach it to your refund or other recovery and the expense occurIf you are a survivor of a public safety officer who Form 1040.
RECORDS in the same year, the recovery reduces the de-was killed in the line of duty, you may be able to
duction or credit and is not reported as income.exclude from income certain amounts you re- For more information on S corporations and
ceive. their shareholders, see Instructions for Form Recovery for 2 or more years. If you receive   For this purpose, the term public safety 1120S. a refund or other recovery that is for amountsofficer includes law enforcement officers, you paid in 2 or more separate years, you mustfirefighters, chaplains, and rescue squad and allocate, on a pro rata  basis, the recoveredambulance crew members. For more informa- amount between the years in which you paid it.tion, see Publication 559, Survivors, Executors, Recoveries This allocation is necessary to determine theand Administrators. amount of recovery from any earlier years and to
A recovery is a return of an amount you de- determine the amount, if any, of your allowable
ducted or took a credit for in an earlier year. The deduction for this item for the current year. For
most common recoveries are refunds, reim- information on how to compute the allocation,
Partnership Income bursements, and rebates of deductions itemized see Recoveries in Publication 525.
on Schedule A (Form 1040). You also may have
A partnership generally is not a taxable entity. recoveries of non-itemized deductions (such as
Itemized DeductionThe income, gains, losses, deductions, and payments on previously deducted bad debts)
credits of a partnership are passed through to and recoveries of items for which you previously Recoveries
the partners based on each partner's distributive claimed a tax credit.
share of these items. For more information, see If you recover any amount that you deducted in
Tax benefit rule. You must include a recoveryPublication 541. an earlier year on Schedule A (Form 1040), you
in your income in the year you receive it up to the generally must include the full amount of the
Schedule K-1 (Form 1065). Although a part- amount by which the deduction or credit you recovery in your income in the year you receive
nership generally pays no tax, it must file an took for the recovered amount reduced your tax it.
information return on Form 1065, U.S. Return of in the earlier year. For this purpose, any in-
Partnership Income, and send Schedule K-1 crease to an amount carried over to the current Where to report. Enter your state or local in-
(Form 1065) to each partner. In addition, the year that resulted from the deduction or credit is come tax refund on Form 1040, line 10, and the
partnership will send each partner a copy of the considered to have reduced your tax in the ear- total of all other recoveries as other income on
Partner's Instructions for Schedule K-1 (Form lier year. For more information, see Publication Form 1040, line 21. You cannot use Form 1040A
1065) to help each partner report his or her 525. or Form 1040EZ.
Chapter 12 Other Income Page 89

Page 92 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Standard deduction limit. You generally are Example. During 2008 you paid $1,700 for may be able to take a credit against your tax for
medical expenses. From this amount you sub- the year in which you repaid it. Generally, youallowed to claim the standard deduction if you do
tracted $1,500, which was 7.5% of your adjusted can claim a deduction or credit only if the repay-not itemize your deductions. Only your itemized
gross income. Your actual medical expense de- ment qualifies as an expense or loss incurred indeductions that are more than your standard
duction was $200. In 2009, you received a $500 your trade or business or in a for-profit transac-deduction are subject to the recovery rule (un-
reimbursement from your medical insurance for tion.less you are required to itemize your deduc-
your 2008 expenses. The only amount of thetions). If your total deductions on the earlier year Type of deduction. The type of deduction you$500 reimbursement that must be included inreturn were not more than your income for that are allowed in the year of repayment dependsyour income for 2009 is $200 Ðthe amount ac-year, include in your income this year the lesser on the type of income you included in the earliertually deducted.of: year. You generally deduct the repayment on
the same form or schedule on which you previ-• Your recoveries, or Other recoveries. See Recoveries in Publica-
ously reported it as income. For example, if yoution 525 if:• The amount by which your itemized de- reported it as self-employment income, deduct itductions exceeded the standard deduc- • You have recoveries of items other than as a business expense on Schedule C or Sched-tion. itemized deductions, or ule C-EZ (Form 1040) or Schedule F (Form
1040). If you reported it as a capital gain, deduct• You received a recovery for an item for
it as a capital loss on Schedule D (Form 1040). IfExample. For 2008, you filed a joint return. which you claimed a tax credit (other than
you reported it as wages, unemployment com-Your taxable income was $60,000 and you were investment credit or foreign tax credit) in a
pensation, or other nonbusiness income, deductnot entitled to any tax credits. Your standard prior year.
it as a miscellaneous itemized deduction ondeduction was $11,400, and you had itemized
Schedule A (Form 1040).deductions of $13,000. In 2009, you received
the following recoveries for amounts deducted Repaid social security benefits. If you re-on your 2008 return: paid social security benefits or equivalent rail-Rents from Personal road retirement benefits, see Repayment ofMedical expenses ............. . $200 benefits in chapter 11.State and local income tax refund ... . 400 Property
Refund of mortgage interest ....... . 325 Repayment of $3,000 or less. If the amount
you repaid was $3,000 or less, deduct it fromIf you rent out personal property, such as equip-Total recoveries ............... . $925 your income in the year you repaid it. If you mustment or vehicles, how you report your income
deduct it as a miscellaneous itemized deduction,None of the recoveries were more than the de- and expenses is generally determined by:
enter it on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 23.ductions taken for 2008. The difference between • Whether or not the rental activity is a busi-the state and local income tax you deducted and Repayment over $3,000. If the amount youness, andyour local general sales tax was more than repaid was more than $3,000, you can deduct• Whether or not the rental activity is con-$400. the repayment (as explained under Type of de-ducted for profit.Your total recoveries are less than the duction, earlier). However, you can choose in-
amount by which your itemized deductions ex- stead to take a tax credit for the year ofGenerally, if your primary purpose is income or
ceeded the standard deduction ($13,000 − repayment if you included the income under aprofit and you are involved in the rental activity
11,400 = $1,600), so you must include your total claim of right. This means that at the time youwith continuity and regularity, your rental activity
recoveries in your income for 2009. Report the included the income, it appeared that you had anis a business. See Publication 535, Business
state and local income tax refund of $400 on unrestricted right to it. If you qualify for thisExpenses, for details on deducting expenses for
Form 1040, line 10, and the balance of your choice, figure your tax under both methods andboth business and not-for-profit activities.
recoveries, $525, on Form 1040, line 21. compare the results. Use the method (deduction
or credit) that results in less tax.Reporting business income and expenses.
Standard deduction for earlier years. To de- If you are in the business of renting personal Method 1. Figure your tax for 2009 claimingtermine if amounts recovered in 2009 must be property, report your income and expenses on a deduction for the repaid amount. If you mustincluded in your income, you must know the Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040). The deduct it as a miscellaneous itemized deduction,standard deduction for your filing status for the form instructions have information on how to enter it on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 28.year the deduction was claimed. Standard de- complete them.
duction amounts for 2008, 2007, and 2006, are Method 2. Figure your tax for 2009 claiming
Reporting nonbusiness income. If you arein Publication 525. a credit for the repaid amount. Follow these
not in the business of renting personal property, steps.
report your rental income on Form 1040, line 21.Example. You filed a joint return on Form
1. Figure your tax for 2009 without deductingList the type and amount of the income on the1040 for 2008 with taxable income of $45,000.
the repaid amount.dotted line next to line 21.Your itemized deductions were $11,550. The
standard deduction that you could have claimed 2. Refigure your tax from the earlier yearReporting nonbusiness expenses. If youwas $10,900. In 2009, you recovered $2,100 of without including in income the amountrent personal property for profit, include youryour 2008 itemized deductions. None of the re- you repaid in 2009.rental expenses in the total amount you enter oncoveries were more than the actual deductions
Form 1040, line 36. Also enter the amount and 3. Subtract the tax in (2) from the tax shownfor 2008. Include $650 of the recoveries in your
ªPPRº on the dotted line next to line 36. on your return for the earlier year. This is2009 income. This is the smaller of your recov-
If you do not rent personal property for profit, the credit.eries ($2,100) or the amount by which your item-
your deductions are limited and you cannot re-ized deductions were more than the standard 4. Subtract the answer in (3) from the tax forport a loss to offset other income. See  Activitydeduction ($11,550 − 10,900 = $650). 2009 figured without the deduction (Stepnot for profit, under Other Income, later. 1).
Recovery limited to deduction. You do not If method 1 results in less tax, deduct theinclude in your income any amount of your re- amount repaid. If method 2 results in less tax,covery that is more than the amount you de- claim the credit figured in (3) above on Formducted in the earlier year. The amount you Repayments 1040, line 70, and enter ªI.R.C. 1341º in theinclude in your income is limited to the smaller column to the right of line 70.of: If you had to repay an amount that you included An example of this computation can be foundin your income in an earlier year, you may be• The amount deducted on Schedule A in Publication 525.able to deduct the amount repaid from your(Form 1040), or income for the year in which you repaid it. Or, if
• The amount recovered. the amount you repaid is more than $3,000, you
Page 90 Chapter 12 Other Income

Page 93 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tax withholding. You can choose to have
Royalties federal income tax withheld from your unem-Unemployment ployment compensation. To make this choice,Royalties from copyrights, patents, and oil, gas, complete Form W-4V, Voluntary WithholdingBenefitsand mineral properties are taxable as ordinary Request, and give it to the paying office. Tax will
income. be withheld at 10% of your payment.The tax treatment of unemployment benefits youYou generally report royalties in Part I of If you do not choose to have tax with-receive depends on the type of program payingSchedule E (Form 1040). However, if you hold held from your unemployment com-the benefits.
an operating oil, gas, or mineral interest or are in pensation, you may be liable for
CAUTION
!
business as a self-employed writer, inventor, estimated tax. If you do not pay enough tax,Unemployment compensation. For 2009,
artist, etc., report your income and expenses on either through withholding or estimated tax, or ayou must include in income all unemployment
Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040). combination of both, you may have to pay acompensation you received that is more than
penalty. For more information on estimated tax,$2,400. You should receive a Form 1099-G
see chapter 4.showing in box 1 the total unemployment com-Copyrights and patents. Royalties from
pensation paid to you in 2009. You must sub-copyrights on literary, musical, or artistic works, Supplemental unemployment benefits.tract $2,400 from that amount to figure howand similar property, or from patents on inven- Benefits received from an employer-financedmuch of your unemployment compensation istions, are amounts paid to you for the right to use fund (to which the employees did not contribute)taxable and must be reported on line 19 of Formyour work over a specified period of time. Royal- are not unemployment compensation. They are1040, line 13 of Form 1040A, or line 3 of Formties generally are based on the number of units taxable as wages and are subject to withholding1040EZ. Do not enter less than zero. If married for income tax. They may be subject to socialsold, such as the number of books, tickets to a filing jointly, include any unemployment com- security and Medicare taxes. For more informa-performance, or machines sold. pensation received by your spouse that is more tion, see Supplemental Unemployment Benefitsthan $2,400. in section 5 of Publication 15-A, Employer'sOil, gas, and minerals. Royalty income from Types of unemployment compensation. Supplemental Tax Guide. Report these pay-
oil, gas, and mineral properties is the amount ments on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A orUnemployment compensation generally in-
you receive when natural resources are ex- on line 1 of Form 1040EZ.cludes any amount received under an unem-
tracted from your property. The royalties are ployment compensation law of the United States Repayment of benefits. You may have tobased on units, such as barrels, tons, etc., and or of a state. It includes the following benefits. repay some of your supplemental unemploy-are paid to you by a person or company who ment benefits to qualify for trade readjustment• Benefits paid by a state or the District ofleases the property from you. allowances under the Trade Act of 1974. If youColumbia from the Federal Unemployment
repay supplemental unemployment benefits inDepletion. If you are the owner of an eco- Trust Fund.
the same year you receive them, reduce thenomic interest in mineral deposits or oil and gas • State unemployment insurance benefits. total benefits by the amount you repay. If youwells, you can recover your investment through
repay the benefits in a later year, you must• Railroad unemployment compensationthe depletion allowance. For information on this
include the full amount of the benefits receivedbenefits.subject, see chapter 9 of Publication 535.
in your income for the year you received them.• Disability payments from a governmentCoal and iron ore. Under certain circum- Deduct the repayment in the later year as anprogram paid as a substitute for unem-stances, you can treat amounts you receive adjustment to gross income on Form 1040. (Youployment compensation. (Amounts re-from the disposal of coal and iron ore as pay- cannot use Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ.) In-ceived as workers' compensation forments from the sale of a capital asset, rather clude the repayment on Form 1040, line 36, andinjuries or illness are not unemployment enter ªSub-Pay TRAº and the amount on thethan as royalty income. For information about compensation. See chapter 5 for more in- dotted line next to line 36. If the amount yougain or loss from the sale of coal and iron ore, formation.) repay in a later year is more than $3,000, yousee Publication 544.
may be able to take a credit against your tax for• Trade readjustment allowances under theSale of property interest. If you sell your the later year instead of deducting the amountTrade Act of 1974.complete interest in oil, gas, or mineral rights, repaid. For more information on this, see Repay-• Unemployment assistance under the Dis-the amount you receive is considered payment ments, earlier.aster Relief and Emergency Assistancefor the sale of section 1231 property, not royalty
Private unemployment fund. Unemploy-Act. income. Under certain circumstances, the sale ment benefit payments from a private (nonun-is subject to capital gain or loss treatment on ion) fund to which you voluntarily contribute areGovernmental program. If you contributeSchedule D (Form 1040). For more information taxable only if the amounts you receive are moreto a governmental unemployment compensa-on selling section 1231 property, see chapter 3 than your total payments into the fund. Reporttion program and your contributions are not de-of Publication 544. the taxable amount on Form 1040, line 21.ductible, amounts you receive under the
If you retain a royalty, an overriding royalty, program are not included as unemployment Payments by a union. Benefits paid to you asor a net profit interest in a mineral property for compensation until you recover your contribu- an unemployed member of a union from regularthe life of the property, you have made a lease or tions. If you deducted all of your contributions to union dues are included in your income on Forma sublease, and any cash you receive for the the program, the entire amount you receive 1040, line 21. However, if you contribute to aunder the program is included in your income.assignment of other interests in the property is special union fund and your payments to theordinary income subject to a depletion allow- fund are not deductible, the unemployment ben-Repayment of unemployment compensa-ance. efits you receive from the fund are includible intion. If you repaid in 2009 unemployment
your income only to the extent they are morecompensation you received in 2009, subtractPart of future production sold. If you own
than your contributions.the amount you repaid from the total amount youmineral property but sell part of the future pro-
received and enter the difference on line 19 ofduction, you generally treat the money you re- Guaranteed annual wage. Payments you re-Form 1040, line 13 of Form 1040A, or line 3 ofceive from the buyer at the time of the sale as a ceive from your employer during periods of un-Form 1040EZ. On the dotted line next to yourloan from the buyer. Do not include it in your employment, under a union agreement thatentry enter ªRepaidº and the amount you repaid.income or take depletion based on it. guarantees you full pay during the year, areIf you repaid unemployment compensation in taxable as wages. Include them on line 7 ofWhen production begins, you include all the 2009 that you included in income in an earlier Form 1040 or Form 1040A or on line 1 of Formproceeds in your income, deduct all the produc- year, you can deduct the amount repaid on 1040EZ.tion expenses, and deduct depletion from that Schedule A (Form 1040), line 23, if you itemize
amount to arrive at your taxable income from the deductions. If the amount is more than $3,000, State employees. Payments similar to a
see Repayments, earlier.property. state's unemployment compensation may be
Chapter 12 Other Income Page 91

Page 94 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
made by the state to its employees who are not 1. To reimburse or pay reasonable and nec- for whom they are paid. This includes basic (part
covered by the state's unemployment compen- essary personal, family, living, or funeral A (Hospital Insurance Benefits for the Aged))
sation law. Although the payments are fully tax- expenses that result from a qualified disas- and supplementary (part B (Supplementary
able, do not report them as unemployment ter; Medical Insurance Benefits for the Aged)).
compensation. Report these payments on Form 2. To reimburse or pay reasonable and nec- Old-age, survivors, and disability insurance1040, line 21. essary expenses incurred for the repair or benefits (OASDI). OASDI payments under
rehabilitation of your home or repair or re- section 202 of title II of the Social Security Act
placement of its contents to the extent it is are not includible in the gross income of the
due to a qualified disaster; individuals to whom they are paid. This applies
Welfare and Other to old-age insurance benefits, and insurance3. By a person engaged in the furnishing or benefits for wives, husbands, children, widows,sale of transportation as a common carrierPublic Assistance widowers, mothers and fathers, and parents, asbecause of the death or personal physical well as the lump-sum death payment.injuries incurred as a result of a qualifiedBenefits disaster; or Nutrition Program for the Elderly. Food
benefits you receive under the Nutrition Pro-Do not include in your income governmental 4. By a federal, state, or local government, or
gram for the Elderly are not taxable. If you pre-benefit payments from a public welfare fund agency, or instrumentality in connection
pare and serve free meals for the program,based upon need, such as payments due to with a qualified disaster in order to pro-
include in your income as wages the cash payblindness. Payments from a state fund for the mote the general welfare.
you receive, even if you are also eligible for foodvictims of crime should not be included in the You can exclude this amount only to the extent benefits.victims' incomes if they are in the nature of any expense it pays for is not paid for by insur-welfare payments. Do not deduct medical ex- Payments to reduce cost of winter energy.ance or otherwise. The exclusion does not applypenses that are reimbursed by such a fund. You Payments made by a state to qualified people toif you were a participant or conspirator in amust include in your income any welfare pay- reduce their cost of winter energy use are notterrorist action or his or her representative.ments that are compensation for services or that taxable.A qualified disaster is:are obtained fraudulently.
• A disaster which results from a terrorist or
Alternative trade adjustment assistance military action;
(ATAA) payments. Payments you receive • A federally declared disaster; or Other Incomefrom a state agency under the Demonstration
Project for Alternative Trade Adjustment Assis- • A disaster which results from an accident The following brief discussions are arranged intance for Older Workers (ATAA) must be in- involving a common carrier, or from any alphabetical order. Income items that are dis-cluded in your income. The state must send you other event, which is determined to be cat- cussed in greater detail in another publicationForm 1099-G to advise you of the amount you astrophic by the Secretary of the Treasury include a reference to that publication.should include in income. The amount should be or his or her delegate.
reported on Form 1040, line 21. Activity not for profit. You must include on
For amounts paid under item (4), a disaster is your return income from an activity from whichPersons with disabilities. If you have a disa- qualified if it is determined by an applicable you do not expect to make a profit. An examplebility, you must include in income compensation federal, state, or local authority to warrant assis- of this type of activity is a hobby or a farm youyou receive for services you perform unless the tance from the federal, state, or local govern- operate mostly for recreation and pleasure.compensation is otherwise excluded. However, ment, agency, or instrumentality. Enter this income on Form 1040, line 21. Deduc-you do not include in income the value of goods, tions for expenses related to the activity areDisaster mitigation payments. You also canservices, and cash that you receive, not in return limited. They cannot total more than the incomeexclude from income any amount you receivefor your services, but for your training and reha- you report and can be taken only if you itemizethat is a qualified disaster mitigation payment.bilitation because you have a disability. Excluda- deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). SeeLike qualified disaster relief payments, qualifiedble amounts include payments for transportation Not-for-Profit Activities in chapter 1 of Publica-disaster mitigation payments are also most com-and attendant care, such as interpreter services tion 535 for information on whether an activity ismonly paid to you in the period immediatelyfor the deaf, reader services for the blind, and considered carried on for a profit.following damage to property as a result of aservices to help mentally retarded persons do
natural disaster. However, disaster mitigationtheir work. Alaska Permanent Fund dividend. If you re-
payments are grants you use to mitigate (reduce ceived a payment from Alaska's mineral income
the severity of) potential damage from futureDisaster relief grants. Do not include fund (Alaska Permanent Fund dividend), report
natural disasters. They are paid to you throughpost-disaster grants received under the Disaster it as income on line 21 of Form 1040, line 13 of
state and local governments based on the provi-Relief and Emergency Assistance Act in your Form 1040A, or line 3 of Form 1040EZ. The
sions of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Reliefincome if the grant payments are made to help state of Alaska sends each recipient a document
and Emergency Assistance Act or the Nationalyou meet necessary expenses or serious needs that shows the amount of the payment with the
Flood Insurance Act.for medical, dental, housing, personal property, check. The amount also is reported to IRS.
You cannot increase the basis or adjustedtransportation, or funeral expenses. Do not de-
Alimony. Include in your income on Formbasis of your property for improvements madeduct casualty losses or medical expenses that
1040, line 11, any alimony payments you re-with nontaxable disaster mitigation payments.are specifically reimbursed by these disaster
ceive. Amounts you receive for child support arerelief grants. If you have deducted a casualty Home Affordable Modification Program not income to you. Alimony and child supportloss for the loss of your personal residence and (HAMP). If you benefit from payments are discussed in chapter 18.you later receive a disaster relief grant for the Pay-for-Performance Success Payments underloss of the same residence, you may have to Bribes. If you receive a bribe, include it in yourHAMP, the payments are not taxable.include part or all of the grant in your taxable income.income. See Recoveries, earlier. Unemploy- Mortgage assistance payments. Payments Campaign contributions. These contribu-ment assistance payments under the Act are made under section 235 of the National Housing tions are not income to a candidate unless theytaxable unemployment compensation. See Un- Act for mortgage assistance are not included in are diverted to his or her personal use. To beemployment compensation . under Unemploy- the homeowner's income. Interest paid for the exempt from tax, the contributions must bement Benefits, earlier. homeowner under the mortgage assistance pro- spent for campaign purposes or kept in a fundgram cannot be deducted.Disaster relief payments. You can exclude for use in future campaigns. However, interest
from income any amount you receive that is a Medicare. Medicare benefits received under earned on bank deposits, dividends received on
qualified disaster relief payment. A qualified dis- title XVIII of the Social Security Act are not contributed securities, and net gains realized on
aster relief payment is an amount paid to you: includible in the gross income of the individuals sales of contributed securities are taxable and
Page 92 Chapter 12 Other Income

Page 95 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
must be reported on Form 1120-POL, U.S. In- 7. Attorney fees and costs (including contin- Energy conservation subsidies. You can
come Tax Return for Certain Political Organiza- exclude from gross income any subsidy pro-gent fees) where the underlying recovery
tions. Excess campaign funds transferred to an vided, either directly or indirectly, by public utili-is included in gross income.
office account must be included in the office- ties for the purchase or installation of an energyDo not include in your income compensatoryholder's income on Form 1040, line 21, in the conservation measure for a dwelling unit.damages for personal physical injury or physicalyear transferred. Energy conservation measure. This in-sickness (whether received in a lump sum or
cludes installations or modifications that are pri-installments).Car pools. Do not include in your income marily designed to reduce consumption ofamounts you receive from the passengers for Emotional distress. Emotional distress it- electricity or natural gas, or improve the man-driving a car in a car pool to and from work. self is not a physical injury or physical sickness, agement of energy demand.These amounts are considered reimbursement but damages you receive for emotional distress
for your expenses. However, this rule does not Dwelling unit. This includes a house, apart-due to a physical injury or sickness are treated
apply if you have developed car pool arrange- ment, condominium, mobile home, boat, or simi-as received for the physical injury or sickness.
ments into a profit-making business of transport- lar property. If a building or structure containsDo not include them in your income.
ing workers for hire. both dwelling and other units, any subsidy mustIf the emotional distress is due to a personal be properly allocated.injury that is not due to a physical injury orCash for clunkers. If you received a voucher sickness (for example, employment discrimina- Estate and trust income.     An estate or trust,to be applied toward the purchase of a qualified tion or injury to reputation), you must include the unlike a partnership, may have to pay federalnew vehicle in exchange for the trade-in of an damages in your income, except for any dam- income tax. If you are a beneficiary of an estateeligible used vehicle, the amount of the voucher ages you receive for medical care due to that or trust, you may be taxed on your share of itsis not considered income. However, your basis emotional distress. Emotional distress includes income distributed or required to be distributedin the new vehicle must be reduced by the physical symptoms that result from emotional to you. However, there is never a double tax.amount of the voucher. distress, such as headaches, insomnia, and Estates and trusts file their returns on Form
stomach disorders. 1041, U.S. Income Tax Return for Estates andCash rebates. A cash rebate you receive from
Trusts, and your share of the income is reporteda dealer or manufacturer of an item you buy is Deduction for costs involved in unlawful to you on Schedule K-1 (Form 1041).not income, but you must reduce your basis by discrimination suits. You may be able to de-
the amount of the rebate. Current income required to be distributed.duct attorney fees and court costs paid to re-
If you are the beneficiary of an estate or trustcover a judgment or settlement for a claim ofExample. You buy a new car for $24,000 that must distribute all of its current income, youunlawful discrimination under various provisionscash and receive a $2,000 rebate check from must report your share of the distributable netof federal, state, and local law listed in Internalthe manufacturer. The $2,000 is not income to income, whether or not you actually received it.Revenue Code section 62(e), a claim againstyou. Your basis in the car is $22,000. This is the the United States government, or a claim under Current income not required to be distrib-basis on which you figure gain or loss if you sell section 1862(b)(3)(A) of the Social Security Act. uted.  If you are the beneficiary of an estate orthe car and depreciation if you use it for busi- For more information, see Publication 525. trust and the fiduciary has the choice of whetherness.
to distribute all or part of the current income, you
Credit card insurance. Generally, if you re- must report:Casualty insurance and other reimburse- ceive benefits under a credit card disability orments. You generally should not report these • All income that is required to be distributedunemployment insurance plan, the benefits arereimbursements on your return unless you are to you, whether or not it is actually distrib-taxable to you. These plans make the minimumfiguring gain or loss from the casualty or theft. uted, plusmonthly payment on your credit card account ifSee chapter 25, for more information. you cannot make the payment due to injury, • All other amounts actually paid or credited
illness, disability, or unemployment. Report on to you,Child support payments. You should not re-
Form 1040, line 21, the amount of benefits youport these payments on your return. See chapter up to the amount of your share of distributablereceived during the year that is more than the18 for more information. net income.amount of the premiums you paid during the
year.Court awards and damages. To determine if How to report. Treat each item of income
settlement amounts you receive by compromise the same way that the estate or trust would treat
or judgment must be included in your income, it. For example, if a trust's dividend income isDown payment assistance. If you purchase
you must consider the item that the settlement distributed to you, you report the distribution asa home and receive assistance from a nonprofit
replaces. The character of the income as ordi- dividend income on your return. The same rulecorporation to make the down payment, that
nary income or capital gain depends on the applies to distributions of tax-exempt interestassistance is not included in your income. If the
nature of the underlying claim. Include the fol- and capital gains.corporation qualifies as a tax-exempt charitable
lowing as ordinary income. The fiduciary of the estate or trust must tellorganization, the assistance is treated as a gift
you the type of items making up your share ofand is included in your basis of the house. If the1. Interest on any award. the estate or trust income and any credits youcorporation does not qualify, the assistance is
are allowed on your individual income tax return.treated as a rebate or reduction of the purchase2. Compensation for lost wages or lost profits
price and is not included in your basis.in most cases. Losses. Losses of estates and trusts gener-
ally are not deductible by the beneficiaries.3. Punitive damages, in most cases. It does Economic recovery payment. If you re-not matter if they relate to a physical injury Grantor trust. Income earned by a grantorceived an economic recovery payment, such asor physical sickness. trust is taxable to the grantor, not the benefi-the payments of $250 made to certain recipients
ciary, if the grantor keeps certain control over4. Amounts received in settlement of pension of social security, SSI, railroad retirement, or
the trust. (The grantor is the one who transferredrights (if you did not contribute to the plan). certain veterans' benefits, it is not taxable for
property to the trust.) This rule applies if thefederal income tax purposes, but it reduces any5. Damages for: property (or income from the property) put intomaking work pay credit or government retiree
the trust will or may revert (be returned) to thecredit.a. Patent or copyright infringement, grantor or the grantor's spouse.
b. Breach of contract, or Generally, a trust is a grantor trust if theEmployment agency fees. If you get a job grantor has a reversionary interest valued (atthrough an employment agency, and the fee isc. Interference with business operations. the date of transfer) at more than 5% of thepaid by your employer, the fee is not includible in value of the transferred property.your income if you are not liable for it. However,6. Back pay and damages for emotional dis-
if you pay it and your employer reimburses youtress received to satisfy a claim under Title Expenses paid by another. If your personal
for it, it is includible in your income.VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. expenses are paid for by another person, such
Chapter 12 Other Income Page 93

Page 96 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
as a corporation, the payment may be taxable to A qualified foster individual is a person who: If you win a state lottery prize payable
you depending upon your relationship with that in installments, see Publication 525 for
1. Is living in a foster family home, andperson and the nature of the payment. But if the more information.
TIP
payment makes up for a loss caused by that 2. Was placed there by:
Form W-2G. You may have received aperson, and only restores you to the position you
a. An agency of a state or one of its politi- Form W-2G, Certain Gambling Winnings, show-were in before the loss, the payment is not
ing the amount of your gambling winnings andincludible in your income. cal subdivisions, or
any tax taken out of them. Include the amountb. A qualified foster care placementFees for services. Include all fees for your from box 1 on Form 1040, line 21. Include theagency.services in your income. Examples of these fees amount shown in box 2 on Form 1040, line 61,are amounts you receive for services you per- as federal income tax withheld.form as: Difficulty-of-care payments. These are Gifts and inheritances. Generally, property• A corporate director, additional payments that are designated by the you receive as a gift, bequest, or inheritance ispayer as compensation for providing the addi-• An executor, administrator, or personal not included in your income. However, if prop-tional care that is required for physically, men-representative of an estate, erty you receive this way later produces incometally, or emotionally handicapped qualified foster such as interest, dividends, or rents, that income• A manager of a trade or business you op- individuals. A state must determine that the ad- is taxable to you. If property is given to a trusterated before declaring Chapter 11 bank- ditional compensation is needed, and the care and the income from it is paid, credited, or dis-ruptcy, for which the payments are made must be pro- tributed to you, that income is also taxable tovided in your home.• A notary public, or you. If the gift, bequest, or inheritance is the
You must include in your income diffi- income from the property, that income is taxable• An election precinct official. culty-of-care payments received for more than: to you.
• 10 qualified foster individuals under ageNonemployee compensation. If you are Inherited pension or IRA. If you inherited a
not an employee and the fees for your services 19, or pension or an individual retirement arrangement
from the same payer total $600 or more for the (IRA), you may have to include part of the inher-• 5 qualified foster individuals age 19 oryear, you may receive a Form 1099-MISC. You ited amount in your income. See chapter 10 ifolder.may need to report your fees as you inherited a pension. See chapter 17 if you
self-employment income. See Self-Employed inherited an IRA.Maintaining space in home. If you are paidPersons, in chapter 1, for a discussion of when to maintain space in your home for emergency Hobby losses. Losses from a hobby are notyou are considered self-employed. foster care, you must include the payment in deductible from other income. A hobby is anCorporate director. Corporate director your income. activity from which you do not expect to make afees are self-employment income. Report these profit. See Activity not for profit, earlier.Reporting taxable payments.  If you re-payments on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ ceive payments that you must include in your If you collect stamps, coins, or other(Form 1040).
income, you are in business as a foster care items as a hobby for recreation andPersonal representatives. All personal provider and you are self-employed. Report the pleasure, and you sell any of the items,
CAUTION
!representatives must include in their gross in- payments on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ your gain is taxable as a capital gain. (Seecome fees paid to them from an estate. If you (Form 1040). See Publication 587, Business chapter 16.) However, if you sell items from yourare not in the trade or business of being an Use of Your Home (Including Use by Daycare collection at a loss, you cannot deduct the loss.executor (for instance, you are the executor of a Providers), to help you determine the amountfriend's or relative's estate), report these fees on Illegal activities. Income from illegal activi-you can deduct for the use of your home.Form 1040, line 21. If you are in the trade or ties, such as money from dealing illegal drugs,
business of being an executor, report these fees must be included in your income on Form 1040,Found property. If you find and keep propertyas self-employment income on Schedule C or line 21, or on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZthat does not belong to you that has been lost orSchedule C-EZ (Form 1040). The fee is not (Form 1040) if from your self-employment activ-abandoned (treasure-trove), it is taxable to youincludible in income if it is waived. ity.at its fair market value in the first year it is your
Manager of trade or business for bank- undisputed possession. Indian fishing rights. If you are a member ofruptcy estate. Include in your income all pay- a qualified Indian tribe that has fishing rightsments received from your bankruptcy estate for Free tour. If you received a free tour from a secured by treaty, executive order, or an Act ofmanaging or operating a trade or business that travel agency for organizing a group of tourists, Congress as of March 17, 1988, do not includeyou operated before you filed for bankruptcy. you must include its value in your income. Re- in your income amounts you receive from activi-Report this income on Form 1040, line 21. port the fair market value of the tour on Form ties related to those fishing rights. The income is
1040, line 21, if you are not in the trade or not subject to income tax, self-employment tax,Notary public.  Report payments for these
business of organizing tours. You cannot deduct or employment taxes.services on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ
your expenses in serving as the voluntary leader(Form 1040). These payments are not subject to
Interest on frozen deposits. In general, youof the group at the group's request. If you organ-self-employment tax. (See the separate instruc-
exclude from your income the amount of interesttions for Schedule SE (Form 1040) for details. ize tours as a trade or business, report the tour's earned on a frozen deposit. See Interest incomevalue on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (FormElection precinct official. You should re- on frozen deposits in chapter 7.1040).ceive a Form W-2 showing payments for serv-
Interest on qualified savings bonds. Youices performed as an election official or election
Gambling winnings. You must include your may be able to exclude from income the interestworker. Report these payments on line 7 of
gambling winnings in income on Form 1040, line from qualified U.S. savings bonds you redeem ifForm 1040 or Form 1040A or on line 1 of Form
21. If you itemize your deductions on Schedule you pay qualified higher educational expenses1040EZ.
A (Form 1040), you can deduct gambling losses in the same year. For more information on this
Foster care providers. Payments you re- you had during the year, but only up to the exclusion, see Education Savings Bond Pro-
ceive from a state, political subdivision, or a amount of your winnings. See chapter 28  for gram under U.S. Savings Bonds in chapter 7.
qualified foster care placement agency for pro- information on recordkeeping.viding care to qualified foster individuals in your Job interview expenses. If a prospective em-
Lotteries and raffles. Winnings from lotter-home generally are not included in your income. ployer asks you to appear for an interview and
ies and raffles are gambling winnings. In addi-However, you must include in your income pay- either pays you an allowance or reimburses you
tion to cash winnings, you must include in yourments received for the care of more than 5 for your transportation and other travel ex-
income the fair market value of bonds, cars,individuals age 19 or older and certain diffi- penses, the amount you receive is generally not
houses, and other noncash prizes.culty-of-care payments. taxable. You include in income only the amount
Page 94 Chapter 12 Other Income

Page 97 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you receive that is more than your actual ex- tax-exempt charitable organization as des- Amounts used for room and board do not qualify
penses. ignated by you. for the exclusion. See Publication 970 for more
information on qualified scholarships and fellow-Jury duty.   Jury duty pay you receive must be See Publication 525 for more information about ship grants.included in your income on Form 1040, line 21. If the conditions that apply to the transfer.
you must give the pay to your employer because Payment for services. Generally, you must
your employer continues to pay your salary Qualified tuition programs (QTPs). A quali- include in income the part of any scholarship or
while you serve on the jury, you can deduct the fied tuition program (also known as a 529 pro- fellowship that represents payment for past,
amount turned over to your employer as an gram) is a program set up to allow you to either present, or future teaching, research, or other
adjustment to your income. Enter the amount prepay or contribute to an account established services. This applies even if all candidates for a
you repay your employer on Form 1040, line 36. for paying a student's qualified higher education degree must perform the services to receive the
Enter ªJury Payº and the amount on the dotted expenses at an eligible educational institution. A degree.
line next to line 36. program can be established and maintained by For information about the rules that apply to
a state, an agency or instrumentality of a state, a tax-free qualified tuition reduction provided toKickbacks.   You must include kickbacks, side or an eligible educational institution. employees and their families by an educationalcommissions, push money, or similar payments The part of a distribution representing the institution, see Publication 970.you receive in your income on Form 1040, line amount paid or contributed to a QTP is not21, or on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form VA payments. Allowances paid by the De-included in income. This is a return of the invest-1040), if from your self-employment activity. partment of Veterans Affairs are not included inment in the program. your income. These allowances are not consid-The beneficiary generally does not include inExample. You sell cars and help arrange ered scholarship or fellowship grants.income any earnings distributed from a QTP ifcar insurance for buyers. Insurance brokers pay Prizes. Scholarship prizes won in a contestthe total distribution is less than or equal toback part of their commissions to you for refer- are not scholarships or fellowships if you do notadjusted qualified higher education expenses.ring customers to them. You must include the have to use the prizes for educational purposes.See Publication 970 for more information.kickbacks in your income. You must include these amounts in your incomeRailroad retirement annuities. The followingMedical savings accounts (MSAs). You on Form 1040, line 21, whether or not you usetypes of payments are treated as pension orgenerally do not include in income amounts you the amounts for educational purposes.annuity income and are taxable under the ruleswithdraw from your Archer MSA or Medicare Stolen property. If you steal property, youexplained in chapter 11.Advantage MSA if you use the money to pay for must report its fair market value in your incomequalified medical expenses. Generally, qualified • Tier 1 railroad retirement benefits that are in the year you steal it unless in the same year,medical expenses are those you can deduct on more than the social security equivalent you return it to its rightful owner.Schedule A (Form 1040), Itemized Deductions. benefit.
For more information about qualified medical Transporting school children. Do not in-• Tier 2 benefits.expenses, see chapter 21. For more information clude in your income a school board mileage
about Archer MSAs or Medicare Advantage • Vested dual benefits. allowance for taking children to and from school
MSAs, see Publication 969, Health Savings Ac- if you are not in the business of taking children to
counts and Other Tax-Favored Health Plans. school. You cannot deduct expenses for provid-Rewards. If you receive a reward for providing ing this transportation.Prizes and awards. If you win a prize in a information, include it in your income.
lucky number drawing, television or radio quiz Union benefits and dues. Amounts deductedSale of home. You may be able to excludeprogram, beauty contest, or other event, you from your pay for union dues, assessments,from income all or part of any gain from the salemust include it in your income. For example, if contributions, or other payments to a union can-or exchange of a personal residence. See chap-you win a $50 prize in a photography contest, not be excluded from your income.ter 15.you must report this income on Form 1040, line You may be able to deduct some of these
Sale of personal items. If you sold an item21. If you refuse to accept a prize, do not include payments as a miscellaneous deduction subject
you owned for personal use, such as a car,its value in your income. to the 2%-of-AGI limit if they are related to your
refrigerator, furniture, stereo, jewelry, orPrizes and awards in goods or services must job and if you itemize deductions on Schedule A
silverware, your gain is taxable as a capital gain.be included in your income at their fair market (Form 1040). For more information, see Union
Report it on Schedule D (Form 1040). You can-value. Dues and Expenses in chapter 28.
not deduct a loss.Employee awards or bonuses. Cash Strike and lockout benefits. Benefits paidHowever, if you sold an item you held forawards or bonuses given to you by your em- to you by a union as strike or lockout benefits,investment, such as gold or silver bullion, coins,ployer for good work or suggestions generally including both cash and the fair market value ofor gems, any gain is taxable as a capital gainmust be included in your income as wages. other property, are usually included in your in-and any loss is deductible as a capital loss.However, certain noncash employee achieve- come as compensation. You can exclude these
ment awards can be excluded from income. See benefits from your income only when the factsExample. You sold a painting on an onlineBonuses and awards in chapter 5. clearly show that the union intended them asauction website for $100. You bought the paint- gifts to you.ing for $20 at a garage sale years ago. ReportPulitzer, Nobel, and similar prizes. If you
your gain as a capital gain on Schedule D (Formwere awarded a prize in recognition of accom- Utility rebates. If you are a customer of an
1040).plishments in religious, charitable, scientific, ar- electric utility company and you participate in the
tistic, educational, literary, or civic fields, you utility's energy conservation program, you mayScholarships and fellowships. A candidategenerally must include the value of the prize in receive on your monthly electric bill either:for a degree can exclude amounts received as ayour income. However, you do not include this qualified scholarship or fellowship. A qualified • A reduction in the purchase price of elec-prize in your income if you meet all of the follow- scholarship or fellowship is any amount you re- tricity furnished to you (rate reduction), oring requirements. ceive that is for: • A nonrefundable credit against the• You were selected without any action on • Tuition and fees to enroll at or attend an purchase price of the electricity.your part to enter the contest or proceed- educational institution, or The amount of the rate reduction or nonrefund-ing.
• Fees, books, supplies, and equipment re- able credit is not included in your income.• You are not required to perform substan- quired for courses at the educational insti-tial future services as a condition to receiv- tution.ing the prize or award.
• The prize or award is transferred by the
payer directly to a governmental unit or
Chapter 12 Other Income Page 95

Page 98 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Part Three.
The four chapters in this part discuss investment gains and losses, includingGains and how to figure your basis in property. A gain from selling or trading stocks,
bonds, or other investment property may be taxed or it may be tax free, atLosses least in part. A loss may or may not be deductible. These chapters also
discuss gains from selling property you personally use Ð including the special
rules for selling your home. Nonbusiness casualty and theft losses are dis-
cussed in chapter 25 in Part Five.
❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of the buildings. Allocate the cost basis according
Assets to the respective fair market values (FMVs) of
the land and buildings at the time of purchase.❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses13. Figure the basis of each asset by multiplying the
❏ 551 Basis of Assets lump sum by a fraction. The numerator is the
FMV of that asset and the denominator is the❏ 564 Mutual Fund Distributions FMV of the whole property at the time of
Basis of ❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property purchase.
If you are not certain of the FMVs of the
land and buildings, you can allocateProperty
the basis according to their assessed
TIP
values for real estate tax purposes.Cost Basis
Fair market value (FMV). FMV is the priceIntroduction The basis of property you buy is usually its cost. at which the property would change hands be-The cost is the amount you pay in cash, debtThis chapter discusses how to figure your basis tween a willing buyer and a willing seller, neitherobligations, other property, or services. Yourin property. It is divided into the following sec- having to buy or sell, and both having reasona-cost also includes amounts you pay for the fol-tions. ble knowledge of all the necessary facts. Saleslowing items: of similar property on or about the same date• Cost basis.
may be helpful in figuring the FMV of the prop-• Sales tax,
• Adjusted basis. erty.• Freight,
• Basis other than cost. Assumption of mortgage. If you buy prop-• Installation and testing,
erty and assume (or buy the property subject to)Your basis is the amount of your investment in • Excise taxes, an existing mortgage on the property, your basisproperty for tax purposes. Use the basis to figure includes the amount you pay for the property• Legal and accounting fees (when theygain or loss on the sale, exchange, or other plus the amount to be paid on the mortgage.must be capitalized),disposition of property. Also use it to figure de-
ductions for depreciation, amortization, deple- • Revenue stamps, Settlement costs. Your basis includes thetion, and casualty losses. settlement fees and closing costs you paid for• Recording fees, andIf you use property for both business or in- buying the property. (A fee for buying property isvestment purposes and for personal purposes, • Real estate taxes (if you assume liability a cost that must be paid even if you buy theyou must allocate the basis based on the use. for the seller). property for cash.) Do not include fees and costsOnly the basis allocated to the business or in- for getting a loan on the property in your basis.In addition, the basis of real estate and businessvestment use of the property can be depreci- The following are some of the settlementassets may include other items.ated. fees or closing costs you can include in the basisYour original basis in property is adjusted of your property.Loans with low or no interest.  If you buy(increased or decreased) by certain events. For property on a time-payment plan that charges • Abstract fees (abstract of title fees).example, if you make improvements to the prop- little or no interest, the basis of your property iserty, increase your basis. If you take deductions • Charges for installing utility services.your stated purchase price minus any amountfor depreciation or casualty losses, or claim cer- considered to be unstated interest. You gener- • Legal fees (including fees for the titletain credits, reduce your basis. ally have unstated interest if your interest rate is search and preparation of the sales con-less than the applicable federal rate.Keep accurate records of all items that tract and deed). For more information, see Unstated Interestaffect the basis of your property. For
• Recording fees.and Original Issue Discount (OID) in Publicationmore information on keeping records,
RECORDS
537.see chapter 1. • Survey fees.
• Transfer taxes. Real PropertyUseful Items
• Owner's title insurance.You may want to see: Real property, also called real estate, is land and • Any amounts the seller owes that yougenerally anything built on, growing on, or at-Publication agree to pay, such as back taxes or inter-tached to land. est, recording or mortgage fees, chargesIf you buy real property, certain fees and❏ 15-B Employer's Tax Guide to Fringe for improvements or repairs, and salesother expenses you pay are part of your costBenefits commissions.basis in the property.❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income
Lump sum purchase. If you buy buildings Settlement costs do not include amounts❏ 535 Business Expenses and the land on which they stand for a lump placed in escrow for the future payment of items
❏ 537 Installment Sales sum, allocate the cost basis among the land and such as taxes and insurance.
Page 96 Chapter 13 Basis of Property

Page 99 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The following are some of the settlement Table 13-1. Examples of Adjustments to Basis
fees and closing costs you cannot include in the
basis of property. Increases to Basis Decreases to Basis
• Casualty insurance premiums. • Capital improvements: • Exclusion from income of
• Rent for occupancy of the property before Putting an addition on your home  subsidies for energy conservation
closing. Replacing an entire roof  measures
Paving your driveway• Charges for utilities or other services re-
Installing central air conditioning • Casualty or theft loss deductionslated to occupancy of the property before
Rewiring your home  and insurance reimbursementsclosing.
• Charges connected with getting a loan, • Assessments for local improvements:such as points (discount points, loan origi- Water connectionsnation fees), mortgage insurance premi-
Extending utility service lines to the • Postponed gain from the sale of a homeums, loan assumption fees, cost of a
propertycredit report, and fees for an appraisal re-
Sidewalks • Alternative motor vehicle credit quired by a lender.
(Form 8910)
• Fees for refinancing a mortgage. Roads
• Alternative fuel vehicle refueling
property credit (Form 8911)Real estate taxes. If you pay real estate taxes
the seller owed on real property you bought, and
the seller did not reimburse you, treat those • Residential energy credits (Form 5695)
taxes as part of your basis. You cannot deduct
them as an expense. • Casualty losses: • Depreciation and section 179 deduction
Restoring damaged propertyIf you reimburse the seller for taxes the seller
paid for you, you can usually deduct that amount • Nontaxable corporate distributions
as an expense in the year of purchase. Do not • Legal fees:
include that amount in the basis of your property. Cost of defending and perfecting a title • Certain canceled debt excluded from
If you did not reimburse the seller, you must Fees for getting a reduction of an  income
reduce your basis by the amount of those taxes. assessment
• Zoning costs • EasementsPoints. If you pay points to get a loan (includ-
ing a mortgage, second mortgage, line of credit,
• Adoption tax benefitsor a home equity loan), do not add the points to
the basis of the related property. Generally, you
deduct the points over the term of the loan. For
basement, adding another bathroom or bed- You must increase your basis in the propertymore information on how to deduct points, see
by the amount you spend on repairs that restoreroom, putting up a fence, putting in new plumb-chapter 23.
the property to its pre-casualty condition.ing or wiring, installing a new roof, or paving yourPoints on home mortgage. Special rules driveway. For more information on casualty and theftmay apply to points you and the seller pay when
losses, see chapter 25.you get a mortgage to buy your main home. If Assessments for local improvements.
certain requirements are met, you can deduct Add to the basis of property assessments for Depreciation and section 179 deduction.the points in full for the year in which they are improvements such as streets and sidewalks if Decrease the basis of your qualifying businesspaid. Reduce the basis of your home by any they increase the value of the property as- property by any section 179 deduction you takeseller-paid points. sessed. Do not deduct them as taxes. However, and the depreciation you deducted, or couldyou can deduct as taxes assessments for main- have deducted (including any special deprecia-tenance or repairs, or for meeting interest tion allowance), on your tax returns under thecharges related to the improvements. method of depreciation you selected.
Adjusted Basis For more information about depreciation andExample. Your city changes the street in
the section 179 deduction, see Publication 946front of your store into an enclosed pedestrianBefore figuring gain or loss on a sale, exchange, and the Instructions for Form 4562.mall and assesses you and other affected prop-or other disposition of property or figuring allow- erty owners for the cost of the conversion. Addable depreciation, depletion, or amortization, Example. You owned a duplex used asthe assessment to your property's basis. In thisyou must usually make certain adjustments (in- rental property that cost you $40,000, of whichexample, the assessment is a depreciable as-creases and decreases) to the cost of the prop- $35,000 was allocated to the building andset.erty. The result is the adjusted basis. $5,000 to the land. You added an improvement
to the duplex that cost $10,000. In February last
Decreases to Basis year, the duplex was damaged by fire. Up to thatIncreases to Basis time, you had been allowed depreciation of
Decrease the basis of any property by all items $23,000. You sold some salvaged material forIncrease the basis of any property by all items that represent a return of capital for the period $1,300 and collected $19,700 from your insur-properly added to a capital account. Examples during which you held the property. Examples of ance company. You deducted a casualty loss ofof items that increase basis are shown in Table items that decrease basis are shown in Table $1,000 on your income tax return for last year.13-1. These include the items discussed below. 13-1. These include the items discussed below. You spent $19,000 of the insurance proceeds
for restoration of the duplex, which was com-
Improvements. Add to your basis in property pleted this year. You must use the duplex's
Casualty and theft losses. If you have a cas-the cost of improvements having a useful life of adjusted basis after the restoration to determine
ualty or theft loss, decrease the basis in yourmore than 1 year, that increase the value of the depreciation for the rest of the property's recov-
property, lengthen its life, or adapt it to a differ- property by any insurance proceeds or other ery period. Figure the adjusted basis of the du-
ent use. For example, improvements include reimbursement and by any deductible loss not plex as follows:
putting a recreation room in your unfinished covered by insurance.
Chapter 13 Basis of Property Page 97

Page 100 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Original cost of duplex ........ . $35,000 property at the time it is transferred to you, less You realized a gain of $5,000 ($31,000 −
Addition to duplex ........... . 10,000 any amount you paid for it. Property is substan- $26,000). You bought replacement property
Total cost of duplex .......... . $45,000 tially vested when it is transferable or when it is similar in use to the converted property for
Minus: Depreciation ......... . 23,000 not subject to a substantial risk of forfeiture (you $29,000. You recognize a gain of $2,000
Adjusted basis before casualty ... . $22,000 do not have a good chance of losing it). For ($31,000 − $29,000), the unspent part of the
Minus: Insurance more information, see Restricted Property in payment from the state. Your unrecognized gain
proceeds ..... . $19,700 Publication 525. is $3,000, the difference between the $5,000Deducted casualty realized gain and the $2,000 recognized gain.Bargain purchases. A bargain purchase isloss ......... . 1,000 The basis of the replacement property is figureda purchase of an item for less than its FMV. If, asSalvage proceeds  1,300  22,000 as follows:compensation for services, you buy goods orAdjusted basis after casualty .... . $-0-
Add: Cost of restoring duplex .... . 19,000 other property at less than FMV, include the Cost of replacement property ..... . $29,000Adjusted basis after restoration $19,000 difference between the purchase price and the Minus: Gain not recognized ...... . 3,000property's FMV in your income. Your basis in the Basis of replacement property .. . $26,000property is its FMV (your purchase price plus theNote. Your basis in the land is its original amount you include in income). cost of $5,000. Allocating the basis. If you buy more thanIf the difference between your purchase one piece of replacement property, allocate yourEasements. The amount you receive for price and the FMV is a qualified employee dis- basis among the properties based on their re-granting an easement is generally considered to count, do not include the difference in income. spective costs.be proceeds from the sale of an interest in real However, your basis in the property is still its
property. It reduces the basis of the affected part FMV. See Employee Discounts in Publication Basis for depreciation. Special rules apply in
of the property. If the amount received is more 15-B. determining and depreciating the basis of
than the basis of the part of the property affected MACRS property acquired in an involuntary con-
by the easement, reduce your basis in that part version. For information, see What Is the BasisTaxable Exchangesto zero and treat the excess as a recognized of Your Depreciable Property?  in chapter 1 of
gain. Publication 946.A taxable exchange is one in which the gain isIf the gain is on a capital asset, see chapter taxable or the loss is deductible. A taxable gain16 for information about how to report it. If the or deductible loss also is known as a recognized Nontaxable Exchangesgain is on property used in a trade or business, gain or loss. If you receive property in exchangesee Publication 544 for information about how to for other property in a taxable exchange, the A nontaxable exchange is an exchange in whichreport it. basis of the property you receive is usually its you are not taxed on any gain and you cannot
FMV at the time of the exchange.Exclusion of subsidies for energy conserva- deduct any loss. If you receive property in a
tion measures. You can exclude from gross nontaxable exchange, its basis is generally the
income any subsidy you received from a public same as the basis of the property you trans-Involuntary Conversionsutility company for the purchase or installation of ferred. See Nontaxable Trades in chapter 14.
an energy conservation measure for a dwelling If you receive replacement property as a result
unit. Reduce the basis of the property for which of an involuntary conversion, such as a casualty,
you received the subsidy by the excluded Like-Kind Exchangestheft, or condemnation, figure the basis of the
amount. For more information about this sub- replacement property using the basis of the con- The exchange of property for the same kind ofsidy, see chapter 12. verted property. property is the most common type of nontaxablePostponed gain from sale of home. If you exchange. To qualify as a like-kind exchange,Similar or related property. If you receivepostponed gain from the sale of your main home the property traded and the property receivedreplacement property similar or related in serv-under rules in effect before May 7, 1997, you must be both of the following.ice or use to the converted property, the replace-must reduce the basis of the home you acquired ment property's basis is the same as the • Qualifying property.as a replacement by the amount of the post- converted property's basis on the date of theponed gain. For more information on the rules • Like-kind property.conversion, with the following adjustments.for the sale of a home, see chapter 15.
The basis of the property you receive is gener-1. Decrease the basis by the following.
ally the same as the adjusted basis of the prop-
a. Any loss you recognize on the involun- erty you gave up. If you trade property in a
tary conversion.Basis Other Than Cost like-kind exchange and also pay money, the
basis of the property received is the adjustedb. Any money you receive that you do not
There are many times when you cannot use cost basis of the property you gave up increased byspend on similar property.
as basis. In these cases, the fair market value or the money you paid.
the adjusted basis of the property can be used. 2. Increase the basis by the following. Qualifying property. In a like-kind exchange,Fair market value (FMV) and adjusted basis you must hold for investment or for productivea. Any gain you recognize on the involun-were discussed earlier. use in your trade or business both the propertytary conversion.
you give up and the property you receive.
Property Received b. Any cost of acquiring the replacement
Like-kind property. There must be an ex-property.for Services change of like-kind property. Like-kind proper-
ties are properties of the same nature orIf you receive property for your services, include Money or property not similar or related.  If character, even if they differ in grade or quality.its FMV in income. The amount you include in you receive money or property not similar or The exchange of real estate for real estate andincome becomes your basis. If the services related in service or use to the converted prop- personal property for similar personal propertywere performed for a price agreed on before- erty, and you buy replacement property similar are exchanges of like-kind property.hand, it will be accepted as the FMV of the or related in service or use to the convertedproperty if there is no evidence to the contrary. Example. You trade in an old truck used inproperty, the basis of the replacement property
Restricted property. If you receive prop- your business with an adjusted basis of $1,700is its cost decreased by the gain not recognized
erty for your services and the property is subject for a new one costing $6,800. The dealer allowson the conversion.
to certain restrictions, your basis in the property you $2,000 on the old truck, and you pay $4,800.
is its FMV when it becomes substantially vested. Example. The state condemned your prop- This is a like-kind exchange. The basis of the
However, this rule does not apply if you make an erty. The adjusted basis of the property was new truck is $6,500 (the adjusted basis of the old
election to include in income the FMV of the $26,000 and the state paid you $31,000 for it. one, $1,700, plus the amount you paid, $4,800).
Page 98 Chapter 13 Basis of Property

Page 101 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you sell your old truck to a third party for the adjusted basis and holding period of the purposes after reduction by any annual exclu-
$2,000 instead of trading it in and then buy a property as of the date of the transfer. sion and marital or charitable deduction that
new one from the dealer, you have a taxable For more information about the transfer of applies to the gift. For information on the gift tax,
gain of $300 on the sale (the $2,000 sale price property from a spouse, see chapter 14. see Publication 950, Introduction to Estate and
minus the $1,700 adjusted basis). The basis of Gift Taxes.
the new truck is the price you pay the dealer. Property Received Example. In 2009, you received a gift of
Partially nontaxable exchanges. A partially as a Gift property from your mother that had an FMV of
nontaxable exchange is an exchange in which $50,000. Her adjusted basis was $20,000. TheTo figure the basis of property you receive as ayou receive unlike property or money in addition amount of the gift for gift tax purposes wasgift, you must know its adjusted basis to theto like-kind property. The basis of the property $37,000 ($50,000 minus the $13,000 annualdonor just before it was given to you, its FMV atyou receive is the same as the adjusted basis of exclusion). She paid a gift tax of $7,540 on thethe time it was given to you, and any gift tax paidthe property you gave up, with the following property. Your basis is $26,107, figured as fol-on it.adjustments. lows:
1. Decrease the basis by the following FMV less than donor's adjusted basis. If the Fair market value ............. . $50,000amounts. FMV of the property at the time of the gift is less Minus: Adjusted basis .......... . −20,000than the donor's adjusted basis, your basis de- Net increase in value .......... . $30,000a. Any money you receive. pends on whether you have a gain or a loss
when you dispose of the property. Your basis forb. Any loss you recognize on the ex- Gift tax paid ................ . $7,540figuring gain is the same as the donor's adjustedchange. Multiplied by ($30,000 ÷  $37,000) .. . ×  .81basis plus or minus any required adjustments to Gift tax due to net increase in value $6,107
basis while you held the property. Your basis for2. Increase the basis by the following Adjusted basis of property to your
figuring loss is its FMV when you received theamounts. mother .................... . +20,000
gift plus or minus any required adjustments to Your basis in the property ...... . $26,107
a. Any additional costs you incur. basis while you held the property. See Adjusted
Basis, earlier.b. Any gain you recognize on the ex- Note.  If you received a gift before 1977,change. your basis in the gift (the donor's adjusted basis)Example. You received an acre of land as a
includes any gift tax paid on it. However, yourgift. At the time of the gift, the land had an FMVIf the other party to the exchange assumes basis cannot exceed the FMV of the gift at theof $8,000. The donor's adjusted basis wasyour liabilities, treat the debt assumption as time it was given to you.$10,000. After you received the property, nomoney you received in the exchange. events occurred to increase or decrease your
Allocation of basis. If you receive like-kind basis. If you later sell the property for $12,000, Inherited Propertyand unlike properties in the exchange, allocate you will have a $2,000 gain because you must
the basis first to the unlike property, other than use the donor's adjusted basis at the time of the Your basis in property you inherit from a dece-money, up to its FMV on the date of the ex- gift ($10,000) as your basis to figure gain. If you dent is generally one of the following.change. The rest is the basis of the like-kind sell the property for $7,000, you will have a
• The FMV of the property at the date of theproperty. $1,000 loss because you must use the FMV at
decedent's death.the time of the gift ($8,000) as your basis to
More information. See Like-Kind Exchanges figure loss. • The FMV on the alternate valuation date ifin chapter 1 of Publication 544 for more informa- If the sales price is between $8,000 and the personal representative for the estatetion. $10,000, you have neither gain nor loss. elects to use alternate valuation.
Business property. If you hold the gift asBasis for depreciation. Special rules apply in • The value under the special-use valuationbusiness property, your basis for figuring anydetermining and depreciating the basis of method for real property used in farmingdepreciation, depletion, or amortization deduc-MACRS property acquired in a like-kind ex- or a closely held business if elected fortions is the same as the donor's adjusted basischange. For information, see What Is the Basis estate tax purposes.plus or minus any required adjustments to basisof Your Depreciable Property?  in chapter 1 of
• The decedent's adjusted basis in land towhile you hold the property.Publication 946.
the extent of the value excluded from the
FMV equal to or greater than donor's ad- decedent's taxable estate as a qualifiedProperty Transferred justed basis. If the FMV of the property is conservation easement.
equal to or greater than the donor's adjustedFrom a Spouse
basis, your basis is the donor's adjusted basis at If a federal estate tax return does not have to
The basis of property transferred to you or trans- the time you received the gift. Increase your be filed, your basis in the inherited property is its
ferred in trust for your benefit by your spouse is basis by all or part of any gift tax paid, depending appraised value at the date of death for state
the same as your spouse's adjusted basis. The on the date of the gift, explained later. inheritance or transmission taxes.
same rule applies to a transfer by your former Also, for figuring gain or loss from a sale or For more information, see the instructions tospouse that is incident to divorce. However, for other disposition or for figuring depreciation, de- Form 706, United States Estate (and Genera-property transferred in trust, adjust your basis pletion, or amortization deductions on business tion-Skipping Transfer) Tax Return.for any gain recognized by your spouse or for- property, you must increase or decrease your
mer spouse if the liabilities assumed, plus the basis (the donor's adjusted basis) by any re- Community property. In community propertyliabilities to which the property is subject, are quired adjustments to basis while you held the states (Arizona, California, Idaho, Louisiana,more than the adjusted basis of the property property. See Adjusted Basis, earlier.
Nevada, New Mexico, Texas, Washington, andtransferred.  If you received a gift during the tax year,
Wisconsin), husband and wife are each usuallyIf the property transferred to you is a series increase your basis in the gift (the donor's ad-
considered to own half the community property.E, series EE, or series I U.S. savings bond, the justed basis) by the part of the gift tax paid on it
When either spouse dies, the total value of thetransferor must include in income the interest due to the net increase in value of the gift. Figure
community property, even the part belonging toaccrued to the date of transfer. Your basis in the the increase by multiplying the gift tax paid by a
the surviving spouse, generally becomes thebond immediately after the transfer is equal to fraction. The numerator of the fraction is the net
basis of the entire property. For this rule tothe transferor's basis increased by the interest increase in value of the gift and the denominator
apply, at least half the value of the communityincome includible in the transferor's income. For is the amount of the gift.
property interest must be includible in the dece-more information on these bonds, see chapter 7. The net increase in value of the gift is the
dent's gross estate, whether or not the estateAt the time of the transfer, the transferor FMV of the gift minus the donor's adjusted basis.
must give you the records needed to determine The amount of the gift is its value for gift tax must file a return.
Chapter 13 Basis of Property Page 99

Page 102 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. You and your spouse owned the change in the property's use, as discussed deduct the premium on a tax-exempt bond, you
earlier under Adjusted Basis. must amortize the premium each year and re-community property that had a basis of $80,000.
duce your basis in the bond by the amortizedWhen your spouse died, half the FMV of the
Example. Assume the same facts as in the amount.community interest was includible in your
previous example, except that you sell the prop-spouse's estate. The FMV of the community
Original issue discount (OID) on debt instru-erty at a loss after being allowed depreciationinterest was $100,000. The basis of your half of
ments. You must increase your basis in andeductions of $37,500. In this case, you wouldthe property after the death of your spouse is
OID debt instrument by the OID you include instart with the FMV on the date of the change to$50,000 (half of the $100,000 FMV). The basis
income for that instrument. See Original Issuerental use ($180,000), because it is less than theof the other half to your spouse's heirs is also
Discount (OID)  in chapter 7 and Publicationadjusted basis of $203,000 ($178,000 +$50,000.
1212, Guide To Original Issue Discount (OID)$25,000 (land)) on that date. Reduce thatFor more information about community prop-
Instruments.amount ($180,000) by the depreciation deduc-erty, see Publication 555, Community Property.
tions ($37,500). The basis for loss is $142,500 Tax-exempt obligations. OID on($180,000 − $37,500). tax-exempt obligations is generally not taxable.Property Changed From
However, when you dispose of a tax-exempt
Personal to Business or obligation issued after September 3, 1982, andStocks and Bonds
acquired after March 1, 1984, you must accrueRental Use The basis of stocks or bonds you buy generally OID on the obligation to determine its adjusted
is the purchase price plus any costs of purchase, basis. The accrued OID is added to the basis ofIf you hold property for personal use and then
such as commissions and recording or transfer the obligation to determine your gain or loss.change it to business use or use it to produce
fees. If you get stocks or bonds other than by See chapter 4 of Publication 550.rent, you can begin to depreciate the property at
purchase, your basis is usually determined bythe time of the change. To do so, you must figure
the FMV or the previous owner's adjusted basis,its basis for depreciation. An example of chang-
as discussed earlier.ing property held for personal use to business or
You must adjust the basis of stocks for cer-rental use would be renting out your former
tain events that occur after purchase. For exam-personal residence.
ple, if you receive additional stock from
nontaxable stock dividends or stock splits, re-Basis for depreciation. The basis for depre- 14.duce your basis for each share of stock by divid-ciation is the lesser of the following amounts.
ing the adjusted basis of the old stock by the
• The FMV of the property on the date of the number of shares of old and new stock. This rule
change. applies only when the additional stock received Sale of Propertyis identical to the stock held. Also reduce your• Your adjusted basis on the date of the
basis when you receive nontaxable distribu-change.
tions. They are a return of capital.
ReminderExample. Several years ago, you paid Example. In 2007 you bought 100 shares of
$160,000 to have your house built on a lot that XYZ stock for $1,000 or $10 a share. In 2008
cost $25,000. You paid $20,000 for permanent Foreign income. If you are a U.S. citizen whoyou bought 100 shares of XYZ stock for $1,600
improvements to the house and claimed a sells property located outside the United States,or $16 a share. In 2009 XYZ declared a 2-for-1
$2,000 casualty loss deduction for damage to you must report all gains and losses from thestock split. You now have 200 shares of stock
the house before changing the property to rental sale of that property on your tax return unless itwith a basis of $5 a share and 200 shares with a
use last year. Because land is not depreciable, is exempt by U.S. law. This is true whether youbasis of $8 a share.
you include only the cost of the house when reside inside or outside the United States and
Other basis. There are other ways to figurefiguring the basis for depreciation. whether or not you receive a Form 1099 from the
the basis of stocks or bonds depending on how payer.Your adjusted basis in the house when you
you acquired them. For detailed information, seechanged its use was $178,000 ($160,000 +
Stocks and Bonds  under Basis of Investment$20,000 − $2,000). On the same date, your
Property in chapter 4 of Publication 550.property had an FMV of $180,000, of which
$15,000 was for the land and $165,000 was for IntroductionIdentifying stocks or bonds sold. If you canthe house. The basis for figuring depreciation on adequately identify the shares of stock or the This chapter discusses the tax consequences ofthe house is its FMV on the date of the change bonds you sold, their basis is the cost or other selling or trading investment property. It explains($165,000) because it is less than your adjusted basis of the particular shares of stocks or bonds. the following.basis ($178,000). If you buy and sell securities at various times in
• What a sale or trade is.varying quantities and you cannot adequatelySale of property. If you later sell or dispose of identify the shares you sell, the basis of theproperty changed to business or rental use, the • Figuring gain or loss.securities you sell is the basis of the securitiesbasis you use will depend on whether you are • Nontaxable trades.you acquired first. For more information aboutfiguring gain or loss. identifying securities you sell, see Stocks and • Related party transactions.Gain. The basis for figuring a gain is your Bonds under Basis of Investment Property  in
adjusted basis in the property when you sell the • Capital gains or losses.chapter 4 of Publication 550.
property. • Capital assets and noncapital assets.Mutual fund shares. If you sell mutual fund
shares you acquired at various times and pricesExample. Assume the same facts as in the • Holding period.
and left on deposit in an account kept by aprevious example except that you sell the prop- • Rollover of gain from publicly traded se-custodian or agent, you can elect to use anerty at a gain after being allowed depreciation curities.average basis. For more information, see Publi-deductions of $37,500. Your adjusted basis for
cation 564.figuring gain is $165,500 ($178,000 + $25,000
(land) − $37,500). Other property transactions. Certain trans-Bond premium. If you buy a taxable bond at a fers of property are not discussed here. They areLoss. Figure the basis for a loss starting premium and elect to amortize the premium, discussed in other IRS publications. These in-with the smaller of your adjusted basis or the reduce the basis of the bond by the amortized clude the following.FMV of the property at the time of the change to premium you deduct each year. See Bond Pre-
business or rental use. Then make adjustments mium Amortization in chapter 3 of Publication • Sales of a main home, covered in chapter
(increases and decreases) for the period after 550 for more information. Although you cannot 15.
Page 100 Chapter 14 Sale of Property

Page 103 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Installment sales, covered in Publication Redemption of stock. A redemption of stock the loss. You must use Form 1040X, Amended
537, Installment Sales. is treated as a sale or trade and is subject to the U.S. Individual Income Tax Return, to amend
capital gain or loss provisions unless the re- your return for the year the security became• Transactions involving business property, demption is a dividend or other distribution on worthless. You must file it within 7 years from thecovered in Publication 544, Sales and stock. date your original return for that year had to beOther Dispositions of Assets. filed, or 2 years from the date you paid the tax,Dividend versus sale or trade. Whether a• Transfers of property at death, covered in whichever is later. For more information aboutredemption is treated as a sale, trade, dividend,Publication 559, Survivors, Executors, and filing a claim, see Amended Returns and Claimsor other distribution depends on the circum-Administrators. for Refund in chapter 1.stances in each case. Both direct and indirect
• Dispositions of an interest in a passive ac- ownership of stock will be considered. The re-
How To Figuretivity, covered in Publication 925, Passive demption is treated as a sale or trade of stock if:
Activity and At-Risk Rules. Gain or Loss• The redemption is not essentially
equivalent to a dividend (see chapter 8),Publication 550, Investment Income and Ex- You figure gain or loss on a sale or trade ofpenses (Including Capital Gains and Losses), • There is a substantially disproportionate property by comparing the amount you realizeprovides a more detailed discussion about sales redemption of stock, with the adjusted basis of the property.and trades of investment property. Publication • There is a complete redemption of all the Gain. If the amount you realize from a sale or550 includes information about the rules cover- stock of the corporation owned by the trade is more than the adjusted basis of theing nonbusiness bad debts, straddles, section shareholder, or property you transfer, the difference is a gain.1256 contracts, puts and calls, commodity fu-
tures, short sales, and wash sales. It also dis- • The redemption is a distribution in partial Loss. If the adjusted basis of the property youcusses investment-related expenses. liquidation of a corporation. transfer is more than the amount you realize, the
difference is a loss.
Useful Items Redemption or retirement of bonds. A re- Adjusted basis. The adjusted basis of prop-You may want to see: demption or retirement of bonds or notes at their erty is your original cost or other original basismaturity is generally treated as a sale or trade. properly adjusted (increased or decreased) forPublication In addition, a significant modification of a certain items. See chapter 13 for more informa-bond is treated as a trade of the original bond for❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses tion about determining the adjusted basis ofa new bond. For details, see Regulations sec- property.❏ 564 Mutual Fund Distributions tion 1.1001-3.
Amount realized. The amount you realizeSurrender of stock. A surrender of stock by aForm (and Instructions) from a sale or trade of property is everything youdominant shareholder who retains ownership of receive for the property. This includes the❏ Schedule D (Form 1040) Capital Gains more than half of the corporation's voting shares money you receive plus the fair market value ofand Losses is treated as a contribution to capital rather than any property or services you receive. If youas an immediate loss deductible from taxable❏ 8824 Like-Kind Exchanges received a note or other debt instrument for theincome. The surrendering shareholder must re- property, see How To Figure Gain or Loss  inallocate his or her basis in the surrendered chapter 4 of Publication 550 to figure the amountshares to the shares he or she retains. realized.
Worthless securities. Stocks, stock rights, If you finance the buyer's purchase of yourSales and Trades and bonds (other than those held for sale by a property and the debt instrument does not pro-
securities dealer) that became completely vide for adequate stated interest, the unstatedIf you sold property such as stocks, bonds, or worthless during the tax year are treated as interest that you must report as ordinary incomecertain commodities through a broker during the though they were sold on the last day of the tax will reduce the amount realized from the sale.year, you should receive, for each sale, a Form year. This affects whether your capital loss is For more information, see Publication 537.1099-B, Proceeds From Broker and Barter Ex- long-term or short-term. See Holding Period , Fair market value. Fair market value is thechange Transactions, or an equivalent state- later. price at which the property would change handsment from the broker. You should receive the Worthless securities also include securities between a buyer and a seller, neither beingstatement by March 1 of the next year. It will that you abandon after March 12, 2008. To forced to buy or sell and both having reasonableshow the gross proceeds from the sale. The IRS abandon a security, you must permanently sur- knowledge of all the relevant facts.will also get a copy of Form 1099-B from the render and relinquish all rights in the securitybroker. and receive no consideration in exchange for it. Example. You trade A Company stock withUse Form 1099-B (or an equivalent state- All the facts and circumstances determine an adjusted basis of $7,000 for B Companyment received from your broker) to complete whether the transaction is properly character- stock with a fair market value of $10,000, whichSchedule D (Form 1040). ized as an abandonment or other type of trans- is your amount realized. Your gain is $3,000action, such as an actual sale or exchange, ($10,000 − $7,000).contribution to capital, dividend, or gift.What Is a Sale or Trade?
If you are a cash basis taxpayer and make Debt paid off. A debt against the property,
This section explains what is a sale or trade. It payments on a negotiable promissory note that or against you, that is paid off as a part of the
also explains certain transactions and events you issued for stock that became worthless, you transaction, or that is assumed by the buyer,
that are treated as sales or trades. can deduct these payments as losses in the must be included in the amount realized. This is
years you actually make the payments. Do not true even if neither you nor the buyer is person-A sale is generally a transfer of property for
deduct them in the year the stock became worth- ally liable for the debt. For example, if you sell ormoney or a mortgage, note, or other promise to
less. trade property that is subject to a nonrecoursepay money.
loan, the amount you realize generally includesA trade is a transfer of property for other How to report loss. Report worthless se- the full amount of the note assumed by the buyerproperty or services and may be taxed in the curities on Schedule D (Form 1040), line 1 or even if the amount of the note is more than thesame way as a sale. line 8, whichever applies. In columns (c) and (d), fair market value of the property.enter ªWorthless.º Enter the amount of your lossSale and purchase. Ordinarily, a transaction in parentheses in column (f).is not a trade when you voluntarily sell property Example. You sell stock that you had
for cash and immediately buy similar property to Filing a claim for refund. If you do not pledged as security for a bank loan of $8,000.
replace it. The sale and purchase are two sepa- claim a loss for a worthless security on your Your basis in the stock is $6,000. The buyer
rate transactions. But see Like-kind exchanges original return for the year it becomes worthless, pays off your bank loan and pays you $20,000 in
under Nontaxable Trades, later. you can file a claim for a credit or refund due to cash. The amount realized is $28,000 ($20,000
Chapter 14 Sale of Property Page 101

Page 104 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
+ $8,000). Your gain is $22,000 ($28,000 − 5. The property to be received must be identi- Convertible stocks and bonds. You gen-
fied in writing within 45 days after the date erally will not have a recognized gain or loss if$6,000).
you transfer the property given up in the you convert bonds into stock or preferred stockPayment of cash. If you trade property and trade. into common stock of the same corporation ac-cash for other property, the amount you realize cording to a conversion privilege in the terms of6. The property to be received must be re-is the fair market value of the property you re- the bond or the preferred stock certificate.ceived by the earlier of:ceive. Determine your gain or loss by sub-
Property for stock of a controlled corpora-tracting the cash you pay plus the adjusted basis
a. The 180th day after the date on which tion. If you transfer property to a corporationof the property you trade in from the amount you you transfer the property given up in the solely in exchange for stock in that corporation,realize. If the result is a positive number, it is a trade, or and immediately after the trade you are in con-gain. If the result is a negative number, it is a
trol of the corporation, you ordinarily will notloss. b. The due date, including extensions, for
recognize a gain or loss. This rule applies bothyour tax return for the year in which the
to individuals and to groups who transfer prop-No gain or loss. You may have to use a basis transfer of the property given up occurs.
erty to a corporation. It does not apply if thefor figuring gain that is different from the basis
corporation is an investment company.If you trade property with a related party in aused for figuring loss. In this case, you may have
For this purpose, to be in control of a corpo-like-kind exchange, a special rule may apply.neither a gain nor a loss. See Basis Other Than
ration, you or your group of transferors mustSee Related Party Transactions , later in thisCost in chapter 13.
own, immediately after the exchange, at leastchapter. Also, see chapter 1 of Publication 544
80% of the total combined voting power of allfor more information on exchanges of businessNontaxable Trades classes of stock entitled to vote and at least 80%property and special rules for exchanges using
of the outstanding shares of each class of non-qualified intermediaries or involving multipleThis section discusses trades that generally do voting stock of the corporation.properties.not result in a taxable gain or deductible loss. If this provision applies to you, you may haveFor more information on nontaxable trades, see Partly nontaxable exchange. If you receive to attach to your return a complete statement ofchapter 1 of Publication 544. money or unlike property in addition to like prop- all facts pertinent to the exchange. For details,erty, and the above six conditions are met, you see Regulations section 1.351-3.Like-kind exchanges. If you trade business have a partly nontaxable trade. You are taxed on
Additional information. For more informa-or investment property for other business or any gain you realize, but only up to the amount
tion on trades of stock, see Nontaxable Tradesinvestment property of a like kind, you do not of the money and the fair market value of the
in chapter 4 of Publication 550.pay tax on any gain or deduct any loss until you unlike property you receive. You cannot deduct
sell or dispose of the property you receive. To be a loss.
Insurance policies and annuities. You willnontaxable, a trade must meet all six of the Like property and unlike property trans- not have a recognized gain or loss if the insuredfollowing conditions. ferred. If you give up unlike property in addi- or annuitant is the same under both contracts
tion to the like property, you must recognize gain1. The property must be business or invest- and you trade:
or loss on the unlike property you give up. Thement property. You must hold both the • A life insurance contract for another lifegain or loss is the difference between the ad-property you trade and the property you insurance contract or for an endowment orjusted basis of the unlike property and its fairreceive for productive use in your trade or annuity contract,market value.business or for investment. Neither prop-
• An endowment contract for an annuityerty may be property used for personal Like property and money transferred. If
contract or for another endowment con-purposes, such as your home or family conditions (1) ± (6) are met, you have a nontax-
tract that provides for regular paymentscar. able trade even if you pay money in addition to
beginning at a date not later than the be-the like property.2. The property must not be held primarily for ginning date under the old contract, or
sale. The property you trade and the prop- Basis of property received. To figure the ba- • An annuity contract for another annuityerty you receive must not be property you sis of the property received, see Nontaxable contract.sell to customers, such as merchandise. Exchanges in chapter 13.
3. The property must not be stocks, bonds, How to report. You must report the trade of You also may not have to recognize gain or
notes, choses in action, certificates of trust like property on Form 8824. If you figure a recog- loss on an exchange of a portion of an annuity
or beneficial interest, or other securities or nized gain or loss on Form 8824, report it on contract for another annuity contract. See Reve-
evidences of indebtedness or interest, in- Schedule D (Form 1040), or on Form 4797, nue Ruling 2003-76 in Internal Revenue Bulletin
cluding partnership interests. However, Sales of Business Property, whichever applies. 2003-33 and Revenue Procedure 2008-24 in
see Special rules for mutual ditch, reser- For information on using Form 4797, see Internal Revenue Bulletin 2008-13. Revenue
voir, or irrigation company stock, in chapter chapter 4 of Publication 544. Ruling 2003-76 is available at www.irs.gov/irb/
4 of Publication 550 for an exception. Also, 2003-33_IRB/ar11.html . Revenue ProcedureCorporate stocks. The following trades ofyou can have a nontaxable trade of corpo- 2008-24 is available at www.irs.gov/irb/2008Ðcorporate stocks generally do not result in arate stocks under a different rule, as dis- 13_IRB/ar13.html.taxable gain or a deductible loss.cussed later. Exchanges of contracts not included in this
Corporate reorganizations. In some in- list, such as an annuity contract for an endow-4. There must be a trade of like property. The stances, a company will give you common stock ment contract, or an annuity or endowment con-trade of real estate for real estate, or per- for preferred stock, preferred stock for common tract for a life insurance contract, are taxable.sonal property for similar personal prop- stock, or stock in one corporation for stock inerty, is a trade of like property. The trade Demutualization of life insurance compa-another corporation. If this is a result of aof an apartment house for a store building, nies. If you received stock in exchange formerger, recapitalization, transfer to a controlledor a panel truck for a pickup truck, is a your equity interest as a policyholder or an annu-corporation, bankruptcy, corporate division, cor-trade of like property. The trade of a piece itant, you generally will not have a recognizedporate acquisition, or other corporate reorgani-of machinery for a store building is not a gain or loss. See Demutualization of Life Insur-zation, you do not recognize gain or loss.trade of like property. Real property lo- ance Companies in Publication 550.
cated in the United States and real prop- Stock for stock of the same corporation.
erty located outside the United States are You can exchange common stock for common U.S. Treasury notes or bonds. You can trade
not like property. Also, personal property stock or preferred stock for preferred stock in the certain issues of U.S. Treasury obligations for
used predominantly within the United same corporation without having a recognized other issues designated by the Secretary of the
States and personal property used gain or loss. This is true for a trade between two Treasury, with no gain or loss recognized on the
predominantly outside the United States stockholders as well as a trade between a stock- trade. See the discussion in chapter 1 of Publi-
are not like property. holder and the corporation. cation 550 for more information.
Page 102 Chapter 14 Sale of Property

Page 105 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Members of your family. This includes only each item may be taxable. However, you cannotTransfers Between deduct the loss on any item. Also, you cannotyour brothers and sisters, half-brothers
Spouses reduce gains from the sales of any of theseand half-sisters, spouse, ancestors (par-
items by losses on the sales of any of the otherents, grandparents, etc.), and lineal de-
Generally, no gain or loss is recognized on a items.scendants (children, grandchildren, etc.).
transfer of property from an individual to (or in
Indirect transactions. You cannot deduct• A partnership in which you directly or indi-trust for the benefit of) a spouse, or if incident to
your loss on the sale of stock through yourrectly own more than 50% of the capitala divorce, a former spouse. This nonrecognition
broker if, under a prearranged plan, a relatedinterest or the profits interest. rule does not apply in the following situations.
party buys the same stock you had owned. This• A corporation in which you directly or indi-• The recipient spouse or former spouse is does not apply to a trade between related par-rectly own more than 50% in value of thea nonresident alien. ties through an exchange that is purely coinci-outstanding stock. (See Constructive own- dental and is not prearranged.• Property is transferred in trust. Gain must ership of stock, later.)be recognized to the extent the amount of Constructive ownership of stock. In de-• A tax-exempt charitable or educational or-the liabilities assumed by the trust, plus termining whether a person directly or indirectlyganization that is directly or indirectly con-any liabilities on the property, exceed the owns any of the outstanding stock of a corpora-trolled, in any manner or by any method,adjusted basis of the property. tion, the following rules apply.by you or by a member of your family,For other situations, see Publication 550, chap- Rule 1. Stock directly or indirectly owned bywhether or not this control is legally en-ter 4. or for a corporation, partnership, estate, or trustforceable. 
is considered owned proportionately by or for itsAny transfer of property to a spouse or former
shareholders, partners, or beneficiaries.In addition, a loss on the sale or trade ofspouse on which gain or loss is not recognized is
treated by the recipient as a gift and is not property is not deductible if the transaction is Rule 2. An individual is considered to ownconsidered a sale or exchange. The recipient's directly or indirectly between the following re- the stock that is directly or indirectly owned by orbasis in the property will be the same as the lated parties. for his or her family. Family includes only broth-adjusted basis of the giver immediately before ers and sisters, half-brothers and half-sisters,• A grantor and fiduciary, or the fiduciarythe transfer. This carryover basis rule applies spouse, ancestors, and lineal descendants.and beneficiary, of any trust. whether the adjusted basis of the transferred
Rule 3. An individual owning, other than byproperty is less than, equal to, or greater than • Fiduciaries of two different trusts, or the
applying rule 2, any stock in a corporation iseither its fair market value at the time of transfer fiduciary and beneficiary of two different
considered to own the stock that is directly oror any consideration paid by the recipient. This trusts, if the same person is the grantor of
indirectly owned by or for his or her partner.rule applies for purposes of determining loss as both trusts. 
well as gain. Any gain recognized on a transfer Rule 4. When applying rule 1, 2, or 3, stock• A trust fiduciary and a corporation of whichin trust increases the basis. constructively owned by a person under rule 1 ismore than 50% in value of the outstandingA transfer of property is incident to a divorce treated as actually owned by that person. Butstock is directly or indirectly owned by orif the transfer occurs within 1 year after the date stock constructively owned by an individualfor the trust, or by or for the grantor of theon which the marriage ends, or if the transfer is under rule 2 or rule 3 is not treated as owned bytrust.related to the ending of the marriage. that individual for again applying either rule 2 or• A corporation and a partnership if the rule 3 to make another person the constructivesame persons own more than 50% inRelated Party Transactions owner of the stock.value of the outstanding stock of the cor-
poration and more than 50% of the capitalSpecial rules apply to the sale or trade of prop- Property received from a related party. Ifinterest, or the profits interest, in the part-erty between related parties. you sell or trade at a gain property that younership. acquired from a related party, you recognize theGain on sale or trade of depreciable prop-
gain only to the extent it is more than the loss• Two S corporations if the same personserty. Your gain from the sale or trade of prop-
previously disallowed to the related party. Thisown more than 50% in value of the out-erty to a related party may be ordinary income,
rule applies only if you are the original transfereestanding stock of each corporation. rather than capital gain, if the property can be
and you acquired the property by purchase ordepreciated by the party receiving it. See chap- • Two corporations, one of which is an S exchange. This rule does not apply if the relatedter 3 of Publication 544 for more information. corporation, if the same persons own party's loss was disallowed because of the washmore than 50% in value of the outstandingLike-kind exchanges. Generally, if you trade sale rules described in chapter 4 of Publicationstock of each corporation.business or investment property for other busi- 550 under Wash Sales.ness or investment property of a like kind, no • An executor and a beneficiary of an estate If you sell or trade at a loss property that yougain or loss is recognized. See Like-kind ex- (except in the case of a sale or trade to acquired from a related party, you cannot recog-changes earlier under Nontaxable Trades. satisfy a pecuniary bequest). nize the loss that was not allowed to the relatedThis rule also applies to trades of property party.• Two corporations that are members of thebetween related parties, defined next under
same controlled group. (Under certainLosses on sales or trades of property. However, Example 1. Your brother sells you stock forconditions, however, these losses are notif either you or the related party disposes of the $7,600. His cost basis is $10,000. Your brotherdisallowed but must be deferred.) like property within 2 years after the trade, you cannot deduct the loss of $2,400. Later, you sellboth must report any gain or loss not recognized • Two partnerships if the same persons the same stock to an unrelated party foron the original trade on your return filed for the own, directly or indirectly, more than 50% $10,500, realizing a gain of $2,900. Your report-year in which the later disposition occurs. See of the capital interests or the profit inter- able gain is $500 (the $2,900 gain minus thePublication 550, chapter 4 for exceptions. ests in both partnerships. $2,400 loss not allowed to your brother).
Losses on sales or trades of property. You
Multiple property sales or trades. If you Example 2. If, in Example 1, you sold thecannot deduct a loss on the sale or trade of
sell or trade to a related party a number of blocks stock for $6,900 instead of $10,500, your recog-property, other than a distribution in complete
of stock or pieces of property in a lump sum, you nized loss is only $700 (your $7,600 basis minusliquidation of a corporation, if the transaction is
must figure the gain or loss separately for each $6,900). You cannot deduct the loss that wasdirectly or indirectly between you and the follow-
not allowed to your brother.ing related parties. block of stock or piece of property. The gain on
Chapter 14 Sale of Property Page 103

Page 106 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3. Real property used in your trade or busi- Capital Asset Treatment for
ness. Self-Created Musical WorksCapital Gains
4. A copyright, a literary, musical, or artistic You can elect to treat musical compositions andcomposition, a letter or memorandum, orand Losses copyrights in musical works as capital assetssimilar property that is: when you sell or exchange them if:This section discusses the tax treatment of
a. Created by your personal efforts,gains and losses from different types of invest- • Your personal efforts created the property,
orment transactions.    b. Prepared or produced for you (in the
case of a letter, memorandum, or simi- • You acquired the property under circum-lar property), orCharacter of gain or loss. You need to clas- stances (for example, by gift) entitling you
sify your gains and losses as either ordinary or to the basis of the person who created thec. Acquired under circumstances (for ex-capital gains or losses. You then need to classify property or for whom it was prepared orample, by gift) entitling you to the basisyour capital gains and losses as either short produced.of the person who created the propertyterm or long term. If you have long-term gains or for whom it was prepared or pro-and losses, you must identify your 28% rate You must make a separate election for eachduced.
gains and losses. If you have a net capital gain, musical composition (or copyright in a musicalFor an exception to this rule, see Capitalyou must also identify any unrecaptured section work) sold or exchanged during the tax year.Asset Treatment for Self-Created Musical1250 gain. You must make the election on or before the dueWorks later. date (including extensions) of the income taxThe correct classification and identification
return for the tax year of the sale or exchange.helps you figure the limit on capital losses and 5. Accounts or notes receivable acquired in
You must make the election on Schedule Dthe correct tax on capital gains. Reporting capi- the ordinary course of a trade or business
(Form 1040) by treating the sale or exchange astal gains and losses is explained in chapter 16. for services rendered or from the sale of
the sale or exchange of a capital asset, accord-property described in (1).
ing to the Schedule D and its instructions.Capital or Ordinary 6. U.S. Government publications that you re- You can revoke the election if you have IRSceived from the government free or for lessGain or Loss approval. To get IRS approval, you must submitthan the normal sales price, or that you a request for a letter ruling under the appropriateacquired under circumstances entitling youIf you have a taxable gain or a deductible loss IRS revenue procedure. See, for example, Rev.to the basis of someone who received thefrom a transaction, it may be either a capital gain Proc. 2009-1, 2009-1 I.R.B. 1, available at www.publications free or for less than the nor-or loss or an ordinary gain or loss, depending on irs.gov/irb/2009-01_IRB/ar06.html . Alterna-mal sales price.the circumstances. Generally, a sale or trade of tively, you are granted an automatic 6-month
a capital asset (defined next) results in a capital extension from the due date of your income tax7. Certain commodities derivative financial in-
gain or loss. A sale or trade of a noncapital asset return (excluding extensions) to revoke the elec-struments held by commodities derivatives
generally results in ordinary gain or loss. De- tion, provided you timely file your income taxdealers.
pending on the circumstances, a gain or loss on return, and within this 6-month extension period,8. Hedging transactions, but only if the trans-a sale or trade of property used in a trade or you file Form 1040X, Amended Individual In-action is clearly identified as a hedging come Tax Return, that treats the sale or ex-business may be treated as either capital or transaction before the close of the day on change as the sale or exchange of property thatordinary, as explained in Publication 544. In which it was acquired, originated, or en- is not a capital asset.some situations, part of your gain or loss may be tered into.a capital gain or loss and part may be an ordi-
9. Supplies of a type you regularly use ornary gain or loss.
consume in the ordinary course of your Discounted Debt Instruments
trade or business.Capital Assets and Treat your gain or loss on the sale, redemption,
or retirement of a bond or other debt instrumentNoncapital Assets
originally issued at a discount or bought at a
Investment Property discount as capital gain or loss, except as ex-For the most part, everything you own and use
plained in the following discussions.for personal purposes, pleasure, or investment Investment property is a capital asset. Any gainis a capital asset. Some examples are: or loss from its sale or trade is generally a capital Short-term government obligations. Treatgain or loss.• Stocks or bonds held in your personal ac- gains on short-term federal, state, or local gov-
count, ernment obligations (other than tax-exempt obli-Gold, silver, stamps, coins, gems, etc. gations) as ordinary income up to your ratable• A house owned and used by you and your These are capital assets except when they are share of the acquisition discount. This treatmentfamily, held for sale by a dealer. Any gain or loss you applies to obligations that have a fixed maturityhave from their sale or trade generally is a capi-• Household furnishings, date not more than 1 year from the date of issue.tal gain or loss. Acquisition discount is the stated redemption• A car used for pleasure or commuting,
price at maturity minus your basis in the obliga-Stocks, stock rights, and bonds. All of these• Coin or stamp collections, tion.(including stock received as a dividend) are cap-
However, do not treat these gains as income• Gems and jewelry, and ital assets except when held for sale by a securi-
to the extent you previously included the dis-ties dealer. However, if you own small business• Gold, silver, or any other metal. count in income. See Discount on Short-Termstock, see Losses on Section 1244 (Small Busi-
Obligations in chapter 1 of Publication 550.ness) Stock and Losses on Small Business In-Any property you own is a capital asset, ex- vestment Company Stock  in chapter 4 ofcept the following noncapital assets. Short-term nongovernment obligations.Publication 550.
Treat gains on short-term nongovernment obli-1. Property held mainly for sale to customers gations as ordinary income up to your ratableor property that will physically become a share of original issue discount (OID). This treat-Personal Use Propertypart of the merchandise that is for sale to ment applies to obligations that have a fixedcustomers. For an exception, see Capital maturity date of not more than 1 year from theProperty held for personal use only, rather thanAsset Treatment for Self-Created Musical date of issue.for investment, is a capital asset, and you mustWorks later. report a gain from its sale as a capital gain. However, to the extent you previously in-
2. Depreciable property used in your trade or However, you cannot deduct a loss from selling cluded the discount in income, you do not have
business, even if fully depreciated. personal use property. to include it in income again. See Discount on
Page 104 Chapter 14 Sale of Property

Page 107 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Short-Term Obligations in chapter 1 of Publica- written commitment that was binding on May 27, Deposit in Insolvent or Bankrupt
tion 550. 1969, and at all times thereafter. Financial Institution
Long-term debt instruments issued afterTax-exempt state and local government If you lose money you have on deposit in a bank,May 27, 1969 (or after July 1, 1982, if a gov-bonds. If these bonds were originally issued credit union, or other financial institution thaternment instrument). If you hold one of theseat a discount before September 4, 1982, or you becomes insolvent or bankrupt, you may be abledebt instruments, you must include a part of theacquired them before March 2, 1984, treat your to deduct your loss in one of three ways.part of the OID as tax-exempt interest. To figure OID in your gross income each year that you
• Ordinary loss,your gain or loss on the sale or trade of these own the instrument. Your basis in that debt in-
bonds, reduce the amount realized by your part strument is increased by the amount of OID that • Casualty loss, orof the OID. you have included in your gross income. See • Nonbusiness bad debt (short-term capitalIf the bonds were issued after September 3, Original Issue Discount (OID)  in chapter 7 for loss).1982, and acquired after March 1, 1984, in- information about the OID that you must reportcrease the adjusted basis by your part of the on your tax return.OID to figure gain or loss. For more information For more information, see Deposit in InsolventIf you sell or trade the debt instrument beforeon the basis of these bonds, see Discounted or Bankrupt Financial Institution, in chapter 4 ofDebt Instruments  in chapter 4 of Publication maturity, your gain is a capital gain. However, if Publication 550.550. at the time the instrument was originally issued
Any gain from market discount is usually there was an intention to call it before its matur- Sale of Annuitytaxable on disposition or redemption of ity, your gain generally is ordinary income to the
tax-exempt bonds. If you bought the bonds extent of the entire OID reduced by any amounts The part of any gain on the sale of an annuitybefore May 1, 1993, the gain from market dis- contract before its maturity date that is based onof OID previously includible in your income. Incount is capital gain. If you bought the bonds interest accumulated on the contract is ordinarythis case, the rest of the gain is a capital gain.after April 30, 1993, the gain is ordinary income. income.You figure the market discount by sub- Market discount bonds. If the debt instru-
tracting the price you paid for the bond from the ment has market discount and you chose to
sum of the original issue price of the bond and include the discount in income as it accrued, Losses on Section 1244 (Smallthe amount of accumulated OID from the date of increase your basis in the debt instrument by the Business) Stockissue that represented interest to any earlier accrued discount to figure capital gain or loss onholders. For more information, see Market Dis- its disposition. If you did not choose to include  You can deduct as an ordinary loss, rather thancount Bonds in chapter 1 of Publication 550. as a capital loss, your loss on the sale, trade, orthe discount in income as it accrued, you mustA loss on the sale or other disposition of a worthlessness of section 1244 stock. Report thereport gain as ordinary interest income up to thetax-exempt state or local government bond is loss on Form 4797, line 10.instrument's accrued market discount. The restdeductible as a capital loss.
of the gain is capital gain. See Market Discount Any gain on section 1244 stock is a capitalRedeemed before maturity. If a state or Bonds in chapter 1 of Publication 550. gain if the stock is a capital asset in your hands.local bond that was issued before June 9, 1980, Report the gain on Schedule D (Form 1040).A different rule applies to market discountis redeemed before it matures, the OID is not See Losses on Section 1244 (Small Business)bonds issued before July 19, 1984, and pur-taxable to you. Stock in chapter 4 of Publication 550.chased by you before May 1, 1993. See MarketIf a state or local bond issued after June 8,
1980, is redeemed before it matures, the part of discount bonds under Discounted Debt Instru-
the OID that is earned while you hold the bond is ments in chapter 4 of Publication 550. Losses on Small Businessnot taxable to you. However, you must report the Retirement of debt instrument. Any Investment Company Stockunearned part of the OID as a capital gain.
amount that you receive on the retirement of a
See Losses on Small Business Investmentdebt instrument is treated in the same way as ifExample. On July 1, 1998, the date of is- Company Stock in chapter 4 of Publication 550.you had sold or traded that instrument.sue, you bought a 20-year, 6% municipal bond
for $800. The face amount of the bond was
$1,000. The $200 discount was OID. At the time Holding PeriodNotes of individuals. If you hold an obligationthe bond was issued, the issuer had no intention of an individual that was issued with OID afterof redeeming it before it matured. The bond was If you sold or traded investment property, youMarch 1, 1984, you generally must include thecallable at its face amount beginning 10 years must determine your holding period for the prop-
OID in your income currently, and your gain orafter the issue date. erty. Your holding period determines whether
loss on its sale or retirement is generally capitalThe issuer redeemed the bond at the end of any capital gain or loss was a short-term or
gain or loss. An exception to this treatment ap-11 years (July 1, 2009) for its face amount of long-term capital gain or loss.
plies if the obligation is a loan between individu-$1,000 plus accrued annual interest of $60. The
OID earned during the time you held the bond, als and all of the following requirements are met. Long term or short term. If you hold invest-$73, is not taxable. The $60 accrued annual • The lender is not in the business of lend- ment property more than 1 year, any capital gaininterest also is not taxable. However, you must ing money. or loss is a long-term capital gain or loss. If youreport the unearned part of the OID ($127) as a
hold the property 1 year or less, any capital gaincapital gain. • The amount of the loan, plus the amount
or loss is a short-term capital gain or loss.of any outstanding prior loans, is $10,000Long-term debt instruments issued after
To determine how long you held the invest-or less.1954 and before May 28, 1969 (or before July
ment property, begin counting on the date after2, 1982, if a government instrument). If you • Avoiding federal tax is not one of the prin- the day you acquired the property. The day yousell, trade, or redeem for a gain one of these cipal purposes of the loan. disposed of the property is part of your holdingdebt instruments, the part of your gain that is not
period.more than your ratable share of the OID at the If the exception applies, or the obligation wastime of the sale or redemption is ordinary in- issued before March 2, 1984, you do not include Example. If you bought investment propertycome. The rest of the gain is capital gain. If, the OID in your income currently. When you sell on February 5, 2008, and sold it on February 5,however, there was an intention to call the debt or redeem the obligation, the part of your gain 2009, your holding period is not more than 1instrument before maturity, all of your gain that is
that is not more than your accrued share of the year and you have a short-term capital gain ornot more than the entire OID is treated as ordi-
OID at that time is ordinary income. The rest of loss. If you sold it on February 6, 2009, yournary income at the time of the sale. This treat-
the gain, if any, is capital gain. Any loss on the holding period is more than 1 year and you willment of taxable gain also applies to corporate
sale or redemption is capital loss. have a long-term capital gain or loss.instruments issued after May 27, 1969, under a
Chapter 14 Sale of Property Page 105

Page 108 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Securities traded on established market. burdens and privileges of ownership, whichever It is not necessary to go to court if you can
For securities traded on an established securi- happened first. However, taking delivery or pos- show that a judgment from the court would be
ties market, your holding period begins the day session of real property under an option agree- uncollectible. You must only show that you have
after the trade date you bought the securities, ment is not enough to start the holding period. taken reasonable steps to collect the debt.
and ends on the trade date you sold them. The holding period cannot start until there is an Bankruptcy of your debtor is generally good evi-
actual contract of sale. The holding period of the dence of the worthlessness of at least a part ofDo not confuse the trade date with the seller cannot end before that time. an unsecured and unpreferred debt.settlement date, which is the date by
which the stock must be delivered and How to report bad debts.  Deduct nonbusi-
CAUTION
!Real property repossessed. If you sell real
payment must be made. ness bad debts as short-term capital losses onproperty but keep a security interest in it, and
Schedule D (Form 1040).then later repossess the property under the
On Schedule D, Part I, line 1, enter the nameExample. You are a cash method, calendar terms of the sales contract, your holding period
of the debtor and ªstatement attachedº in col-year taxpayer. You sold stock at a gain on De- for a later sale includes the period you held the
umn (a). Enter the amount of the bad debt incember 29, 2009. According to the rules of the property before the original sale and the period
parentheses in column (f). Use a separate linestock exchange, the sale was closed by delivery after the repossession. Your holding period
for each bad debt.of the stock 3 trading days after the sale, on does not include the time between the original
For each bad debt, attach a statement toJanuary 4, 2010. You received payment of the sale and the repossession. That is, it does not
your return that contains:sales price on that same day. Report your gain include the period during which the first buyer
on your 2009 return, even though you received held the property. • A description of the debt, including the
the payment in 2010. The gain is long term or amount, and the date it became due,Stock dividends. The holding period for stockshort term depending on whether you held the
• The name of the debtor, and any businessyou received as a taxable stock dividend beginsstock more than 1 year. Your holding period
or family relationship between you and theon the date of distribution.ended on December 29. If you had sold the
debtor,The holding period for new stock you re-stock at a loss, you would also report it on your
ceived as a nontaxable stock dividend begins on2009 return. • The efforts you made to collect the debt,the same day as the holding period of the old andU.S. Treasury notes and bonds. The holding stock. This rule also applies to stock acquired in
period of U.S. Treasury notes and bonds sold at • Why you decided the debt was worthless.a ªspin-off,º which is a distribution of stock or
auction on the basis of yield starts the day after For example, you could show that the bor-securities in a controlled corporation.
the Secretary of the Treasury, through news rower has declared bankruptcy, or that le-
releases, gives notification of acceptance to Nontaxable stock rights. Your holding period gal action to collect would probably not
successful bidders. The holding period of U.S. for nontaxable stock rights begins on the same result in payment of any part of the debt.
Treasury notes and bonds sold through an offer- day as the holding period of the underlying
ing on a subscription basis at a specified yield stock. The holding period for stock acquired Filing a claim for refund.  If you do not
starts the day after the subscription is submitted. through the exercise of stock rights begins on deduct a bad debt on your original return for the
the date the right was exercised. year it becomes worthless, you can file a claimAutomatic investment service. In determin- for a credit or refund due to the bad debt. To doing your holding period for shares bought by the this, use Form 1040X to amend your return forbank or other agent, full shares are considered Nonbusiness Bad Debts the year the debt became worthless. You mustbought first and any fractional shares are con- file it within 7 years from the date your originalIf someone owes you money that you cannotsidered bought last. Your holding period starts return for that year had to be filed, or 2 yearscollect, you have a bad debt. You may be able toon the day after the bank's purchase date. If a from the date you paid the tax, whichever isdeduct the amount owed to you when you figureshare was bought over more than one purchase later. For more information about filing a claim,your tax for the year the debt becomes worth-date, your holding period for that share is a split see Amended Returns and Claims for Refund inless.holding period. A part of the share is considered chapter 1.Generally, nonbusiness bad debts are badto have been bought on each date that stock
debts that did not come from operating yourwas bought by the bank with the proceeds of Additional information. For more informa-
trade or business, and are deductible asavailable funds. tion, see Nonbusiness Bad Debts in Publication
short-term capital losses. To be deductible, non- 550. For information on business bad debts, seeNontaxable trades. If you acquire investment business bad debts must be totally worthless. chapter 10 of Publication 535, Business Ex-property in a trade for other investment property You cannot deduct a partly worthless nonbusi- penses.and your basis for the new property is deter- ness debt.
mined, in whole or in part, by your basis in the
old property, your holding period for the new Wash SalesGenuine debt required. A debt must be gen-
property begins on the day following the date uine for you to deduct a loss. A debt is genuine if
You cannot deduct losses from sales or tradesyou acquired the old property. it arises from a debtor-creditor relationship
of stock or securities in a wash sale.based on a valid and enforceable obligation toProperty received as a gift. If you receive a A wash sale occurs when you sell or traderepay a fixed or determinable sum of money.gift of property and your basis is determined by stock or securities at a loss and within 30 daysthe donor's adjusted basis, your holding period Basis in bad debt required. To deduct a bad before or after the sale you:is considered to have started on the same day debt, you must have a basis in it Ðthat is, you
the donor's holding period started. 1. Buy substantially identical stock or securi-must have already included the amount in your
If your basis is determined by the fair market ties,income or loaned out your cash. For example,
value of the property, your holding period starts you cannot claim a bad debt deduction for 2. Acquire substantially identical stock or se-on the day after the date of the gift. court-ordered child support not paid to you by curities in a fully taxable trade,
your former spouse. If you are a cash methodInherited property. If you inherit investment 3. Acquire a contract or option to buy sub-taxpayer (as most individuals are), you generallyproperty, your capital gain or loss on any later stantially identical stock or securities, orcannot take a bad debt deduction for unpaiddisposition of that property is treated as a
salaries, wages, rents, fees, interest, dividends,long-term capital gain or loss. This is true re- 4. Acquire substantially identical stock for
and similar items.gardless of how long you actually held the prop- your individual retirement account (IRA) or
erty. Roth IRA.When deductible. You can take a bad debt
Real property bought. To figure how long deduction only in the year the debt becomes If your loss was disallowed because of the
you have held real property bought under an worthless. You do not have to wait until a debt is wash sale rules, add the disallowed loss to the
unconditional contract, begin counting on the due to determine whether it is worthless. A debt cost of the new stock or securities (except in (4)
day after you received title to it or on the day becomes worthless when there is no longer any above). The result is your basis in the new stock
after you took possession of it and assumed the chance that the amount owed will be paid. or securities. This adjustment postpones the
Page 106 Chapter 14 Sale of Property

Page 109 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
loss deduction until the disposition of the new Basis of replacement property. You must most cases). See Excluding the Gain , later. If
subtract the amount of postponed gain from the you can exclude all of the gain, you do not needstock or securities. Your holding period for the
basis of your replacement property. to report the sale on your tax return.new stock or securities begins on the same day
If you have gain that cannot be excluded, it isas the holding period of the stock or securities How to report and postpone gain.  See taxable. Report it on Schedule D (Form 1040).sold. chapter 4 of Publication 550 for details on how to You may also have to complete Form 4797,For more information, see Wash Sales , in report and postpone the gain. Sales of Business Property. See Reporting the
chapter 4 of Publication 550. Sale, later.
If you have a loss on the sale, you cannot
deduct it on your return. However, you may needRollover of Gain From
to report it. See Reporting the Sale, later.
Publicly Traded Securities The following are main topics in this chapter.
• Figuring gain or loss.You may qualify for a tax-free rollover of certain 15.
gains from the sale of publicly traded securities. • Basis.
This means that if you buy certain replacement
• Excluding the gain.property and make the choice described in this
Selling Yoursection, you postpone part or all of your gain. • Ownership and use tests.
You postpone the gain by adjusting the basis • Reporting the sale.
of the replacement property as described in Ba- Home
Other topics include the following.sis of replacement property , later. This
postpones your gain until the year you dispose • Business use or rental of home.
of the replacement property. What's New • Recapturing a federal mortgage subsidy.
You qualify to make this choice if you meet
all the following tests. First-time homebuyer credit. The first-time Useful Itemshomebuyer credit has been expanded for• You sell publicly traded securities at a You may want to see:homes bought after 2008 and before May 1,gain. Publicly traded securities are securi-
2010 (before July 1, 2010, if you entered into aties traded on an established securities Publicationwritten binding contract before May 1, 2010).market. The maximum amount of the credit has been ❏ 523 Selling Your Home• Your gain from the sale is a capital gain. increased, and the recapture rules have
❏ 530 Tax Information for First-Timechanged. You will not have to repay the credit for• During the 60-day period beginning on the Homeownersa home you purchased in 2009 or 2010 if youdate of the sale, you buy replacement use it as your main home for the entire 36-month ❏ 547 Casualties, Disasters, and Theftsproperty. This replacement property must period beginning on the purchase date. (Seebe either common stock or a partnership Reminders, below, and Chapter 37 for details.) Form (and Instructions)interest in a specialized small business in-
Nonqualified use. Gain from the sale or ex-vestment company (SSBIC). This is any ❏ Schedule D (Form 1040) Capital Gainschange of a main home cannot be excludedpartnership or corporation licensed by the and Lossesfrom income if the gain is allocable to periods ofSmall Business Administration under sec- ❏ 982 Reduction of Tax Attributes Due tononqualified use. See Periods of nonqualifiedtion 301(d) of the Small Business Invest- Discharge of Indebtedness (anduse, later.ment Act of 1958, as in effect on May 13, Section 1082 Basis Adjustments)1993.
❏ 8828 Recapture of Federal Mortgage
SubsidyAmount of gain recognized. If you make the Reminderschoice described in this section, you must rec-
ognize gain only up to the following amount. Home sold with undeducted points. If you
• The amount realized on the sale, minus have not deducted all the points you paid to Main Homesecure a mortgage on your old home, you may• The cost of any common stock or partner- be able to deduct the remaining points in theship interest in an SSBIC that you bought This section explains the term ªmain home.ºyear of the sale. See Mortgage ending early Usually, the home you live in most of the time isduring the 60-day period beginning on the under Points in chapter 23. your main home and can be a:date of sale (and did not previously take
Recapturing the first-time homebuyer credit.into account on an earlier sale of publicly • House,If you claimed the first-time homebuyer credit intraded securities).
• Houseboat,2008, and you sold the home or the home
stopped being your main home in 2009, you • Mobile home,If this amount is less than the amount of your generally must repay the credit. You repay the
gain, you can postpone the rest of your gain, • Cooperative apartment, orcredit by including it as additional tax on the
subject to the limit described next. If this amount return for the year your home stops being your • Condominium.is equal to or more than the amount of your gain, main home. For details, see chapter 37.
you must recognize the full amount of your gain. To exclude gain under the rules of this chap-
ter, you generally must have owned and lived inLimit on gain postponed. The amount of
the property as your main home for at least 2gain you can postpone each year is limited to the
years during the 5-year period ending on theIntroductionsmaller of:
date of sale.This chapter explains the tax rules that apply• $50,000 ($25,000 if you are married and
when you sell your main home. Generally, your Land. If you sell the land on which your mainfile a separate return), or
main home is the one in which you live most of home is located, but not the house itself, you
• $500,000 ($250,000 if you are married the time. cannot exclude any gain you have from the sale
and file a separate return), minus the If you sold your main home in 2009, you may of the land. However, if you sell vacant land
amount of gain you postponed for all ear- be able to exclude from income any gain up to a used as part of your main home and that is
lier years. limit of $250,000 ($500,000 on a joint return in adjacent to it, you may be able to exclude the
Chapter 15 Selling Your Home Page 107

Page 110 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
gain from the sale under certain circumstances. you must report the amount as ordinary income the rules discussed in this chapter on an individ-
See Vacant land under Main Home in Publica- in the year the option expires. Report this ual basis.
tion 523 for more information. amount on Form 1040, line 21, or on Form
1040NR, line 21. Dispositions Other ThanExample. You buy a piece of land and move
Form 1099-S. If you received Form 1099-S, Salesyour main home to it. Then you sell the land on
Proceeds From Real Estate Transactions, box 2which your main home was located. This sale is
(gross proceeds) should show the total amount Some special rules apply to other dispositions ofnot considered a sale of your main home, and
you received for your home. your main home.you cannot exclude any gain on the sale of the
However, box 2 will not include the fair mar-land.
ket value of any services or property other than Foreclosure or repossession. If your home
More than one home. If you have more than cash or notes you received or will receive. In- was foreclosed on or repossessed, you have a
one home, you can exclude gain only from the stead, box 4 will be checked to indicate your disposition.
sale of your main home. You must include in receipt or expected receipt of these items. You figure the gain or loss from the disposi-income gain from the sale of any other home. If If you can exclude the entire gain, the person tion in generally the same way as gain or lossyou have two homes and live in both of them, responsible for closing the sale generally will not from a sale. But the selling price of your homeyour main home is ordinarily the one you live in have to report it on Form 1099-S. If you do not used to figure the amount of your gain or lossmost of the time. receive Form 1099-S, use sale documents and depends, in part, on whether you were person-
other records to figure the total amount you ally liable for repaying the debt secured by theExample 1. You own and live in a house in received for your home. home and whether the debt is qualified principalthe city. You also own a beach house, which you residence indebtedness. See Publication 523use during summer months. The house in the for more information.Amount Realizedcity is your main home.
Form 1099-A and Form 1099-C. Generally,The amount realized is the selling price minusExample 2. You own a house, but you live in you will receive Form 1099-A, Acquisition orselling expenses.another house that you rent. The rented house is Abandonment of Secured Property, from your
your main home. lender if your home is transferred in a foreclo-Selling expenses. Selling expenses include:
sure. This form will have the information youProperty used partly as your main home. If • Commissions, need to determine the amount of your gain oryou use only part of the property as your main loss and any ordinary income from cancellation• Advertising fees,home, the rules discussed in this chapter apply of debt that is not a discharge of qualified princi-only to the gain or loss on the sale of that part of • Legal fees, and pal residence indebtedness. If your debt is can-the property. For details, see Business Use or celed, you may receive Form 1099-C,• Loan charges paid by the seller, such asRental of Home, later. Cancellation of Debt.loan placement fees or ªpoints.º
Discharges of qualified principal residence
indebtedness. You may be able to excludeAdjusted BasisFiguring Gain or Loss from gross income a discharge of qualified prin-
cipal residence indebtedness. This exclusionWhile you owned your home, you may have
To figure the gain or loss on the sale of your applies to discharges made after 2006 andmade adjustments (increases or decreases) to
main home, you must know the selling price, the before 2013. If you choose to exclude this in-the basis. This adjusted basis must be deter-
amount realized, and the adjusted basis. Sub- come, you must reduce (but not below zero) themined before you can figure gain or loss on the
tract the adjusted basis from the amount real- basis of the principal residence by the amountsale of your home. For information on how to
ized to get your gain or loss. excluded from your gross income.figure your home's adjusted basis, see Deter-
mining Basis, later. File Form 982 with your tax return. See theSelling price form's instructions for detailed information.− Selling expenses
Amount of Gain or Loss Principal residence. Your principal resi-Amount realized dence is the home where you ordinarily live most
To figure the amount of gain or loss, compare of the time. You can have only one principalAmount realized the amount realized to the adjusted basis. residence at any one time. See Main Home ,− Adjusted basis earlier.Gain on sale. If the amount realized is moreGain or loss Qualified principal residence indebted-than the adjusted basis, the difference is a gain
ness. This indebtedness is a mortgage youand, except for any part you can exclude, gener-
took out to buy, build, or substantially improveally is taxable.Selling Price your principal residence. It also must be secured
Loss on sale. If the amount realized is less by your principal residence.The selling price is the total amount you receive than the adjusted basis, the difference is a loss.
for your home. It includes money; all notes, Amount eligible for the exclusion. TheA loss on the sale of your main home cannot be
mortgages, or other debts assumed by the exclusion applies only to debt discharged afterdeducted.
buyer as part of the sale; and the fair market 2006 and before 2013. The maximum amount
value of any other property or any services you Jointly owned home. If you and your spouse you can treat as qualified principal residence
receive. sell your jointly owned home and file a joint indebtedness is $2 million ($1 million if married
return, you figure your gain or loss as one tax- filing separately). You cannot exclude fromPayment by employer. You may have to sell payer. gross income discharge of qualified principalyour home because of a job transfer. If your residence indebtedness if the discharge was foremployer pays you for a loss on the sale or for Separate returns. If you file separate re- services performed for the lender or on accountyour selling expenses, do not include the pay- turns, each of you must figure your own gain or of any other factor not directly related to a de-ment as part of the selling price. Your employer loss according to your ownership interest in the cline in the value of your residence or to yourwill include it as wages in box 1 of your Form home. Your ownership interest is determined by financial condition.W-2 and you will include it in your income on state law.
Form 1040, line 7, or on Form 1040NR, line 8. Abandonment. If you abandon your home,Joint owners not married. If you and a
you may have ordinary income. If the aban-Option to buy. If you grant an option to buy joint owner other than your spouse sell your
doned home secures a debt for which you areyour home and the option is exercised, add the jointly owned home, each of you must figure
personally liable and the debt is canceled, youamount you receive for the option to the selling your own gain or loss according to your owner-
have ordinary income equal to the amount of theprice of your home. If the option is not exercised, ship interest in the home. Each of you applies
Page 108 Chapter 15 Selling Your Home

Page 111 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
canceled debt. See Publication 523 for more include costs of construction, as discussed in • Insurance payments you received or ex-
information. Publication 523. pect to receive for casualty losses.
• Payments you received for granting anTrading (exchanging) homes. If you trade Settlement fees or closing costs. When you
easement or right-of-way.your old home for another home, treat the trade bought your home, you may have paid settle-
as a sale and a purchase. ment fees or closing costs in addition to the • Depreciation allowed or allowable if you
contract price of the property. You can include in used your home for business or rental pur-Example. You owned and lived in a home your basis some of the settlement fees and poses.with an adjusted basis of $41,000. A real estate closing costs you paid for buying the home, but
dealer accepted your old home as a trade-in and • Residential energy credit (generally al-not the fees and costs for getting a mortgage
allowed you $50,000 toward a new home priced lowed from 1977 through 1987) claimedloan. A fee paid for buying the home is any fee
at $80,000. This is treated as a sale of your old for the cost of energy improvements thatyou would have had to pay even if you paid cash
home for $50,000 with a gain of $9,000 ($50,000 for the home (that is, without the need for financ- you added to the basis of your home.
± $41,000). ing). • Nonbusiness energy property credit (al-If the dealer had allowed you $27,000 and Chapter 13 lists some of the settlement fees lowed beginning in 2006 but not for 2008)assumed your unpaid mortgage of $23,000 on and closing costs that you can include in the claimed for making certain energy savingyour old home, your sales price would still be basis of property, including your home. It also improvements that you added to the basis$50,000 (the $27,000 trade-in allowed plus the lists some settlement costs that cannot be in-
of your home.$23,000 mortgage assumed). cluded in basis.
Also see Publication 523 for additional items • Residential energy efficient property creditTransfer to spouse. If you transfer your home and a discussion of basis other than cost. (allowed beginning in 2006) claimed forto your spouse or to your former spouse incident
making certain energy saving improve-to your divorce, you generally have no gain or
ments that you added to the basis of yourloss. This is true even if you receive cash or Adjusted Basis home.other consideration for the home. Therefore, the
rules in this chapter do not apply. Adjusted basis is your cost or other basis in- • Adoption credit you claimed for improve-
creased or decreased by certain amounts. To ments added to the basis of your home.More information. If you need more infor-
figure your adjusted basis, you can use Work-mation, see Transfer to spouse in Publication • Nontaxable payments from an adoptionsheet 1 in Publication 523.523 and Property Settlements in Publication assistance program of your employer that504, Divorced or Separated Individuals. you used for improvements you added toIncreases to basis. These include the follow-
the basis of your home.Involuntary conversion. You have a disposi- ing.
tion when your home is destroyed or con- • Energy conservation subsidy excluded• Additions and other improvements thatdemned and you receive other property or from your gross income because you re-have a useful life of more than 1 year.money in payment, such as insurance or a con- ceived it (directly or indirectly) from a pub-demnation award. This is treated as a sale and • Special assessments for local improve- lic utility after 1992 to buy or install anyyou may be able to exclude all or part of any gain ments. energy conservation measure. An energyfrom the destruction or condemnation of your • Amounts you spent after a casualty to re- conservation measure is an installation orhome, as explained later under Special Situa- store damaged property. modification that is primarily designed ei-tions.
ther to reduce consumption of electricity or
Improvements. These add to the value of natural gas or to improve the managementDetermining Basis your home, prolong its useful life, or adapt it to of energy demand for a home.
new uses. You add the cost of additions and
You need to know your basis in your home to • District of Columbia first-time homebuyerother improvements to the basis of your prop-
figure any gain or loss when you sell it. Your credit (allowed on the purchase of a princi-erty.
basis in your home is determined by how you got pal residence in the District of ColumbiaFor example, putting a recreation room or
the home. Your basis is its cost if you bought it or beginning on August 5, 1997).another bathroom in your unfinished basement,
built it. If you got it in some other way (inheri- putting up a new fence, putting in new plumbing
tance, gift, etc.), your basis is either its fair mar- or wiring, putting on a new roof, or paving your Recordkeeping.  You should keepket value when you received it or the adjusted unpaved driveway are improvements. An addi- records to prove your home's adjustedbasis of the previous owner. tion to your house, such as a new deck, a sun- basis. Ordinarily, you must keep rec-
RECORDSWhile you owned your home, you may have room, or a new garage, is also an improvement. ords for 3 years after the due date for filing yourmade adjustments (increases or decreases) to return for the tax year in which you sold yourRepairs. These maintain your home in goodyour home's basis. The result of these adjust-
condition but do not add to its value or prolong home. But if you sold a home before May 7,ments is your home's adjusted basis, which is
its life. You do not add their cost to the basis of 1997, and postponed tax on any gain, the basisused to figure gain or loss on the sale of your
your property. of that home affects the basis of the new homehome. See Adjusted Basis, later.
For example, repainting your house inside or you bought. Keep records proving the basis ofYou can find more information on basis and
outside, fixing your gutters or floors, repairing both homes as long as they are needed for taxadjusted basis in chapter 13 of this publication
leaks or plastering, and replacing broken win- purposes.and in Publication 523.
dow panes are examples of repairs. The records you should keep include:
Decreases to basis. These include the fol- • Proof of the home's purchase price andCost As Basis lowing. purchase expenses,
The cost of property is the amount you pay for it • Discharges of qualified principal indebted- • Receipts and other records for all improve-in cash, debt obligations, other property, or serv- ness (but do not reduce basis below zero). ments, additions, and other items that af-ices. fect the home's adjusted basis,• Gain you postponed from the sale of a
Purchase. If you buy your home, your basis is previous home before May 7, 1997. • Any worksheets or other computations youits cost to you. This includes the purchase price used to figure the adjusted basis of the• General sales taxes claimed as an item-and certain settlement or closing costs. Gener- home you sold, the gain or loss on theized deduction on Schedule A (Formally, your purchase price includes your down sale, the exclusion, and the taxable gain,1040) that were imposed on the purchasepayment and any debt, such as a first or second of personal property, such as a houseboat • Any Form 982 that you filed to report anymortgage or notes you gave the seller in pay- used as your home or a mobile home. discharge of qualified principal residencement for the home. If you build, or contract to
build, a new home, your purchase price can • Deductible casualty losses. indebtedness,
Chapter 15 Selling Your Home Page 109

Page 112 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Any Form 2119, Sale of Your Home, that Example 1 Ðhome owned and occupied Example. In 2000, Helen Jones lived in a
you filed to postpone gain from the sale of rented apartment. The apartment building wasfor at least 2 years. Amanda bought and
a previous home before May 7, 1997, and later converted to condominiums, and shemoved into her main home in September 2006.
bought her same apartment on December 3,She sold the home at a gain on September 15,• Any worksheets you used to prepare Form 2006. In 2007, Helen became ill and on April 142009. During the 5-year period ending on the2119, such as the Adjusted Basis of Home of that year she moved to her daughter's home.date of sale (September 16, 2004 ±SeptemberSold Worksheet or the Capital Improve- On July 12, 2009, while still living in her daugh-15, 2009), she owned and lived in the home forments Worksheet from the Form 2119 in- ter's home, she sold her condominium.more than 2 years. She meets the ownershipstructions, or other source of Helen can exclude gain on the sale of herand use tests.computations. condominium because she met the ownership
and use tests during the 5-year period from JulyExample 2 Ðownership test met but use
13, 2004, to July 12, 2009, the date she sold thetest not met. Dan bought a home in 2003.
condominium. She owned her condominiumAfter living in it for 6 months, he moved out. He
from December 3, 2006, to July 12, 2009 (morenever lived in the home again and sold it at aExcluding the Gain than 2 years). She lived in the property from Julygain on June 28, 2009. He owned the home
13, 2004 (the beginning of the 5-year period), toduring the entire 5-year period ending on theYou may qualify to exclude from your income all April 14, 2007 (more than 2 years).date of sale (June 29, 2004 ±June 28, 2009).or part of any gain from the sale of your main The time Helen lived in her daughter's homeHowever, he did not live in it for the required 2home. This means that, if you qualify, you will during the 5-year period can be counted towardyears. He meets the ownership test but not thenot have to pay tax on the gain up to the limit her period of ownership, and the time she liveduse test. He cannot exclude any part of his gaindescribed under Maximum Exclusion, next. To in her rented apartment during the 5-year periodon the sale, unless he qualified for a reducedqualify, you must meet the ownership and use can be counted toward her period of use.maximum exclusion (explained later).tests described later.
You can choose not to take the exclusion by Cooperative apartment. If you sold stock as
including the gain from the sale in your gross a tenant-stockholder in a cooperative housing
Period of Ownership and Useincome on your tax return for the year of the corporation, the ownership and use tests are
sale. met if, during the 5-year period ending on theThe required 2 years of ownership and use dur- date of sale, you:You can use Worksheet 2 in Publication 523 ing the 5-year period ending on the date of theto figure the amount of your exclusion and your • Owned the stock for at least 2 years, andsale do not have to be continuous nor do theytaxable gain, if any. have to occur at the same time. • Lived in the house or apartment that theIf you have any taxable gain from the  You meet the tests if you can show that you stock entitles you to occupy as your mainsale of your home, you may have to owned and lived in the property as your main home for at least 2 years.increase your withholding or make esti-
CAUTION
! home for either 24 full months or 730 days (365
mated tax payments. See Publication 505, Tax ×  2) during the 5-year period ending on the date
Withholding and Estimated Tax. Exceptions to Ownership and Useof sale.
Tests
Temporary absence. Short temporary ab-Maximum Exclusion The following sections contain exceptions to thesences for vacations or other seasonal ab- ownership and use tests for certain taxpayers.sences, even if you rent out the property duringYou can exclude up to $250,000 of the gain on
the absences, are counted as periods of use.the sale of your main home if all of the following Exception for individuals with a disability.
The following examples assume that the re-are true. There is an exception to the use test if, during
duced maximum exclusion (discussed later) the 5-year period before the sale of your home:• You meet the ownership test. does not apply to the sales. • You become physically or mentally unable• You meet the use test. to care for yourself, andExample 1. David Johnson, who is single,• During the 2-year period ending on the bought and moved into his home on February 1, • You owned and lived in your home as yourdate of the sale, you did not exclude gain 2007. Each year during 2007 and 2008, David main home for a total of at least 1 year.from the sale of another home. left his home for a 2-month summer vacation. Under this exception, you are considered to liveDavid sold the house on March 1, 2009. Al-You may be able to exclude up to $500,000 of in your home during any time that you own thethough the total time David used his home isthe gain on the sale of your main home if you are home and live in a facility (including a nursingless than 2 years (21 months), he may excludemarried and file a joint return and meet the home) that is licensed by a state or politicalany gain up to $250,000. The 2-month vacationsrequirements listed in the discussion of the spe- subdivision to care for persons in your condition.are short temporary absences and are countedcial rules for joint returns, later, under Married as periods of use in determining whether David If you meet this exception to the use test, youPersons. used the home for the required 2 years. still have to meet the 2-out-of-5-year ownership
test to claim the exclusion.
Ownership and Use Tests Example 2. Professor Paul Beard, who is
Previous home destroyed or condemned.single, bought and moved into a house on Au- For the ownership and use tests, you add theTo claim the exclusion, you must meet the own- gust 28, 2006. He lived in it as his main home time you owned and lived in a previous homeership and use tests. This means that during the continuously until January 5, 2008, when he that was destroyed or condemned to the time5-year period ending on the date of the sale, you went abroad for a 1-year sabbatical leave. On you owned and lived in the replacement homemust have: February 6, 2009, 1 month after returning from on whose sale you wish to exclude gain. Thisthe leave, Paul sold the house at a gain. Be-• Owned the home for at least 2 years (the rule applies if any part of the basis of the homecause his leave was not a short temporary ab-ownership test), and you sold depended on the basis of the destroyedsence, he cannot include the period of leave to or condemned home. Otherwise, you must have• Lived in the home as your main home for meet the 2-year use test. He cannot exclude any owned and lived in the same home for 2 of the 5at least 2 years (the use test). part of his gain, because he did not use the years before the sale to qualify for the exclusion.residence for the required 2 years.
Exception. If you owned and lived in the prop- Members of the uniformed services or For-
Ownership and use tests met at differenterty as your main home for less than 2 years, eign Service, employees of the intelligence
times. You can meet the ownership and useyou can still claim an exclusion in some cases. community, or employees or volunteers of
tests during different 2-year periods. However,The maximum amount you may be able to ex- the Peace Corps. You can choose to have the
you must meet both tests during the 5-year pe-clude will be reduced. See Reduced Maximum 5-year test period for ownership and use sus-
riod ending on the date of the sale.Exclusion, later. pended during any period you or your spouse
Page 110 Chapter 15 Selling Your Home

Page 113 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
serve on ªqualified official extended dutyº as a • You or your spouse met the ownershipMarried Persons
member of the uniformed services or Foreign test at the time of your spouse's death.
If you and your spouse file a joint return for theService of the United States, as an employee of • Neither you nor your spouse excludedyear of sale and one spouse meets the owner-the intelligence community, or as an employee gain from the sale of another home duringship and use test, you can exclude up toor volunteer of the Peace Corps. This means the last 2 years.$250,000 of the gain. (But see Special rules forthat you may be able to meet the 2-year use test joint returns, next.)even if, because of your service, you did not Example. Harry has owned and used aactually live in your home for at least the re- house as his main home since 2006. Harry andSpecial rules for joint returns. You can ex-quired 2 years during the 5-year period ending Wilma marry on July 1, 2009, and from that dateclude up to $500,000 of the gain on the sale ofon the date of sale. they use Harry's house as their main home.your main home if all of the following are true.If this helps you qualify to exclude gain, you Harry died on August 15, 2009, and Wilma in-• You are married and file a joint return forcan choose to have the 5-year test period sus- herited the property. Wilma sold the property onthe year.pended by filing a return for the year of sale that September 1, 2009, at which time she had not
does not include the gain. • Either you or your spouse meets the own- remarried. Although Wilma owned and used the
ership test. house for less than 2 years, Wilma is consideredExample. David bought and moved into a to have satisfied the ownership and use tests• Both you and your spouse meet the usehome in 2001. He lived in it as his main home for because her period of ownership and use in-test.21/2 years. For the next 6 years, he did not live in cludes the period that Harry owned and used theit because he was on qualified official extended • During the 2-year period ending on the property before death.duty with the Army. He then sold the home at a date of the sale, neither you nor your
spouse excluded gain from the sale of an-gain in 2009. To meet the use test, David
Home transferred from spouse. If yourother home.chooses to suspend the 5-year test period for
home was transferred to you by your spouse (orthe 6 years he was on qualified official extended If either spouse does not satisfy all these re- former spouse if the transfer was incident toduty. This means he can disregard those 6 quirements, the maximum exclusion that can be
divorce), you are considered to have owned ityears. Therefore, David's 5-year test period con- claimed by the couple is the total of the maxi-
sists of the 5 years before he went on qualified during any period of time when your spousemum exclusions that each spouse would qualify
official extended duty. He meets the ownership owned it.for if not married and the amounts were figured
and use tests because he owned and lived in the separately. For this purpose, each spouse is
home for 21/2 years during this test period. treated as owning the property during the period Use of home after divorce. You are consid-that either spouse owned the property.Period of suspension. The period of sus- ered to have used property as your main home
pension cannot last more than 10 years. To- during any period when:Example 1 Ðone spouse sells a home.gether, the 10-year suspension period and the Emily sells her home in June 2009. She marries • You owned it, and5-year test period can be as long as, but no Jamie later in the year. She meets the owner- • Your spouse or former spouse is allowedmore than, 15 years. You cannot suspend the ship and use tests, but Jamie does not. Emily5-year period for more than one property at a to live in it under a divorce or separationcan exclude up to $250,000 of gain on a sepa-time. You can revoke your choice to suspend the instrument and uses it as his or her mainrate or joint return for 2009. The $500,000 maxi-
5-year period at any time. home.mum exclusion for certain joint returns does not
apply because Jamie does not meet the useFor more information about the suspension
test.of the 5-year test period, see Members of the
Reduced Maximumuniformed services or Foreign Service, employ-
Example 2 Ðeach spouse sells a home.ees of the intelligence community, or employees Exclusion
The facts are the same as in Example 1 exceptor volunteers of the Peace Corps in Publication
that Jamie also sells a home in 2009 before he If you fail to meet the requirements to qualify for523.
marries Emily. He meets the ownership and use the $250,000 or $500,000 exclusion, you may
tests on his home, but Emily does not. Emily and still qualify for a reduced exclusion. This appliesPeriods of nonqualified use. Generally, the Jamie can each exclude up to $250,000 of gain to those who:gain from the sale or exchange of your main from the sale of their individual homes. The
home will not qualify for the exclusion to the • Fail to meet the ownership and use tests,$500,000 maximum exclusion for certain joint
extent that the gains are allocated to periods of orreturns does not apply because Emily and Ja-
nonqualified use. Nonqualified use is any period mie do not jointly meet the use test for the same • Have used the exclusion within 2 years ofafter December 31, 2008, during which the prop- home. selling their current home.erty is not used as the main home.
.Sale of main home by surviving spouse. IfThe gain resulting from the sale of the prop-
your spouse died and you did not remarry beforeerty is allocated between qualified and nonquali- In both cases, to qualify for a reduced exclu-
the date of sale, you are considered to havefied use periods based on the amount of time the sion, the sale of your main home must be due toowned and lived in the property as your mainproperty was held for qualified and nonqualified one of the following reasons.home during any period of time when youruse. Gain from the sale or exchange of a main • A change in place of employment.spouse owned and lived in it as a main home.home allocable to periods of qualified use will
If you meet all of the following requirements,continue to qualify for the exclusion for the sale • Health.
you may qualify to exclude up to $500,000 ofof your main home. Gain from the sale or ex- • Unforeseen circumstances.any gain from the sale or exchange of your mainchange of property allocable to nonqualified use
home.will not qualify for the exclusion.
Unforeseen circumstances. The sale of your• The sale or exchange took place afterGain is generally allocated to periods of non- main home is because of an unforeseen circum-2008.qualified use based on the ratio which: (1) the stance if your primary reason for the sale is theaggregate periods of nonqualified use during the • The sale or exchange took place no more occurrence of an event that you could not rea-period the property was owned by you over (2) than 2 years after the date of death of your sonably have anticipated before buying and oc-the total period the property was owned by you. spouse. cupying your main home.You do not incorporate any period before 2009 • You have not remarried. See Publication 523 for more informationfor the aggregate periods of nonqualified use.
and to use Worksheet 3 to figure your reducedCertain exceptions apply. For details, see Publi- • You and your spouse met the use test at
cation 523. maximum exclusion.the time of your spouse's death.
Chapter 15 Selling Your Home Page 111

Page 114 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Business Use or Reporting the Sale Special Situations
The situations that follow may affect your exclu-Rental of Home Do not report the 2009 sale of your main home
sion.on your tax return unless:
You may be able to exclude gain from the sale of • You have a gain and you do not qualify toa home that you have used for business or to Sale of home acquired in a like-kind ex-exclude all of it,produce rental income. But you must meet the change. You cannot claim the exclusion if:
• You have a gain and you choose not toownership and use tests. • You acquired your home in a like-kind ex-exclude it, or change (also known as a section 1031 ex-Example 1. On May 29, 2003, Amy bought change) or your basis in your home is• You have a loss and you received Forma house. She moved in on that date and lived in determined by reference to the basis of1099-S.it until May 31, 2005, when she moved out of the the home in the hands of the person who
house and put it up for rent. The house was acquired the property in a like-kind ex- If you have any taxable gain on the sale ofrented from June 1, 2005, to March 31, 2007. change (for example, you received theyour main home that cannot be excluded, reportAmy moved back into the house on April 1, home from that person as a gift), andthe entire gain on Schedule D (Form 1040).
2007, and lived there until she sold it on January Report it in column (f) of line 1 or line 8 of • You sold the home during the 5-year pe-30, 2009. During the 5-year period ending on the Schedule D, as short-term or long-term capital riod beginning with the date your homedate of the sale (January 31, 2004±January 30, gain depending on how long you owned the was acquired in the like-kind exchange.
2009), Amy owned and lived in the house for home. If you qualify for an exclusion, show it on Gain from a like-kind exchange is not taxable atmore than 2 years as shown in the following the line directly below the line on which you the time of the exchange. This means that gaintable. report the gain. Enter ªSection 121 exclusionº in will not be taxed until you sell or otherwise dis-column (a) of that line and show the amount of pose of the property you receive. To defer gainFive Year Used as Used as the exclusion in column (f) as a loss (in paren- from a like-kind exchange, you must have ex- Period  Home  Rental theses). changed business or investment property for
 1/31/04 ± business or investment property of a like kind.If you have a loss on the sale of your main
5/31/05 16 months For more information about like-kind ex-home for which you received a Form 1099-S,
changes, see Publication 544, Sales and Otheryou must report the loss on Schedule D even 6/1/05 ± Dispositions of Assets.though the loss is not deductible. Report the3/31/07  22 months
transaction on line 1 or 8, as above. Complete Home relinquished in a like-kind exchange. 4/1/07 ± columns (a) through (e). Enter -0- in column (f). If you use your main home partly for business or1/30/09 22 months
If you used the home for business or to rental purposes and then exchange the home38 months 22 months
produce rental income, you may have to use for another property, see Publication 523.
Form 4797 to report the sale of the business orAmy can exclude gain up to $250,000. However,
rental part (or the sale of the entire property ifshe cannot exclude the part of the gain equal to Expatriates. You cannot claim the exclusion ifused entirely for business or rental). See Busi-the depreciation she claimed or could have the expatriation tax applies to you. The expatria-ness Use or Rental of Home  in Publication 523claimed for renting the house, as explained later tion tax applies to certain U.S. citizens who haveand the Instructions for Form 4797.under Depreciation after May 6, 1997. renounced their citizenship (and to certain
long-term residents who have ended their resi-Installment sale. Some sales are made underExample 2. William owned and used a dency). For more information about the expatria-
arrangements that provide for part or all of thehouse as his main home from 2003 through tion tax, see chapter 4 of Publication 519, U.S.
selling price to be paid in a later year. These2006. On January 1, 2007, he moved to another Tax Guide for Aliens.
sales are called ªinstallment sales.º If you fi-state. He rented his house from that date until
nance the buyer's purchase of your home your-April 30, 2009, when he sold it. During the 5-year Home destroyed or condemned. If yourself instead of having the buyer get a loan orperiod ending on the date of sale (May 1, home was destroyed or condemned, any gainmortgage from a bank, you probably have an2004±April 30, 2009), William owned and lived (for example, because of insurance proceedsinstallment sale. You may be able to report thein the house for 32 months (more than 2 years). you received) qualifies for the exclusion.part of the gain you cannot exclude on the in-He must report the sale on Form 4797 because Any part of the gain that cannot be excludedstallment basis.it was rental property at the time of sale. Be- (because it is more than the maximum exclu-Use Form 6252, Installment Sale Income, tocause he met the ownership and use tests, he sion) can be postponed under the rules ex-report the sale. Enter your exclusion on line 15can exclude gain up to $250,000. However, he plained in:
of Form 6252.cannot exclude the part of the gain equal to the • Publication 547, in the case of a home thatdepreciation he claimed or could have claimed Seller-financed mortgage. If you sell your was destroyed, orfor renting the house, as explained next. home and hold a note, mortgage, or other finan- • Publication 544, chapter 1, in the case of acial agreement, the payments you receive gen- home that was condemned.Depreciation after May 6, 1997. If you were erally consist of both interest and principal. You
entitled to take depreciation deductions be- must separately report as interest income the
Sale of remainder interest. Subject to thecause you used your home for business pur- interest you receive as part of each payment. If other rules in this chapter, you can choose toposes or as rental property, you cannot exclude the buyer of your home uses the property as a exclude gain from the sale of a remainder inter-main or second home, you must also report thethe part of your gain equal to any depreciation est in your home. If you make this choice, youname, address, and social security numberallowed or allowable as a deduction for periods cannot choose to exclude gain from your sale of(SSN) of the buyer on line 1 of Schedule Bafter May 6, 1997. If you can show by adequate any other interest in the home that you sell(Form 1040A or 1040). The buyer must give yourecords or other evidence that the depreciation separately.his or her SSN and you must give the buyer yourallowed was less than the amount allowable, the Exception for sales to related persons.SSN. Failure to meet these requirements mayamount you cannot exclude is the amount al- You cannot exclude gain from the sale of aresult in a $50 penalty for each failure. If you orlowed. See Publication 544 for more informa- remainder interest in your home to a relatedthe buyer does not have and is not eligible to gettion. person. Related persons include your brothers,an SSN, see Social Security Number in chapter sisters, half-brothers, half-sisters, spouse, an-1.Property used partly for business or rental. cestors (parents, grandparents, etc.), and lineal
If you used property partly as a home and partly More information. For more information on descendants (children, grandchildren, etc.). Re-
for business or to produce rental income, see installment sales, see Publication 537, Install- lated persons also include certain corporations,
partnerships, trusts, and exempt organizations.Publication 523. ment Sales.
Page 112 Chapter 15 Selling Your Home

Page 115 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Your home is destroyed by a casualty, and If you sell or otherwise dispose of property
you replace it on its original site within 2 used in a trade or business or for the productionRecapturing (Paying years after the end of the tax year when of income, see Publication 544, Sales and Other
Dispositions of Assets, before completingthe destruction happened (within 5 years ifBack) a Federal Schedule D.the home was in the Hurricane Katrina dis-
aster area and was destroyed by reasonMortgage Subsidy of the hurricane after August 24, 2005). If Useful Items
your home was located in the Kansas dis- You may want to see:If you financed your home under a federally aster area, one of the Midwestern disastersubsidized program (loans from tax-exempt areas, or another federally declared disas- Publicationqualified mortgage bonds or loans with mort- ter area, see Replacement Period in Publi-gage credit certificates), you may have to recap- ❏ 537 Installment Salescation 547.ture all or part of the benefit you received from
❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions ofthat program when you sell or otherwise dispose • You refinance your mortgage loan (unless
Assetsof your home. You recapture the benefit by in- you later meet the conditions listed previ-
creasing your federal income tax for the year of ously under When recapture applies). ❏ 550 Investment Income and Expensesthe sale. You may have to pay this recapture tax
even if you can exclude your gain from income Form (and Instructions)Notice of amounts. At or near the time ofunder the rules discussed earlier; that exclusion settlement of your mortgage loan, you should ❏ Schedule D (Form 1040) Capital Gainsdoes not affect the recapture tax. receive a notice that provides the federally sub- and Losses
sidized amount and other information you willLoans subject to recapture rules. The re- ❏ 4797 Sales of Business Propertyneed to figure your recapture tax.capture applies to loans that:
❏ 6252 Installment Sale Income
1. Came from the proceeds of qualified mort- How to figure and report the recapture. The ❏ 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitationsgage bonds, or recapture tax is figured on Form 8828. If you sell
your home and your mortgage is subject to re-2. Were based on mortgage credit certifi- capture rules, you must file Form 8828 even ifcates. you do not owe a recapture tax. Attach Form
The recapture also applies to assumptions of 8828 to your Form 1040. For more information, Reporting Capitalthese loans. see Form 8828 and its instructions.
Gains and LossesWhen recapture applies. Recapture of the
federal mortgage subsidy applies only if you Report capital gains and losses on Schedule Dmeet both of the following conditions. (Form 1040). Enter your sales and trades ofRecapturing (Paying
stocks, bonds, etc., and real estate (if not re-• Within the first 9 years after the date you
ported on Form 4684, 4797, 6252, 6781, orclose your mortgage loan, you sell or oth- Back) the First-Time
8824) on line 1 of Part I or line 8 of Part II, aserwise dispose of your home at a gain.
appropriate. Include all these transactions evenHomebuyer Credit• Your income for the year of disposition is if you did not receive a Form 1099-B, Proceedsmore than that year's adjusted qualifying From Broker and Barter Exchange Transac-If you claimed the first-time homebuyer credit inincome for your family size for that year tions, or Form 1099-S, Proceeds From Real2008, and you sold the home or the home(related to the income requirements a per- Estate Transactions (or substitute statement).stopped being your main home in 2009, youson must meet to qualify for the federally You can use Schedule D-1 as a continuationgenerally must repay the credit. You repay thesubsidized program). schedule to report more transactions.credit by including it as additional tax on the
Be sure to add all sales price entries in col-return for the year your home stops being your
When recapture does not apply. Recapture umn (d) of lines 1 and 2 and enter the total onmain home. For details, see chapter 37.
does not apply in any of the following situations. line 3. Also add all sales price entries in column
(d) of lines 8 and 9 and enter the total on line 10.• Your mortgage loan was a qualified home Then add the following amounts reported to youimprovement loan (QHIL) of not more than for 2009 on Forms 1099-B and Forms 1099-S$15,000 used for alterations, repairs, and (or on substitute statements):improvements that protect or improve the
basic livability or energy efficiency of your • Proceeds from transactions involving
home. stocks, bonds, and other securities, and16.
• Your mortgage loan was a QHIL of not • Gross proceeds from real estate transac-
more than $150,000 in the case of a QHIL tions (other than the sale of your main
used to repair damage from Hurricane Ka- home if you had no taxable gain) not re-
trina to homes in the hurricane disaster ported on another form or schedule.Reporting Gainsarea; a QHIL funded by a qualified mort- If this total is more than the total of lines 3 andgage bond that is a qualified Gulf Opportu- 10, attach a statement to your return explainingnity Zone Bond; or a QHIL for an and Losses the difference.owner-occupied home in the Gulf Opportu-
nity Zone (GO Zone), Rita GO Zone, or Installment sales. You cannot use the install-Wilma GO Zone. For more information, ment method to report a gain from the sale ofsee Publication 4492, Information for Tax- Introduction stock or securities traded on an established se-payers Affected by Hurricanes Katrina,
curities market. You must report the entire gainRita, and Wilma. Also see Publication This chapter discusses how to report capital in the year of sale (the year in which the trade4492-B, Information for Affected Taxpay- gains and losses from sales, exchanges, and date occurs).ers in the Midwestern Disaster Areas. other dispositions of investment property on
Schedule D of Form 1040. The discussion in- Passive activity gains and losses. If you• The home is disposed of as a result of
cludes the following topics. have gains or losses from a passive activity, youyour death.
may also have to report them on Form 8582. In• How to report short-term gains and losses.• You dispose of the home more than 9 some cases, the loss may be limited under theyears after the date you closed your mort- • How to report long-term gains and losses. passive activity rules. Refer to Form 8582 and itsgage loan. separate instructions for more information about• How to figure capital loss carryovers. reporting capital gains and losses from a pas-• You transfer the home to your spouse, or
• How to figure your tax on a net capital sive activity.to your former spouse incident to a di-
gain.vorce, where no gain is included in your Form 1099-B transactions. If you sold prop-income. • An illustrated example of how to complete erty, such as stocks, bonds, or certain commodi-
• You dispose of the home at a loss. Schedule D. ties, through a broker, you should receive Form
Chapter 16 Reporting Gains and Losses Page 113

Page 116 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1099-B or equivalent statement from the broker. If the total of (1) and (2) is more than the total of  The result after combining these items with
Use the Form 1099-B or the equivalent state- lines 3 and 10, attach a statement to your return your other long-term capital gains and losses is
ment to complete Schedule D. explaining the reason for the difference. your net long-term capital gain or loss (line 15 of
Report the gross proceeds shown in box 2 of Schedule D).File Form 1099-B or Form 1099-S with theForm 1099-B as the gross sales price in column IRS. If you received gross proceeds as a nomi- Capital gain distributions only. You do(d) of either line 1 or line 8 of Schedule D, nee in 2009, you must file a Form 1099-B or not have to file Schedule D if both of the follow-whichever applies. However, if the broker ad- Form 1099-S for those proceeds with the IRS. ing are true.vises you, in box 2 of Form 1099-B, that gross Send the Form 1099-B or Form 1099-S with a • The only amounts you would have to re-proceeds (gross sales price) less commissions Form 1096, Annual Summary and Transmittal of port on Schedule D are capital gain distri-and option premiums were reported to the IRS, U.S. Information Returns, to your Internal Reve- butions from box 2a of Form 1099-DIV (orenter that net sales price in column (d) of either nue Service Center by March 1, 2010 (March 31, substitute statement).line 1 or line 8 of Schedule D, whichever applies. 2010, if you file Form 1099-B or Form 1099-S If the net sales price is entered in column (d), • You do not have an amount in box 2b, 2c,electronically). Give the actual owner of the pro-do not include the commissions and option pre- or 2d of any Form 1099-DIV (or substituteceeds Copy B of the Form 1099-B or Formmiums in column (e). statement).1099-S by February 16, 2010. On Form 1099-B,
you should be listed as the ªPayer.º The otherForm 1099-CAP transactions. If a corpora-
owner should be listed as the ªRecipient.º Ontion in which you own stock has had a change in If both of the above statements are true, reportForm 1099-S, you should be listed as the ªFiler.ºcontrol or a substantial change in capital struc- your capital gain distributions directly on line 13The other owner should be listed as the ªTrans-ture, you should receive Form 1099-CAP or an of Form 1040 and check the box on line 13. Also,feror.º You do not, however, have to file a Formequivalent statement from the corporation. Use use the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain1099-B or Form 1099-S to show proceeds forthe Form 1099-CAP or equivalent statement to Tax Worksheet in the Form 1040 instructions toyour spouse. For more information about thefigure the gain to report on Schedule D (Form figure your tax.reporting requirements and the penalties for fail-1040). You cannot claim a loss on Schedule D
You can report your capital gain distributionsure to file (or furnish) certain information returns,(Form 1040) as a result of this transaction.
on line 10 of Form 1040A, instead of on Formsee the General Instructions for Forms 1099,Report the aggregate amount received
1040, if both of the following are true.1098, 3921, 3922, 5498, and W-2G.shown in box 2 of Form 1099-CAP as the gross
sales price in column (d) of either line 1 or line 8 • None of the Forms 1099-DIV (or substituteSale of property bought at various times. Ifof Schedule D, whichever applies. statements) you received have an amountyou sell a block of stock or other property that in box 2b, 2c, or 2d.Form 1099-S transactions. If you sold or you bought at various times, report the
traded reportable real estate, you generally short-term gain or loss from the sale on one line • You do not have to file Form 1040 for any
should receive from the real estate reporting in Part I of Schedule D and the long-term gain or other capital gains or losses.
person a Form 1099-S showing the gross pro- loss on one line in Part II. Write ªVariousº in
ceeds. column (b) for the ªDate acquired.º See the Total net gain or loss. To figure your total netªReportable real estateº is defined as any Comprehensive Example later in this chapter. gain or loss, combine your net short-term capitalpresent or future ownership interest in any of the gain or loss (line 7) with your net long-termfollowing: Sale expenses.  Add to your cost or other capital gain or loss (line 15). Enter the result onbasis any expense of sale such as brokers' fees,• Improved or unimproved land, including air Schedule D, Part III, line 16. If your losses arecommissions, state and local transfer taxes, andspace, more than your gains, see Capital Losses, next.option premiums. Enter this adjusted amount in If both lines 15 and 16 are gains and line 43 of• Inherently permanent structures, including column (e) of either Part I or Part II of Schedule Form 1040 is more than zero, see Capital Gainany residential, commercial, or industrial D, whichever applies, unless you reported the Tax Rates, later.building, net sales price amount in column (d).
For more information about adjustments to• A condominium unit and its accessory fix- basis, see chapter 13. Capital Lossestures and common elements, including
land, and Short-term gains and losses. Capital gain or If your capital losses are more than your capital
loss on the sale or trade of investment property• Stock in a cooperative housing corporation gains, you can claim a capital loss deduction.
held 1 year or less is a short-term capital gain or(as defined in section 216 of the Internal Report the deduction on line 13 of Form 1040,
loss. You report it in Part I of Schedule D. If theRevenue Code). enclosed in parentheses.
amount you report in column (f) is a loss, show it
Limit on deduction. Your allowable capitalA ªreal estate reporting personº could include in parentheses.
loss deduction, figured on Schedule D, is thethe buyer's attorney, your attorney, the title or You combine your share of short-term capital
lesser of:escrow company, a mortgage lender, your bro- gain or loss from partnerships, S corporations,
ker, the buyer's broker, or the person acquiring and fiduciaries, and any short-term capital loss • $3,000 ($1,500 if you are married and filethe biggest interest in the property. carryover, with your other short-term capital a separate return), orYour Form 1099-S will show the gross pro- gains and losses to figure your net short-term
• Your total net loss as shown on line 16 ofceeds from the sale or exchange in box 2. Fol- capital gain or loss on line 7 of Schedule D.
Schedule D.low the instructions for Schedule D to report
Long-term gains and losses. A capital gainthese transactions and include them on line 1 or
or loss on the sale or trade of investment prop- You can use your total net loss to reduce your8 as appropriate. However, report like-kind ex-
erty held more than 1 year is a long-term capital income dollar for dollar, up to the $3,000 limit.changes on Form 8824 instead.
gain or loss. You report it in Part II of ScheduleIt is unlawful for any real estate reporting
Capital loss carryover. If you have a total netD. If the amount you report in column (f) is a loss,person to separately charge you for complying
loss on line 16 of Schedule D that is more thanshow it in parentheses.with the requirement to file Form 1099-S.
the yearly limit on capital loss deductions, youYou also report the following in Part II ofNominees. If you receive gross proceeds as a can carry over the unused part to the next yearSchedule D:nominee (that is, the gross proceeds are in your and treat it as if you had incurred it in that next• Undistributed long-term capital gains fromname but actually belong to someone else), year. If part of the loss is still unused, you cana mutual fund (or other regulated invest-report on Schedule D, lines 3 and 10, only the carry it over to later years until it is completelyment company) or real estate investmentproceeds that belong to you. Then add the fol- used up.trust (REIT),lowing amounts reported to you for 2009 on When you figure the amount of any capital
Forms 1099-B and 1099-S (or substitute state- loss carryover to the next year, you must take• Your share of long-term capital gains or
ments) that you are not reporting on another the current year's allowable deduction into ac-losses from partnerships, S corporations,
form or schedule included with your return: count, whether or not you claimed it and whetherand fiduciaries,
or not you filed a return for the current year.1. Proceeds from transactions involving • All capital gain distributions from mutual When you carry over a loss, it remains longstocks, bonds, and other securities, and funds and REITs not reported directly on term or short term. A long-term capital loss youline 10 of Form 1040A or line 13 of Form2. Gross proceeds from real estate transac- carry over to the next tax year will reduce that1040, andtions (other than the sale of your main year's long-term capital gains before it reduces
home if you are not required to report it). • Long-term capital loss carryovers. that year's short-term capital gains.
Page 114 Chapter 16 Reporting Gains and Losses

Page 117 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
before January 1, 2011. The exclusion can beTable 16-1. What Is Your Maximum Capital Gain Rate?
up to 60% for certain empowerment zone busi-
ness stock. The eligible gain minus your sectionTHEN your 1202 exclusion is a 28% rate gain. See Gains onmaximum capital Qualified Small Business Stock in chapter 4 ofIF your net capital gain is from ... gain rate is ... Publication 550.
a collectibles gain 28% Unrecaptured section 1250 gain.  Generally,
this is any part of your capital gain from sellingan eligible gain on qualified small business stock minus the section 1250 property (real property) that is duesection 1202 exclusion 28% to depreciation (but not more than your net sec-
tion 1231 gain), reduced by any net loss in thean unrecaptured section 1250 gain 25%
28% group. Use the Unrecaptured Section 1250
other gain1 and the regular tax rate that would apply is 25% Gain Worksheet in the Schedule D instructions
to figure your unrecaptured section 1250 gain.or higher 15%
For more information about section 1250 prop-
other gain1 and the regular tax rate that would apply is erty and section 1231 gain, see chapter 3 of
lower than 25% 0% Publication 544.
Tax computation using maximum capital1 Other gain means any gain that is not collectibles gain, gain on qualified small business stock, or
gains rates. Use the Qualified Dividends andunrecaptured section 1250 gain.
Capital Gain Tax Worksheet or the Schedule D
Tax Worksheet (whichever applies) to figure
your tax if you have qualified dividends or net
capital gain. You have net capital gain if Sched-Figuring your carryover. The amount of ule D, lines 15 and 16, are both gains.your capital loss carryover is the amount of your
Schedule D Tax Worksheet. You must useCapital Gain Tax Ratestotal net loss that is more than the lesser of:
the Schedule D Tax Worksheet in the Schedule
1. Your allowable capital loss deduction for The tax rates that apply to a net capital gain are D instructions to figure your tax if:
generally lower than the tax rates that apply tothe year, or • You have to file Schedule D, andother income. These lower rates are called the2. Your taxable income increased by your al- maximum capital gain rates. • Schedule D, line 18 (28% rate gain) or linelowable capital loss deduction for the year The term ªnet capital gainº means the 19 (unrecaptured section 1250 gain), isand your deduction for personal exemp- amount by which your net long-term capital gain more than zero.tions. for the year is more than your net short-term See Comprehensive Example, later, for an ex-capital loss.If your deductions are more than your gross ample of how to figure your tax using the Sched-For 2009, the maximum capital gain ratesincome for the tax year, use your negative tax- ule D Tax Worksheet.are 0%, 15%, 25%, or 28%. See Table 16-1 forable income in computing the amount in item (2).
details. Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax  Complete the Capital Loss Carryover Work- Worksheet. If you do not have to use thesheet in the Instructions for Schedule D or Publi- If you figure your tax using the maxi- Schedule D Tax Worksheet (as explainedcation 550 to determine the part of your capital mum capital gain rates, and the regular above) and any of the following apply, use theloss for 2009 that you can carry over to 2010. tax computation results in a lower tax,
TIP Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Work-the regular tax computation applies. sheet in the instructions for Form 1040 or FormExample. Bob and Gloria sold securities in 1040A (whichever you file) to figure your tax.2009. The sales resulted in a capital loss of Example. All of your net capital gain is from
$7,000. They had no other capital transactions. • You received qualified dividends. (Seeselling collectibles, so the capital gain rate would
Their taxable income was $26,000. On their joint Qualified Dividends in chapter 8.)be 28%. Because you are single and your tax-
2009 return, they can deduct $3,000. The un- able income is $25,000, none of your taxable • You do not have to file Schedule D andused part of the loss, $4,000 ($7,000 − $3,000), income will be taxed above the 15% rate. The you received capital gain distributions.can be carried over to 2010. 28% rate does not apply. (See Capital gain distributions only, ear-
If their capital loss had been $2,000, their lier.)Investment interest deducted. If you claim acapital loss deduction would have been $2,000. deduction for investment interest, you may have • Schedule D, lines 15 and 16, are bothThey would have no carryover. to reduce the amount of your net capital gain more than zero.
Use short-term losses first. When you fig- that is eligible for the capital gain tax rates.
ure your capital loss carryover, use your Reduce it by the amount of the net capital gain Alternative minimum tax. These capital gainshort-term capital losses first, even if you in- you choose to include in investment income rates are also used in figuring alternative mini-curred them after a long-term capital loss. If you when figuring the limit on your investment inter- mum tax.est deduction. This is done on the Schedule Dhave not reached the limit on the capital loss
Tax Worksheet or the Qualified Dividends anddeduction after using the short-term capital
Capital Gain Tax Worksheet. For more informa-losses, use the long-term capital losses until you
tion about the limit on investment interest, seereach the limit.
ComprehensiveInterest Expenses  in chapter 3 of PublicationDecedent's capital loss. A capital loss 550.sustained by a decedent during his or her last Example
tax year (or carried over to that year from an Collectibles gain or loss. This is gain or loss
earlier year) can be deducted only on the final from the sale or trade of a work of art, rug, Emily Jones is single and, in addition to wages
income tax return filed for the decedent. The antique, metal (such as gold, silver, and plati- from her job, she has income from stocks and
capital loss limits discussed earlier still apply in num bullion), gem, stamp, coin, or alcoholic bev- other securities. For the 2009 tax year, she had
this situation. The decedent's estate cannot de- erage held more than 1 year. the following capital gains and losses, which she
Collectibles gain includes gain from sale ofduct any of the loss or carry it over to following reports on Schedule D. All the Forms 1099 she
an interest in a partnership, S corporation, or received showed net sales prices. Her filled-inyears.
trust due to unrealized appreciation of col- Schedule D is shown in this chapter.Joint and separate returns. If you and your lectibles.spouse once filed separate returns and are now Capital gains and losses Ð Schedule D.
filing a joint return, combine your separate capi- Gain on qualified small business stock. If Emily sold stock in two different companies that
tal loss carryovers. However, if you and your you realized a gain from qualified small business she held for less than a year. In June, she sold
spouse once filed a joint return and are now stock that you held more than 5 years, you 100 shares of Trucking Co. stock that she had
filing separate returns, any capital loss carryover generally can exclude up to 50% of your gain bought in February. She had an adjusted basis
from the joint return can be deducted only on the from income. The exclusion can be up to 75% of $650 in the stock and sold it for $900, for a
return of the spouse who actually had the loss. for stock acquired after February 17, 2009, and gain of $250. In July, she sold 25 shares of
Chapter 16 Reporting Gains and Losses Page 115

Page 118 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Computer Co. stock that she bought in June. Her basis is $1,100, so she has a $3,000 gain She kept the completed Capital Loss Carry-
She had an adjusted basis in the stock of $2,500 over Worksheet (not illustrated) in her 2008 edi-which she enters in column (f) of line 8. Because
and she sold it for $2,000, for a loss of $500. She tion of Publication 550 or her Schedule Dshe held the stock more than 5 years, she has a
reports these short-term transactions on line 1 in instructions, so she could properly report her$1,500 section 1202 exclusion. She claims the
Part I of Schedule D. loss carryover for the 2009 tax year withoutexclusion on the line below by entering $1,500
Emily had three other stock sales that she refiguring it.as a loss in column (f). She also enters the
reports as long-term transactions on line 8 in exclusion as a positive amount on line 2 of the Tax computation. Because Emily hasPart II of Schedule D. In February, she sold 60 28% Rate Gain Worksheet. gains on both lines 15 and 16 of Schedule D,shares of Car Co. for $2,100. She had inherited She received a Form 1099-B (not shown) she checks the ªYesº box on line 17 and goes tothe Car Co. stock from her father. Its fair market from her broker for each of these transactions. line 18. On line 18 she enters $450 from line 7 ofvalue at the time of his death was $2,500, which the 28% Rate Gain Worksheet. Because line 18became her basis. Her loss on the sale is $400. Reconciliation of Forms 1099-B. Emily is greater than zero, she checks the ªNoº box onBecause she had inherited the stock, her loss is makes sure that the total of the amounts re- line 20 and uses the Schedule D Tax Worksheeta long-term loss, regardless of how long she and ported in column (d) of lines 3 and 10 of Sched- to figure her tax.her father actually held the stock. She enters the ule D is not less than the total of the amounts After entering the gain from line 16 on line 13loss in column (f) of line 8. shown on the Forms 1099-B she received from of her Form 1040, she completes the rest ofIn June, she sold 500 shares of Furniture Co. her broker. For 2009, the total is $23,100. Form 1040 through line 43. She enters thestock for $14,000. She had bought 100 of those amount from that line, $30,000, on line 1 of theCapital loss carryover from 2008. Emilyshares in 1997, for $1,000. She had bought 100 Schedule D Tax Worksheet. After filling out thehas a capital loss carryover to 2009 of $800, ofmore shares in 1999 for $2,200, and an addi- rest of that worksheet, she figures her tax aswhich $300 is short-term capital loss, and $500tional 300 shares in 2002 for $1,500. Her total $2,751. This is less than the $4,086 tax sheis long-term capital loss. She enters thesebasis in the stock is $4,700. She has a $9,300 would have figured without the capital gain taxamounts on lines 6 and 14 of Schedule D. She($14,000 − $4,700) gain on this sale, which she rates.also enters the $500 long-term capital loss car-enters in column (f) of line 8.
ryover on line 5 of the 28% Rate Gain Work-In December, she sold 20 shares of Toy Co.
sheet. Her filled-in 28% Rate Gain Worksheet isfor $4,100. This was qualified small business
shown below.stock that she had bought in September 2004.
28% Rate Gain Worksheet for Emily JonesÐLine 18 Keep for Your Records
1. Enter the total of all collectibles gain or (loss) from items you reported on line 8, column (f), of Schedules
D and D-1 ................................................................... . 1. 0
2. Enter as a positive number the amount of any section 1202 exclusion you reported on line 8, column (f),
of Schedules D and D-1, for which you excluded 50% of the gain, plus 2/3 of any section 1202 exclusion
you reported on line 8, column (f), of Schedules D and D-1, for which you excluded 60% of the gain ... . 2. 1,500
3. Enter the total of all collectibles gain or (loss) from Form 4684, line 4 (but only if Form 4684, line 15, is
more than zero); Form 6252; Form 6781, Part II; and Form 8824 ............................ . 3.
4. Enter the total of any collectibles gain reported to you on:
• Form 1099-DIV, box 2d;
}
.............. . 4.• Form 2439, box 1d; and
• Schedule K-1 from a partnership, S corporation, estate, or trust.
5. Enter your long-term capital loss carryovers from Schedule D, line 14, and Schedule K-1 (Form 1041), 5. ( 500)box 11, code C ................................................................ .
6. If Schedule D, line 7, is a (loss), enter that (loss) here. Otherwise, enter -0- ..................... . 6. ( 550)
7. Combine lines 1 through 6. If zero or less, enter -0-. If more than zero, also enter this amount on
Schedule D, line 18 ............................................................. . 7. 450
Page 116 Chapter 16 Reporting Gains and Losses

Page 119 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Schedule D Tax Worksheet Keep for Your Records
Complete this worksheet only if line 18 or line 19 of Schedule D is more than zero. Otherwise, complete the Qualified Dividends and
Capital Gain Tax Worksheet on page 39 of the Instructions for Form 1040 (or in the Instructions for Form 1040NR) to figure your tax.
Exception: Do not use the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet or this worksheet to figure your tax if:
• Line 15 or line 16 of Schedule D is zero or less and you have no qualified dividends on Form 1040, line 9b (or Form 1040NR, line 10b);
or
• Form 1040, line 43 (or Form 1040NR, line 40) is zero or less.
 Instead, see the instructions for Form 1040, line 44 (or Form 1040NR, line 41).
1. Enter your taxable income from Form 1040, line 43 (or Form 1040NR, line 40). (However, if you are filing Form 2555
or 2555-EZ (relating to foreign earned income), enter instead the amount from line 3 of the Foreign Earned Income
Tax Worksheet on page 38 of the Form 1040 Instructions) ...................................... . 1. 30,000
2. Enter your qualified dividends from Form 1040, line 9b (or
Form 1040NR, line 10b)* ....................... . 2.
3. Enter the amount from Form 4952 (used to
figure investment interest expense
deduction), line 4g ................ . 3.
4. Enter the amount from Form 4952, line 4e* 4.
5. Subtract line 4 from line 3. If zero or less, enter -0- ...... . 5.
6. Subtract line 5 from line 2. If zero or less, enter -0-** .................. . 6.
7. Enter the smaller of line 15 or line 16 of Schedule D ..... . 7. 9,350
8. Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 4 ................ . 8.
9. Subtract line 8 from line 7. If zero or less, enter -0-** .................. . 9. 9,350
10. Add lines 6 and 9 ..................................................... . 10. 9,350
11. Add lines 18 and 19 of Schedule D** ............................ . 11. 450
12. Enter the smaller of line 9 or line 11 ........................................ . 12. 450
13. Subtract line 12 from line 10. .......................................................... . 13. 8,900
14. Subtract line 13 from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0-. .......................................... . 14. 21,100
15. Enter the smaller of:
• The amount on line 1 or
}
•  $33,950 if single or married filing separately; ...... . 15. 30,000$67,900 if married filing jointly or qualifying widow(er); or
$45,500 if head of household
16. Enter the smaller of line 14 or line 15 ............................ . 16. 21,100
17. Subtract line 10 from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0- ..... . 17. 20,650
18. Enter the larger of line 16 or line 17 ....................................... . © 18. 21,100
If lines 15 and 16 are the same, skip lines 19 and go to line 20. Otherwise, go to line 19.
19. Subtract line 16 from line 15 ............................................ . © 19. 8,900
If lines 1 and 15 are the same, skip lines 20 through 32 and go to line 33. Otherwise, go to line 20.
20. Enter the smaller of line 1 or line 13 ............................ . 20.
21. Enter the amount from line 19 (if line 19 is blank, enter -0-) ............. . 21.
22. Subtract line 21 from line 20. If zero or less, enter -0- ........................... . © 22.
23. Multiply line 22 by 15% (.15) .......................................................... . 23.
If Schedule D, line 19, is zero or blank, skip lines 24 through 29 and go to line 30. Otherwise, go to line 24.
24. Enter the smaller of line 9 above or Schedule D, line 19 ............... . 24.
25. Add lines 10 and 18 .......................... . 25.
26. Enter the amount from line 1 above ................ . 26.
27. Subtract line 26 from line 25. If zero or less, enter -0- ................. . 27.
28. Subtract line 27 from line 24. If zero or less, enter -0- ........................... . © 28.
29. Multiply line 28 by 25% (.25) .......................................................... . 29.
If Schedule D, line 18, is zero or blank, skip lines 30 through 32 and go to line 33. Otherwise, go to line 30.
30. Add lines 18, 19, 22, and 28 .............................................. . 30.
31. Subtract line 30 from line 1 ............................................... . 31.
32. Multiply line 31 by 28% (.28) .......................................................... . 32.
33. Figure the tax on the amount on line 18. Use the Tax Table or Tax Computation Worksheet, whichever applies .. . 33. 2,751
34. Add lines 23, 29, 32, and 33 .......................................................... . 34. 2,751
35. Figure the tax on the amount on line 1. Use the Tax Table or Tax Computation Worksheet, whichever applies ... . 35. 4,086
36. Tax on all taxable income (including capital gains and qualified dividends). Enter the smaller of line 34 or line
35. Also include this amount on Form 1040, line 44 (or Form 1040NR, line 41). (If you are filing Form 2555 or
2555-EZ, do not enter this amount on Form 1040, line 44. Instead, enter it on line 4 of the Foreign Earned Income
Tax Worksheet in the Form 1040 instructions) .............................................. . 36. 2,751
*If applicable, enter instead the smaller amount you entered on the dotted line next to line 4e of Form 4952.
**If you are filing Form 2555 or 2555-EZ, see the footnote in the Foreign Earned Income Tax Worksheet on page 38
of the Form 1040 instructions before completing this line.
Chapter 16 Reporting Gains and Losses Page 117

Page 120 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
SCHEDULE D  
(Form 1040) 
Department of the Treasury  
Internal Revenue Service (99) 
Capital Gains and Losses
/H17075 Attach to Form 1040 or Form 1040NR. /H17075 See Instructions for Schedule D (Form 1040). 
/H17075 Use Schedule D-1 to list additional transactions for lines 1 and 8. 
OMB No. 1545-0074
2009
Attachment   
Sequence No. 12 
Name(s) shown on return Your social security number
Part I Short-Term Capital Gains and Losses—Assets Held One Year or Less 
(a) Description of property 
(Example: 100 sh. XYZ Co.) 
(b) Date acquired 
(Mo., day, yr.) 
(c) Date sold  
(Mo., day, yr.) 
(d) Sales price 
(see page D-7 of 
the instructions) 
(e) Cost or other basis 
(see page D-7 of 
the instructions) 
(f) Gain or (loss) 
Subtract (e) from (d) 
1 
2 Enter your short-term totals, if any, from Schedule D-1, 
line 2 .................. 2 
3 Total short-term sales price amounts. Add lines 1 and 2 in 
column (d) ................ 3 
4 Short-term gain from Form 6252 and short-term gain or (loss) from Forms 4684, 6781, and 8824 4 
5 Net short-term gain or (loss) from partnerships, S corporations, estates, and trusts from 
Schedule(s) K-1 ..........................  5 
6 Short-term capital loss carryover. Enter the amount, if any, from line 10 of your Capital Loss 
Carryover Worksheet on page D-7 of the instructions ............. 6 (                                     )
7 Net short-term capital gain or (loss).  Combine lines 1 through 6 in column (f) ..... 7 
Part II Long-Term Capital Gains and Losses—Assets Held More Than One Year 
(a)  Description of property 
(Example: 100 sh. XYZ Co.) 
(b) Date acquired 
(Mo., day, yr.) 
(c) Date sold  
(Mo., day, yr.) 
(d) Sales price 
(see page D-7 of 
the instructions) 
(e) Cost or other basis 
(see page D-7 of 
the instructions) 
(f) Gain or (loss) 
Subtract (e) from (d) 
8 
9 Enter your long-term totals, if any, from Schedule D-1, 
line 9 .................. 9 
10 Total long-term sales price amounts.  Add lines 8 and 9 in 
column (d) ................ 10 
11 Gain from Form 4797, Part I; long-term gain from Forms 2439 and 6252; and long-term gain or 
(loss) from Forms 4684, 6781, and 8824 .................. 11 
12 Net long-term gain or (loss) from partnerships, S corporations, estates, and trusts from 
Schedule(s) K-1 .......................... 12 
13 Capital gain distributions. See page D-2 of the instructions ............ 13 
14 Long-term capital loss carryover. Enter the amount, if any, from line 15 of your Capital Loss 
Carryover Worksheet on page D-7 of the instructions ............. 14 (                                     )
15 Net long-term capital gain or (loss).  Combine lines 8 through 14 in column (f). Then go to Part 
III on the back ........................... 15 
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see Form 1040 or Form 1040NR instructions. Cat. No. 11338H Schedule D (Form 1040) 2009 
Emily Jones 111-00-1111
100 sh Trucking Co. 2-11-09 6-12-09 900 650 250
25 sh. Computer Co. 6-30-09 7-30-09 2,000 2,500 ( 500 )
2,900
300
( 550 )
60 sh. Car Co. INHERITED 2-3-09 2,100 2,500 ( 400  )
500 sh. Furniture Co. VARIOUS 6-30-09 14,000 4,700 9,300
20 sh. Toy Co. 9-28-04 12-15-09 4,100 1,100 3,000
Section 1202 exclusion ( 1,500 )
20,200
500
9,900
EPS Filename: 10211g58 Size: Width = 44.0picas, Depth = 46.0
Page 118 Chapter 16 Reporting Gains and Losses

Page 121 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Schedule D (Form 1040) 2009 Page 2 
Part III Summary
16 Combine lines 7 and 15 and enter the result ................. 16
If line 16 is: 
● A gain, enter the amount from line 16 on Form 1040, line 13, or Form 1040NR, line 14. Then 
go to line 17 below. 
● A  loss, skip lines 17 through 20 below. Then go to line 21. Also be sure to complete line 22. 
● Zero, skip lines 17 through 21 below and enter -0- on Form 1040, line 13, or Form 1040NR, 
line 14. Then go to line 22. 
17 Are lines 15 and 16 both gains? 
Yes. Go to line 18. 
No. Skip lines 18 through 21, and go to line 22. 
18 Enter the amount, if any, from line 7 of the 28% Rate Gain Worksheet on page D-8 of the 
instructions ............................ /H1707518 
19 Enter the amount, if any, from line 18 of the Unrecaptured Section 1250 Gain Worksheet on
page D-9 of the instructions ...................... /H1707519 
20 Are lines 18 and 19 both zero or blank? 
Yes. Complete Form 1040 through line 43, or Form 1040NR through line 40. Then complete 
the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet on page 39 of the Instructions
for Form 1040 (or in the Instructions for Form 1040NR). Do not complete lines 21 and 22 
below. 
No. Complete Form 1040 through line 43, or Form 1040NR through line 40. Then complete 
the Schedule D Tax Worksheet on page D-10 of the instructions. Do not complete lines 21 
and 22 below. 
21 If line 16 is a loss, enter here and on Form 1040, line 13, or Form 1040NR, line 14, the smaller 
of: 
● The loss on line 16 or 
● ($3,000), or if married filing separately, ($1,500) /H20854
............. 21 (                                     )
Note.  When figuring which amount is smaller, treat both amounts as positive numbers. 
22 Do you have qualified dividends on Form 1040, line 9b, or Form 1040NR, line 10b? 
Yes. Complete Form 1040 through line 43, or Form 1040NR through line 40. Then complete 
the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet on page 39 of the Instructions
for Form 1040 (or in the Instructions for Form 1040NR). 
No. Complete the rest of Form 1040 or Form 1040NR. 
Schedule D (Form 1040) 2009 
9,350
✔
450
✔
EPS Filename: 10311g59 Size: Width = 44.0 picas, Depth = 46.0 picas
Chapter 16 Reporting Gains and Losses Page 119

Page 122 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Part Four.
The three chapters in this part discuss some of the adjustments to income thatAdjustments to you can deduct in figuring your adjusted gross income. These chapters cover:
• Contributions you make to traditional individual retirement arrangementsIncome (IRAs) Ð chapter 17,
• Alimony you pay Ð chapter 18, and
• Student loan interest you payÐchapter 19.
Other adjustments to income are discussed elsewhere. See Table V
below.
Table V. Other Adjustments to Income
Use this table to find information about other adjustments to income not covered in this part of the publication.
IF you are looking for more information about the deduction for... THEN see...
Certain business expenses of reservists, performing artists, and Chapter 26.
fee-basis officials
Contributions to a health savings account Publication 969, Health Savings Accounts and Other Tax-Favored
Health Plans.
Moving expenses Publication 521, Moving Expenses.
One-half of self-employment tax Chapter 22.
Self-employed health insurance Chapter 21.
Payments to self-employed SEP, SIMPLE, and qualified plans Publication 560, Retirement Plans for Small Business.
Penalty on the early withdrawal of savings Chapter 7.
Contributions to an Archer MSA Publication 969, Health Savings Accounts and Other Tax-Favored
Health Plans
Reforestation amortization or expense Chapter 9 of Publication 535, Business Expenses.
Contributions to Internal Revenue Code section 501(c)(18)(D) pension Publication 525, Taxable and Nontaxable Income.
plans
Expenses from the rental of personal property Chapter 12.
Certain required repayments of supplemental unemployment benefits Chapter 12.
(sub-pay)
Foreign housing costs Chapter 4 of Publication 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resident
Aliens Abroad.
Jury duty pay given to your employer Chapter 12.
Contributions by certain chaplains to Internal Revenue Code section Publication 517, Social Security and Other Information for Members of
403(b) plans the Clergy and Religious Workers.
Attorney fees and certain costs for actions involving certain unlawful Publication 525.
discrimination claims or awards to whistleblowers
Domestic production activities deduction Form 8903.
Page 120 Chapter 16 Reporting Gains and Losses

Page 123 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you are serving on active duty for a period of
more than 30 days. For more information, see RemindersMilitary differential pay, later.17.
Contributions to both traditional and Roth
IRAs.  For information on your combined con-
tribution limit if you contribute to both traditional
Individual What's New for 2010 and Roth IRAs, see Roth IRAs and traditional
IRAs under How Much Can Be Contributed?
Modified AGI limit for traditional IRA contri- later.Retirement butions increased. For 2010, if you are cov-
Statement of required minimum distribution.ered by a retirement plan at work, your If a minimum distribution is required from yourArrangements deduction for contributions to a traditional IRA is IRA, the trustee, custodian, or issuer that heldreduced (phased out) if your modified AGI is: the IRA at the end of the preceding year must(IRAs) • More than $89,000 but less than $109,000 either report the amount of the required mini-
for a married couple filing a joint return or mum distribution to you, or offer to calculate it for
a qualifying widow(er), you. The report or offer must include the date by
which the amount must be distributed. The re-What's New for 2009 • More than $56,000 but less than $66,000
port is due January 31 of the year in which thefor a single individual or head of house- minimum distribution is required. It can be pro-hold, orModified AGI limit for traditional IRA contri- vided with the year-end fair market value state-butions increased. For 2009, if you were cov- • Less than $10,000 for a married individual ment that you normally get each year. No reportered by a retirement plan at work, your filing a separate return. is required for IRAs of owners who have died.deduction for contributions to a traditional IRA is
reduced (phased out) if your modified adjusted Waiver of RMD for 2009. You are not re-If you either live with your spouse or file a jointgross income (AGI) is: quired to take an RMD for 2009 from your IRA.return, and your spouse is covered by a retire-
• More than $89,000 but less than $109,000 ment plan at work, but you are not, your deduc- IRA interest. Although interest earned fromfor a married couple filing a joint return or tion is phased out if your modified AGI is more your IRA is generally not taxed in the yeara qualifying widow(er), than $167,000 but less than $177,000. If your earned, it is not tax-exempt interest. Do notmodified AGI is $177,000 or more, you cannot• More than $55,000 but less than $65,000 report this interest on your tax return astake a deduction for contributions to a traditionalfor a single individual or head of house- tax-exempt interest.IRA. See How Much Can You Deduct? later.hold, or
Form 8606.  To designate contributions as• Less than $10,000 for a married individual Modified AGI limit for Roth IRA contributions nondeductible, you must file Form 8606, Nonde-filing a separate return. increased. For 2010, your Roth IRA contribu- ductible IRAs.tion limit is reduced (phased out) in the following
If you either lived with your spouse or file a situations. Hurricane and disaster-related tax relief.joint return, and your spouse was covered by a Special rules apply to the use of retirement• Your filing status is married filing jointly orretirement plan at work, but you were not, your funds (including IRAs) by qualified individualsqualifying widow(er) and your modifieddeduction is phased out if your modified AGI is who suffered an economic loss as a result of:AGI is at least $167,000. You cannotmore than $166,000 but less than $176,000. If
• Hurricane Katrina, Rita, or Wilma,make a Roth IRA contribution if your modi-your modified AGI is $176,000 or more, you
cannot take a deduction for contributions to a fied AGI is $177,000 or more. • The storms that began on May 4, 2007, intraditional IRA. See How Much Can You De- the Kansas disaster area, or• Your filing status is single, head of house-duct? later. hold, or married filing separately and you • The severe storms in the Midwestern dis-did not live with your spouse at any time inModified AGI limit for Roth IRA contributions aster areas in 2008.2010 and your modified AGI is at leastincreased. For 2009, your Roth IRA contribu- For more information on these special rules see$105,000. You cannot make a Roth IRAtion limit is reduced (phased out) in the following Hurricane-Related Relief, Relief for Kansas Dis-situations. contribution if your modified AGI is aster Area, and Relief for Midwestern Disaster$120,000 or more.• Your filing status is married filing jointly or Areas in chapter 4 of Publication 590.
qualifying widow(er) and your modified • Your filing status is married filing sepa-
AGI is at least $166,000. You cannot rately, you lived with your spouse at any The term ª50 or olderº is used several
make a Roth IRA contribution if your modi- time during the year, and your modified times in this chapter. It refers to an IRA
fied AGI is $176,000 or more. AGI is more than -0-. You cannot make a owner who is age 50 or older by the
TIP
end of the tax year.Roth IRA contribution if your modified AGI• Your filing status is single, head of house-
is $10,000 or more.hold, or married filing separately and you
did not live with your spouse at any time in See Can You Contribute to a Roth IRA? later.2009 and your modified AGI is at least
$105,000. You cannot make a Roth IRA Conversions to Roth IRAs. Beginning in Introductioncontribution if your modified AGI is 2010, the modified AGI and filing status require-
$120,000 or more. An individual retirement arrangement (IRA) is aments for converting a traditional IRA to a Roth
personal savings plan that gives you tax advan-IRA are eliminated.• Your filing status is married filing sepa- tages for setting aside money for your retire-Also, for any 2010 rollover from an IRA otherrately, you lived with your spouse at any ment.time during the year, and your modified than a Roth IRA to a Roth IRA, any amounts that
This chapter discusses the following topics.AGI is more than -0-. You cannot make a would be included as income will be included in
Roth IRA contribution if your modified AGI income in equal amounts in 2011 and 2012. You • The rules for a traditional IRA (any IRAis $10,000 or more. can choose to include the entire amount in in- that is not a Roth or SIMPLE IRA).
come in 2010.See Can You Contribute to a Roth IRA? later. • The Roth IRA, which features nondeduct-
ible contributions and tax-free distribu-Catch-up contributions in certain employerWaiver of required minimum distribution tions.bankruptcies. The provision for additionalrules. No minimum distribution is required
catch-up contributions in certain employer bank-from your traditional or Roth IRA for 2009. See Simplified Employee Pensions (SEPs) andruptcies does not apply for 2010 or later years.Waiver of required minimum distribution rules Savings Incentive Match Plans for Employeesfor 2009, later. Qualified charitable distributions (QCDs). (SIMPLEs) are not discussed in this chapter. For
The provision for tax-free distributions from IRAs more information on these plans and employ-Military differential pay. For IRA purposes,
for charitable purposes does not apply for 2010 ees' SEP IRAs and SIMPLE IRAs that are part ofyour compensation includes any military differ-
or later years. these plans, see Publications 560 and 590.ential pay you receive from your employer while
Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) Page 121

Page 124 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
For information about contributions, deduc- • The deduction for contributions made on Trustees' fees. Trustees' administrative fees
your behalf to retirement plans, and are not subject to the contribution limit.tions, withdrawals, transfers, rollovers, and
other transactions for 2010, see Publication 590. • The deduction allowed for one-half of your Qualified reservist repayments. If you areself-employment taxes. (or were) a member of a reserve component andUseful Items
you were ordered or called to active duty afterCompensation includes earnings fromYou may want to see: September 11, 2001, you may be able to con-self-employment even if they are not subject to
tribute (repay) to an IRA amounts equal to anyself-employment tax because of your religiousPublication qualified reservist distributions you received.beliefs.❏ 560 Retirement Plans for Small You can make these repayment contributionsMilitary differential pay. For IRA purposes,Business even if they would cause your total contributionscompensation includes military differential pay to the IRA to be more than the general limit on❏ 590 Individual Retirement Arrangements you receive. Military differential payments are contributions. To be eligible to make these re-(IRAs) those payments made by some employers to payment contributions, you must have receivedemployees who have been called to active duty a qualified reservist distribution from an IRA orForm (and Instructions) in the uniformed services for a period of more from a section 401(k) or 403(b) plan or similarthan 30 days. Beginning in 2009, these pay-❏ 5329 Additional Taxes on Qualified Plans arrangement.ments will be reported in box 1 (Wages, tips,(including IRAs) and Other For more information, see Qualified reservistother compensation) of Form W-2.Tax-Favored Accounts repayments under How Much Can Be Contrib-
Nontaxable combat pay. For IRA pur- uted? in chapter 1 of Publication 590.❏ 8606 Nondeductible IRAs
poses, if you were a member of the U.S. Armed Contributions on your behalf to a tradi-Forces, your compensation includes any non- tional IRA reduce your limit for contri-taxable combat pay you receive. butions to a Roth IRA. (See Roth IRAs,
CAUTION
!
What is not compensation? Compensation later.)Traditional IRAs does not include any of the following items.
General limit. For 2009, the most that can be• Earnings and profits from property, suchIn this chapter the original IRA (sometimes
contributed to your traditional IRA generally isas rental income, interest income, and div-called an ordinary or regular IRA) is referred to
idend income. the smaller of the following amounts.as a ªtraditional IRA.º Two advantages of a tradi-
tional IRA are: • Pension or annuity income. • $5,000 ($6,000 if you are 50 or older).
• You may be able to deduct some or all of • Deferred compensation received (com- • Your taxable compensation (defined ear-your contributions to it, depending on your pensation payments postponed from a lier) for the year.
circumstances, and past year). This is the most that can be contributed regard-
• Generally, amounts in your IRA, including • Income from a partnership for which you less of whether the contributions are to one or
earnings and gains, are not taxed until do not provide services that are a material more traditional IRAs or whether all or part of the
they are distributed. income-producing factor. contributions are nondeductible. (See Nonde-
ductible Contributions, later.) Qualified reservist• Any amounts (other than combat pay) you repayments do not affect this limit.exclude from income, such as foreignWhat Is a Traditional IRA? earned income and housing costs. Example 1. Betty, who is 34 years old andA traditional IRA is any IRA that is not a Roth IRA single, earned $24,000 in 2009. Her IRA contri-or a SIMPLE IRA. butions for 2009 are limited to $5,000.When and How Can a
Traditional IRA Be Set Up? Example 2. John, an unmarried college stu-Who Can Set Up
dent working part time, earned $3,500 in 2009.a Traditional IRA? You can set up a traditional IRA at any time. His IRA contributions for 2009 are limited toHowever, the time for making contributions for $3,500, the amount of his compensation.You can set up and make contributions to a any year is limited. See When Can Contributionstraditional IRA if: Be Made, later. Catch-up contributions in certain employer  You can set up different kinds of IRAs with a• You (or, if you file a joint return, your bankruptcies. If you participated in a 401(k)variety of organizations. You can set up an IRAspouse) received taxable compensation plan and the employer who maintained the planat a bank or other financial institution or with aduring the year, and went into bankruptcy, you may be able to con-mutual fund or life insurance company. You can tribute an additional $3,000 to your IRA. See• You were not age 701/2 by the end of the also set up an IRA through your stockbroker. Publication 590 to see if you qualify to makeyear. Any IRA must meet Internal Revenue Code re- these additional contributions.quirements.
What is compensation? Generally, compen- Kinds of traditional IRAs. Your traditional Spousal IRA limit. For 2009, if you file a jointsation is what you earn from working. Compen- IRA can be an individual retirement account or return and your taxable compensation is lesssation includes wages, salaries, tips, annuity. It can be part of either a simplified than that of your spouse, the most that can beprofessional fees, bonuses, and other amounts employee pension (SEP) or an employer or em- contributed for the year to your IRA is theyou receive for providing personal services. The ployee association trust account. smaller of the following amounts.IRS treats as compensation any amount prop-
erly shown in box 1 (Wages, tips, other compen- 1. $5,000 ($6,000 if you are 50 or older).How Much Can Besation) of Form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement, 2. The total compensation includible in theprovided that amount is reduced by any amount Contributed? gross income of both you and your spouseproperly shown in box 11 (Nonqualified plans). for the year, reduced by the following twoThere are limits and other rules that affect theScholarship and fellowship payments are amounts.amount that can be contributed to a traditionalcompensation for this purpose only if shown in
IRA. These limits and other rules are explainedbox 1 of Form W-2. a. Your spouse's IRA contribution for thebelow.Compensation also includes commissions year to a traditional IRA.
and taxable alimony and separate maintenance Community property laws. Except as dis- b. Any contribution for the year to a Rothpayments. cussed later under Spousal IRA limit , each IRA on behalf of your spouse.spouse figures his or her limit separately, usingSelf-employment income. If you are his or her own compensation. This is the ruleself-employed (a sole proprietor or a partner), This means that the total combined contribu-even in states with community property laws.compensation is the net earnings from your tions that can be made for the year to your IRA
trade or business (provided your personal serv- and your spouse's IRA can be as much asBrokers' commissions. Brokers' commis-
ices are a material income-producing factor) re- $10,000 ($11,000 if only one of you is 50 orsions paid in connection with your traditional IRA
duced by the total of: are subject to the contribution limit. older, or $12,000 if both of you are 50 or older).
Page 122 Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

Page 125 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 17-1. Effect of Modified AGI1 on Deduction if You Are Covered by How Much Can You
Retirement Plan at Work Deduct?
If you are covered by a retirement plan at work, use this table to determine if your modified AGI
Generally, you can deduct the lesser of:affects the amount of your deduction.
• The contributions to your traditional IRA
for the year, orIF your filing status is... AND your modified AGI is... THEN you can take...
• The general limit (or the spousal IRA limit, $55,000 or less a full deduction.single if it applies).
more than $55,000 a partial deduction. However, if you or your spouse was covered byor but less than $65,000 an employer retirement plan, you may not be
able to deduct this amount. See Limit If Coveredhead of household $65,000 or more no deduction. by Employer Plan, later.
 $89,000 or less a full deduction.married filing jointly
You may be eligible to claim a credit for
more than $89,000 a partial deduction. contributions to your traditional IRA. or but less than $109,000 For more information, see chapter 37.
TIP
qualifying widow(er) $109,000 or more no deduction. Trustees' fees. Trustees' administrative fees
that are billed separately and paid in connectionless than $10,000 a partial deduction.married filing
with your traditional IRA are not deductible asseparately2
$10,000 or more no deduction. IRA contributions. However, they may be de-
ductible as a miscellaneous itemized deduction1Modified AGI (adjusted gross income). See Modified adjusted gross income (AGI).
on Schedule A (Form 1040). See chapter 28.2If you did not live with your spouse at any time during the year, your filing status is considered Single for this purpose
(therefore, your IRA deduction is determined under the ªSingleº column). Brokers' commissions. Brokers' commis-
sions are part of your IRA contribution and, as
such, are deductible subject to the limits.Designating year for which contribution isWhen Can Contributions made. If an amount is contributed to your Full deduction. If neither you nor your spouseBe Made? traditional IRA between January 1 and April 15, was covered for any part of the year by anyou should tell the sponsor which year (the cur- employer retirement plan, you can take a deduc-As soon as you set up your traditional IRA, rent year or the previous year) the contribution is tion for total contributions to one or more tradi-contributions can be made to it through your for. If you do not tell the sponsor which year it is tional IRAs of up to the lesser of:chosen sponsor (trustee or other administrator). for, the sponsor can assume, and report to the
Contributions must be in the form of money • $5,000 ($6,000 if you are 50 or older inIRS, that the contribution is for the current year
(cash, check, or money order). Property cannot 2009, or $8,000 for certain employer bank-(the year the sponsor received it).
be contributed. ruptcies).Filing before a contribution is made. You
Contributions must be made by due date. • 100% of your compensation.can file your return claiming a traditional IRA
Contributions can be made to your traditional contribution before the contribution is actually This limit is reduced by any contributions madeIRA for a year at any time during the year or by made. Generally, the contribution must be made to a 501(c)(18) plan on your behalf.the due date for filing your return for that year, by the due date of your return, not including
not including extensions. Spousal IRA. In the case of a marriedextensions.
couple with unequal compensation who file aAge 701/2 rule. Contributions cannot be made Contributions not required. You do not have joint return, the deduction for contributions to theto your traditional IRA for the year in which you to contribute to your traditional IRA for every tax traditional IRA of the spouse with less compen-reach age 701/2 or for any later year. year, even if you can. sation is limited to the lesser of the followingYou attain age 70 1/2 on the date that is 6 amounts.calendar months after the 70th anniversary of
your birth. If you were born on or before June 30, 1. $5,000 ($6,000 if you are 50 or older in
1939, you cannot contribute for 2009 or any later 2009, or $8,000 for certain employer bank-
year. ruptcies).
2. The total compensation includible in theTable 17-2. Effect of Modified AGI1 on Deduction if You Are NOT gross income of both spouses for the year
Covered by Retirement Plan at Work reduced by the following three amounts.
If you are not covered by a retirement plan at work, use this table to determine a. The IRA deduction for the year of theif your modified AGI affects the amount of your deduction. spouse with the greater compensation.
b. Any designated nondeductible contribu-IF your filing status is... AND your modified AGI is... THEN you can take... tion for the year made on behalf of the
spouse with the greater compensation.single, any amount a full deduction.
head of household, or c. Any contributions for the year to a Roth
qualifying widow(er) IRA on behalf of the spouse with the
greater compensation.married filing jointly or any amount a full deduction.
separately with a spouse who is This limit is reduced by any contributions to a
not covered by a plan at work 501(c)(18) plan on behalf of the spouse with
the lesser compensation.$166,000 or less a full deduction.married filing jointly with a
spouse who is covered by a plan Note. If you were divorced or legally sepa-more than $166,000 a partial deduction.at work rated (and did not remarry) before the end of thebut less than $176,000
year, you cannot deduct any contributions to
$176,000 or more no deduction. your spouse's IRA. After a divorce or legal sepa-
ration, you can deduct only contributions to yourless than $10,000 a partial deduction.married filing separately with a own IRA. Your deductions are subject to thespouse who is covered by a plan rules for single individuals.$10,000 or more no deduction.at work2
Covered by an employer retirement plan. If
1Modified AGI (adjusted gross income). See Modified adjusted gross income (AGI). you or your spouse was covered by an employer2You are entitled to the full deduction if you did not live with your spouse at any time during the year. retirement plan at any time during the year for
Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) Page 123

Page 126 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
b. A state or political subdivision of aWorksheet 17-1. Figuring Your state, orModified AGI Keep for Your Records
c. An instrumentality of either (a) or (b)
Use this worksheet to figure your modified adjusted gross income for traditional IRA purposes. above.
2. You did not serve more than 90 days on1. Enter your adjusted gross income (AGI) from Form 1040, line 38; or active duty during the year (not countingForm 1040A, line 22, figured without taking into account the amount duty for training).from Form 1040, line 32; or Form 1040A, line 17 ............ . 1.
2. Enter any student loan interest deduction from Form 1040, line 33; Volunteer firefighters. If the only reason youor Form 1040A, line 18 ............................. . 2. participate in a plan is because you are a volun-
teer firefighter, you may not be covered by the3. Enter any tuition and fees deduction from Form 1040, line 34; or
plan. You are not covered by the plan if both ofForm 1040A, line 19 ............................... . 3.
the following conditions are met.
4. Enter any domestic production activities deduction from Form 1040,
1. The plan you participate in is establishedline 35 ........................................ . 4.
for its employees by:
5. Enter any foreign earned income and/or housing exclusion from
a. The United States,Form 2555, line 45; or Form 2555-EZ, line 18 .............. . 5.
b. A state or political subdivision of a6. Enter any foreign housing deduction from Form 2555, line 50 ... . 6.
state, or
7. Enter any excludable savings bond interest from Form 8815, line 14 7. c. An instrumentality of either (a) or (b)
8. Enter any excluded employer-provided adoption benefits from Form above.
8839, line 30 .................................... . 8.
2. Your accrued retirement benefits at the be-9. Add lines 1 through 8. This is your Modified AGI for traditional IRA ginning of the year will not provide morepurposes ...................................... . 9.  than $1,800 per year at retirement.
which contributions were made, your deduction covered by the plan. Types of defined contribu- Limit If Covered by Employer Plan
tion plans include profit-sharing plans, stock bo-may be further limited. This is discussed later
If either you or your spouse was covered by annus plans, and money purchase pension plans.under Limit If Covered by Employer Plan. Limits
employer retirement plan, you may be entitled toon the amount you can deduct do not affect the Defined benefit plan. If you are eligible to only a partial (reduced) deduction or no deduc-amount that can be contributed. See Nonde- participate in your employer's defined benefit tion at all, depending on your income and yourductible Contributions, later. plan for the plan year that ends within your tax filing status.
year, you are covered by the plan. This rule Your deduction begins to decrease (phaseapplies even if you: out) when your income rises above a certainAre You Covered by an Employer
amount and is eliminated altogether when it• Declined to participate in the plan,Plan? reaches a higher amount. These amounts vary• Did not make a required contribution, or depending on your filing status.The Form W-2 you receive from your employer
has a box used to indicate whether you were To determine if your deduction is subject to• Did not perform the minimum service re-
covered for the year. The ªRetirement planº box phaseout, you must determine your modifiedquired to accrue a benefit for the year.
should be checked if you were covered. adjusted gross income (AGI) and your filing sta-
tus. See Filing status  and Modified adjustedA defined benefit plan is any plan that is not aReservists and volunteer firefighters should
gross income (AGI), later. Then use Table 17-1defined contribution plan. Defined benefit plansalso see Situations in Which You Are Not Cov-
or 17-2 to determine if the phaseout applies.include pension plans and annuity plans.ered, later.
If you are not certain whether you were cov- No vested interest. If you accrue a benefit for Social security recipients. Instead of usingered by your employer's retirement plan, you a plan year, you are covered by that plan even if Table 17-1 or Table 17-2, use the worksheets inshould ask your employer. you have no vested interest in (legal right to) the Appendix B of Publication 590 if, for the year, allaccrual. of the following apply.Federal judges. For purposes of the IRA de-
• You received social security benefits.duction, federal judges are covered by an em-
ployer retirement plan. Situations in Which You Are Not • You received taxable compensation.
Covered • Contributions were made to your tradi-
tional IRA.For Which Year(s) Are You Unless you are covered under another employer
plan, you are not covered by an employer plan ifCovered? • You or your spouse was covered by an
you are in one of the situations described below. employer retirement plan.Special rules apply to determine the tax years
Social security or railroad retirement. Cov- Use those worksheets to figure your IRA deduc-for which you are covered by an employer plan.
erage under social security or railroad retire- tion, your nondeductible contribution, and theThese rules differ depending on whether the
ment is not coverage under an employer taxable portion, if any, of your social securityplan is a defined contribution plan or a defined
retirement plan. benefits.benefit plan.
Benefits from a previous employer's plan. Deduction phaseout. If you were covered byTax year. Your tax year is the annual account- If you receive retirement benefits from a previ- an employer retirement plan and you did noting period you use to keep records and report ous employer's plan, you are not covered by that receive any social security retirement benefits,income and expenses on your income tax re- plan. your IRA deduction may be reduced or elimi-turn. For almost all people, the tax year is the nated depending on your filing status and modi-Reservists. If the only reason you participatecalendar year. fied AGI as shown in Table 17-1.in a plan is because you are a member of a
reserve unit of the armed forces, you may not beDefined contribution plan. Generally, you If your spouse is covered. If you are notcovered by the plan. You are not covered by theare covered by a defined contribution plan for a covered by an employer retirement plan, butplan if both of the following conditions are met.tax year if amounts are contributed or allocated your spouse is, and you did not receive any
to your account for the plan year that ends with social security benefits, your IRA deduction may1. The plan you participate in is establishedor within that tax year. be reduced or eliminated entirely depending onfor its employees by: your filing status and modified AGI as shown inA defined contribution plan is a plan that
Table 17-2.provides for a separate account for each person a. The United States,
Page 124 Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

Page 127 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Filing status. Your filing status depends pri- If at least one of the above does not apply, Tax on earnings on nondeductible contribu-
tions. As long as contributions are within thefigure your modified AGI using Worksheet 17-1marily on your marital status. For this purpose,
contribution limits, none of the earnings or gainsabove.you need to know if your filing status is single or
on contributions (deductible or nondeductible)head of household, married filing jointly or quali-
will be taxed until they are distributed. See Whenfying widow(er), or married filing separately. If How to figure your reduced IRA deduction.
Can You Withdraw or Use IRA Assets, later.you need more information on filing status, see You can figure your reduced IRA deduction for
either Form 1040 or Form 1040A by using thechapter 2. Cost basis. You will have a cost basis in yourworksheets in chapter 1 of Publication 590.Lived apart from spouse. If you did not live traditional IRA if you made any nondeductibleAlso, the instructions for Form 1040 and Formwith your spouse at any time during the year and contributions. Your cost basis is the sum of the1040A include similar worksheets that you mayyou file a separate return, your filing status, for nondeductible contributions to your IRA minusbe able to use instead.this purpose, is single. any withdrawals or distributions of nondeduct-
ible contributions.
Modified adjusted gross income (AGI). How Reporting Deductibleyou figure your modified AGI depends on Inherited IRAsContributionswhether you are filing Form 1040 or Form
1040A. If you made contributions to your IRA for If you file Form 1040, enter your IRA deduction If you inherit a traditional IRA, you are called a
2009 and received a distribution from your IRA on line 32 of that form. If you file Form 1040A, beneficiary. A beneficiary can be any person or
in 2009, see Publication 590. enter your IRA deduction on line 17. You cannot entity the owner chooses to receive the benefits
deduct IRA contributions on Form 1040EZ. of the IRA after he or she dies. Beneficiaries of aDo not assume that your modified AGI traditional IRA must include in their gross in-is the same as your compensation. come any taxable distributions they receive.Your modified AGI may include income
CAUTION
! Nondeductiblein addition to your compensation (discussed Inherited from spouse. If you inherit a tradi-Contributionsearlier), such as interest, dividends, and income tional IRA from your spouse, you generally havefrom IRA distributions. the following three choices. You can:Although your deduction for IRA contributions
may be reduced or eliminated, contributions canForm 1040. If you file Form 1040, refigure 1. Treat it as your own IRA by designatingbe made to your IRA up to the general limit or, ifthe amount on the page 1 ªadjusted gross in- yourself as the account owner.it applies, the spousal IRA limit. The differencecomeº line without taking into account any of the
between your total permitted contributions and 2. Treat it as your own by rolling it over intofollowing amounts. your IRA deduction, if any, is your nondeductible your IRA, or to the extent it is taxable, into• IRA deduction. contribution. a:
• Student loan interest deduction. a. Qualified employer plan,Example. Mike is 28 years old and single. In
• Tuition and fees deduction. 2009, he was covered by a retirement plan at b. Qualified employee annuity plan (sec-work. His salary was $57,312. His modified AGI• Domestic production activities deduction. tion 403(a) plan),was $68,000. Mike made a $5,000 IRA contribu-
• Foreign earned income exclusion. c. Tax-sheltered annuity plan (sectiontion for 2009. Because he was covered by a
403(b) plan), orretirement plan and his modified AGI was over• Foreign housing exclusion or deduction.
$65,000, he cannot deduct his $5,000 IRA con- d. Deferred compensation plan of a state• Exclusion of qualified savings bond inter- tribution. He must designate this contribution as or local government (section 457 plan).est shown on Form 8815, Exclusion of In- a nondeductible contribution by reporting it on
terest From Series EE and I U.S. Savings Form 8606, as explained next. 3. Treat yourself as the beneficiary ratherBonds Issued After 1989 (For Filers With than treating the IRA as your own.Qualified Higher Education Expenses). Form 8606. To designate contributions as
nondeductible, you must file Form 8606.• Exclusion of employer-provided adoption Treating it as your own. You will be con-
You do not have to designate a contributionbenefits shown on Form 8839, Qualified sidered to have chosen to treat the IRA as your
as nondeductible until you file your tax return. own if:Adoption Expenses.
When you file, you can even designate other- • Contributions (including rollover contribu-This is your modified AGI. wise deductible contributions as nondeductible. tions) are made to the inherited IRA, orForm 1040A. If you file Form 1040A, You must file Form 8606 to report nonde-
• You do not take the required minimum dis-refigure the amount on the page 1 ªadjusted ductible contributions even if you do not have to
tribution for a year as a beneficiary of thegross incomeº line without taking into account file a tax return for the year.
IRA.any of the following amounts. A Form 8606 is not used for the year
You will only be considered to have chosen to• IRA deduction. that you make a rollover from a quali-
treat the IRA as your own if:fied retirement plan to a traditional IRA
CAUTION
!• Student loan interest deduction. and the rollover includes nontaxable amounts. • You are the sole beneficiary of the IRA,• Tuition and fees deduction. In those situations, a Form 8606 is completed for andthe year you take a distribution from that IRA.• Exclusion of qualified savings bond inter- • You have an unlimited right to withdrawSee Form 8606  under Distributions Fully orest shown on Form 8815. amounts from it.Partly Taxable, later.
This is your modified AGI.
Failure to report nondeductible contribu- However, if you receive a distribution fromBoth contributions for 2009 and distribu- tions. If you do not report nondeductible con- your deceased spouse's IRA, you can roll thattions in 2009. If all three of the following apply, tributions, all of the contributions to your distribution over into your own IRA within theany IRA distributions you received in 2009 may traditional IRA will be treated as deductible con- 60-day time limit, as long as the distribution is
be partly tax free and partly taxable. tributions when withdrawn. All distributions from not a required distribution, even if you are not
your IRA will be taxed unless you can show, with the sole beneficiary of your deceased spouse's• You received distributions in 2009 from satisfactory evidence, that nondeductible contri- IRA.one or more traditional IRAs. butions were made.
• You made contributions to a traditional Inherited from someone other than spouse.Penalty for overstatement. If you over-IRA for 2009. If you inherit a traditional IRA from anyone otherstate the amount of nondeductible contributions than your deceased spouse, you cannot treat• Some of those contributions may be non- on your Form 8606 for any tax year, you must the inherited IRA as your own. This means thatdeductible contributions. pay a penalty of $100 for each overstatement, you cannot make any contributions to the IRA. Itunless it was due to reasonable cause.If this is your situation, you must figure the tax- also means you cannot roll over any amounts
able part of the traditional IRA distribution before Penalty for failure to file Form 8606. You into or out of the inherited IRA. However, you
you can figure your modified AGI. To do this, you will have to pay a $50 penalty if you do not file a can make a trustee-to-trustee transfer as long
can use Worksheet 1-5, Figuring the Taxable required Form 8606, unless you can prove that as the IRA into which amounts are being moved
the failure was due to reasonable cause.Part of Your IRA Distribution, in Publication 590. is set up and maintained in the name of the
Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) Page 125

Page 128 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
deceased IRA owner for the benefit of you as compensation plans of state or local govern- Required distributions. Amounts that must
beneficiary. ments (section 457 plans), and tax-sheltered be distributed during a particular year under the
For more information, see the discussion of annuity plans (section 403(b) plans). The part of required distribution rules (discussed later) are
inherited IRAs  under Rollover From One IRA the distribution that you can roll over is the part not eligible for rollover treatment.
Into Another, later. that would otherwise be taxable (includible in
your income). Qualified plans may, but are not Inherited IRAs. If you inherit a traditional IRA
required to, accept such rollovers. from your spouse, you generally can roll it over,Can You Move Retirement
or you can choose to make the inherited IRATime limit for making a rollover contribution.Plan Assets? your own. See Treating it as your own, earlier.You generally must make the rollover contribu-
Not inherited from spouse. If you inherit ation by the 60th day after the day you receive theYou can transfer, tax free, assets (money or
traditional IRA from someone other than yourdistribution from your traditional IRA or your em-property) from other retirement plans (including
spouse, you cannot roll it over or allow it toployer's plan.traditional IRAs) to a traditional IRA. You can
receive a rollover contribution. You must with- The IRS may waive the 60-day requirementmake the following kinds of transfers.
where the failure to do so would be against draw the IRA assets within a certain period. For• Transfers from one trustee to another. equity or good conscience, such as in the event more information, see Publication 590.
of a casualty, disaster, or other event beyond• Rollovers.
your reasonable control. For more information, Reporting rollovers from IRAs. Report any• Transfers incident to a divorce. see Publication 590. rollover from one traditional IRA to the same or
another traditional IRA on lines 15a and 15b,Extension of rollover period. If an amountTransfers to Roth IRAs. Under certain condi- Form 1040, or lines 11a and 11b, Form 1040A.distributed to you from a traditional IRA or ations, you can move assets from a traditional Enter the total amount of the distribution onqualified employer retirement plan is a frozenIRA or from a designated Roth account to a Roth Form 1040, line 15a, or Form 1040A, line 11a. Ifdeposit at any time during the 60-day periodIRA. You can also move assets from a qualified the total amount on Form 1040, line 15a, orallowed for a rollover, special rules extend theretirement plan to a Roth IRA. See Can You Form 1040A, line 11a, was rolled over, enterrollover period. For more information, see Publi-Move Amounts Into a Roth IRA?  under Roth zero on Form 1040, line 15b, or Form 1040A,cation 590.IRAs, later. line 11b. If the total distribution was not rolled
More information. For more information on over, enter the taxable portion of the part that
rollovers, see Publication 590. was not rolled over on Form 1040, line 15b, orTrustee-to-Trustee Transfer Form 1040A, line 11b. Put ªRolloverº next to
Form 1040, line 15b, or Form 1040A, line 11b.A transfer of funds in your traditional IRA from Rollover From One IRA Into See the forms instructions.one trustee directly to another, either at your Another If you rolled over the distribution into a quali-request or at the trustee's request, is not a rollo-
fied plan (other than an IRA) or you make thever. Because there is no distribution to you, the You can withdraw, tax free, all or part of the rollover in 2010, attach a statement explainingtransfer is tax free. Because it is not a rollover, it assets from one traditional IRA if you reinvest what you did.is not affected by the 1-year waiting period re- them within 60 days in the same or anotherquired between rollovers, discussed later under traditional IRA. Because this is a rollover, youRollover From One IRA Into Another . For infor- cannot deduct the amount that you reinvest in an Rollover From Employer's Planmation about direct transfers to IRAs from retire- IRA.ment plans other than IRAs, see Publication Into an IRA
590. Waiting period between rollovers. Gener- You can roll over into a traditional IRA all or partally, if you make a tax-free rollover of any part of of an eligible rollover distribution you receivea distribution from a traditional IRA, you cannot, from your (or your deceased spouse's):Rollovers within a 1-year period, make a tax-free rollover
of any later distribution from that same IRA. You • Employer's qualified pension,Generally, a rollover is a tax-free distribution to also cannot make a tax-free rollover of any profit-sharing or stock bonus plan,you of cash or other assets from one retirement amount distributed, within the same 1-year pe- • Annuity plan,plan that you contribute (roll over) to another riod, from the IRA into which you made theretirement plan. The contribution to the second tax-free rollover. • Tax-sheltered annuity plan (section 403(b)retirement plan is called a ªrollover contribution.º The 1-year period begins on the date you plan), or
receive the IRA distribution, not on the date you • Governmental deferred compensationNote. An amount rolled over tax free from roll it over into an IRA. plan (section 457 plan).one retirement plan to another is generally in-
cludible in income when it is distributed from the Example. You have two traditional IRAs, A qualified plan is one that meets the require-second plan. IRA-1 and IRA-2. You make a tax-free rollover of ments of the Internal Revenue Code.a distribution from IRA-1 into a new traditionalKinds of rollovers to a traditional IRA. You
IRA (IRA-3). You cannot, within 1 year of thecan roll over amounts from the following plans Eligible rollover distribution. Generally, andistribution from IRA-1, make a tax-free rolloverinto a traditional IRA: eligible rollover distribution is any distribution ofof any distribution from either IRA-1 or IRA-3 into• A traditional IRA, all or part of the balance to your credit in aanother traditional IRA.
qualified retirement plan except the following.However, the rollover from IRA-1 into IRA-3• An employer's qualified retirement plan for
does not prevent you from making a tax-freeits employees, 1. A required minimum distribution (explainedrollover from IRA-2 into any other traditional later under When Must You Withdraw IRA• A deferred compensation plan of a state or IRA. This is because you have not, within the Assets? (Required Minimum Distributions).local government (section 457 plan), or last year, rolled over, tax free, any distribution
from IRA-2 or made a tax-free rollover into 2. A hardship distribution.• A tax-sheltered annuity plan (section
IRA-2.403(b) plan). 3. Any of a series of substantially equal peri-
Exception. For an exception for distribu- odic distributions paid at least once a year
tions from failed financial institutions, see Publi- over:Treatment of rollovers. You cannot deduct a
cation 590.rollover contribution, but you must report the a. Your lifetime or life expectancy,rollover distribution on your tax return as dis- Partial rollovers. If you withdraw assets fromcussed later under Reporting rollovers from b. The lifetimes or life expectancies of youa traditional IRA, you can roll over part of theIRAs and under Reporting rollovers from em- and your beneficiary, orwithdrawal tax free and keep the rest of it. Theployer plans. c. A period of 10 years or more.amount you keep will generally be taxable (ex-
Kinds of rollovers from a traditional IRA. cept for the part that is a return of nondeductible
4. Corrective distributions of excess contribu-You may be able to roll over, tax free, a distribu- contributions). The amount you keep may be
tions or excess deferrals, and any incometion from your traditional IRA into a qualified subject to the 10% additional tax on early distri-
allocable to the excess, or of excess an-plan. These plans include the federal Thrift Sav- butions, discussed later under What Acts Result
nual additions and any allocable gains.ings Fund (for federal employees), deferred in Penalties or Additional Taxes.
Page 126 Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

Page 129 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
5. A loan treated as a distribution because it For conversions after 2009 from a • The date on which the contribution was
traditional IRA to a Roth IRA, the modi- made to the first IRA and the year fordoes not satisfy certain requirements ei-
fied AGI and filing status requirements which it was made.ther when made or later (such as upon
TIP
noted above do not apply.default), unless the participant's accrued • A direction to the trustee of the first IRA to
benefits are reduced (offset) to repay the transfer in a trustee-to-trustee transfer the
loan. Required distributions. You cannot convert amount of the contribution and any net
amounts that must be distributed from your income (or loss) allocable to the contribu-6. Dividends on employer securities. traditional IRA for a particular year (including the tion to the trustee of the second IRA.
7. The cost of life insurance coverage. calendar year in which you reach age 70 1/2) • The name of the trustee of the first IRAunder the required distribution rules (discussed and the name of the trustee of the secondAny nontaxable amounts that you roll later). IRA.over into your traditional IRA become
part of your basis (cost) in your IRAs. • Any additional information needed to
TIPIncome. You must include in your gross in-To recover your basis when you take distribu- make the transfer.come distributions from a traditional IRA thattions from your IRA, you must complete Form you would have had to include in income if you8606 for the year of the distribution. See Form had not converted them into a Roth IRA. These Reporting a recharacterization. If you elect8606 under Distributions Fully or Partly Taxable, amounts are included in income on your return to recharacterize a contribution to one IRA as alater. for the year that you converted them from a contribution to another IRA, you must report the
traditional IRA to a Roth IRA. You do not include recharacterization on your tax return as directed
in gross income any part of a distribution from aRollover by nonspouse beneficiary. A direct by Form 8606 and its instructions. You must
traditional IRA that is a return of your basis, astransfer from a deceased employee's qualified treat the contribution as having been made to
discussed later. the second IRA.pension, profit-sharing or stock bonus plan, an-
If you must include any amount in your grossnuity plan, tax-sheltered annuity (section
income, you may have to increase your with-403(b)) plan, or governmental deferred compen- When Can You Withdrawholding or make estimated tax payments. Seesation (section 457) plan to an IRA set up to
or Use IRA Assets?chapter 4.receive the distribution on your behalf can be
treated as an eligible rollover distribution if you There are rules limiting use of your IRA assetsare the designated beneficiary of the plan and and distributions from it. Violation of the rulesRecharacterizationsnot the employee's spouse. The IRA is treated generally results in additional taxes in the year ofas an inherited IRA. For more information about violation. See What Acts Result in Penalties orYou may be able to treat a contribution made to
inherited IRAs, see Inherited IRAs, earlier. Additional Taxes, later.one type of IRA as having been made to a
different type of IRA. This is called recharacter- Contributions returned before the due dateReporting rollovers from employer plans. izing the contribution. More detailed information of return. If you made IRA contributions inEnter the total distribution (before income tax or is in Publication 590. 2009, you can withdraw them tax free by the dueother deductions were withheld) on Form 1040, date of your return. If you have an extension ofline 16a, or Form 1040A, line 12a. This amount How to recharacterize a contribution. To time to file your return, you can withdraw themshould be shown in box 1 of Form 1099-R. From recharacterize a contribution, you generally tax free by the extended due date. You can dothis amount, subtract any contributions (usually must have the contribution transferred from the this if, for each contribution you withdraw, bothshown in box 5 of Form 1099-R) that were tax- first IRA (the one to which it was made) to the of the following conditions apply.second IRA in a trustee-to-trustee transfer. If theable to you when made. From that result, sub- • You did not take a deduction for the contri-transfer is made by the due date (including ex-tract the amount that was rolled over either bution.tensions) for your tax return for the year duringdirectly or within 60 days of receiving the distri-
which the contribution was made, you can electbution. Enter the remaining amount, even if • You withdraw any interest or other income
to treat the contribution as having been originally earned on the contribution. You can takezero, on Form 1040, line 16b, or Form 1040A, made to the second IRA instead of to the first into account any loss on the contributionline 12b. Also, enter ``Rollover'' next to Form IRA. If you recharacterize your contribution, you while it was in the IRA when calculating1040, line 16b, or Form 1040A, line 12b. must do all three of the following. the amount that must be withdrawn. If
there was a loss, the net income earned• Include in the transfer any net income allo-
on the contribution may be a negativeTransfers Incident to Divorce cable to the contribution. If there was a
amount.loss, the net income you must transfer
If an interest in a traditional IRA is transferred may be a negative amount.
from your spouse or former spouse to you by a • Report the recharacterization on your tax Note. To calculate the amount you mustdivorce or separate maintenance decree or a return for the year during which the contri- withdraw, see Publication 590.written document related to such a decree, the bution was made.interest in the IRA, starting from the date of the Earnings includible in income. You must
• Treat the contribution as having beentransfer, is treated as your IRA. The transfer is include in income any earnings on the contribu-
made to the second IRA on the date that ittax free. For detailed information, see Publica- tions you withdraw. Include the earnings in in-
was actually made to the first IRA.tion 590. come for the year in which you made the
contributions, not in the year in which you with-
draw them.No deduction allowed. You cannot deductConverting From Any Traditional the contribution to the first IRA. Any net income Generally, except for any part of a with-IRA to a Roth IRA you transfer with the recharacterized contribu- drawal that is a return of nondeductible
tion is treated as earned in the second IRA. contributions (basis), any withdrawal of
CAUTION
!You can convert amounts from a traditional IRA your contributions after the due date (or ex-Required notifications. To recharacterizeinto a Roth IRA if, for the tax year you make the tended due date) of your return will be treated asa contribution, you must notify both the trustee ofwithdrawal from the traditional IRA, both of the a taxable distribution. Excess contributions canthe first IRA (the one to which the contributionfollowing requirements are met. also be recovered tax free as discussed underwas actually made) and the trustee of the sec-
What Acts Result in Penalties or Additional• Your modified AGI (explained later under ond IRA (the one to which the contribution is
Taxes, later.Roth IRAs) is not more than $100,000. being moved) that you have elected to treat the
contribution as having been made to the second• You are not a married individual filing a Early distributions tax. The 10% additionalIRA rather than the first. You must make theseparate return. tax on distributions made before you reach agenotifications by the date of the transfer. Only one 591/2 does not apply to these tax-free withdraw-notification is required if both IRAs are main- als of your contributions. However, the distribu-tained by the same trustee. The notification(s)Note. If you did not live with your spouse at tion of interest or other income must be reportedmust include all of the following information.any time during the year and you file a separate on Form 5329 and, unless the distribution quali-
return, your filing status, for this purpose, is • The type and amount of the contribution to fies as an exception to the age 59 1/2 rule, it will
the first IRA that is to be recharacterized.single. be subject to this tax.
Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) Page 127

Page 130 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Beneficiaries. If you are the beneficiary of a you have more than one), you have no basis inWhen Must You Withdraw decedent's traditional IRA, the requirements for your IRA. Because you have no basis in your
IRA Assets? (Required distributions from that IRA generally depend on IRA, any distributions are fully taxable when
whether the IRA owner died before or after the received. See Reporting taxable distributions onMinimum Distributions) required beginning date for distributions. your return, later.
You cannot keep funds in a traditional IRA indef- More information. For more information, in- Partly taxable. If you made nondeductibleinitely. Eventually they must be distributed. If cluding how to figure your minimum required contributions or rolled over any after-taxthere are no distributions, or if the distributions distribution each year and how to figure your amounts to any of your traditional IRAs, youare not large enough, you may have to pay a required distribution if you are a beneficiary of a have a cost basis (investment in the contract)50% excise tax on the amount not distributed as decedent's IRA, see Publication 590. equal to the amount of those contributions.required. See Excess Accumulations (Insuffi- These nondeductible contributions are not taxedcient Distributions), later. The requirements for when they are distributed to you. They are aAre Distributions Taxable?distributing IRA funds differ depending on return of your investment in your IRA.whether you are the IRA owner or the benefi- Only the part of the distribution that repre-In general, distributions from a traditional IRAciary of a decedent's IRA. sents nondeductible contributions and rolledare taxable in the year you receive them. over after-tax amounts (your cost basis) is taxRequired minimum distribution. The Exceptions. Exceptions to distributions from free. If nondeductible contributions have beenamount that must be distributed each year is traditional IRAs being taxable in the year you made or after-tax amounts have been rolledreferred to as the required minimum distribution. receive them are: over to your IRA, distributions consist partly of
nondeductible contributions (basis) and partly ofRequired distributions not eligible for rollo- • Rollovers, deductible contributions, earnings, and gains (ifver. Amounts that must be distributed (re-
• Qualified charitable distributions, dis- there are any). Until all of your basis has beenquired minimum distributions) during a particular
cussed later, distributed, each distribution is partly nontaxableyear are not eligible for rollover treatment.
and partly taxable.• Tax-free withdrawals of contributions, dis-Waiver of required minimum distribution cussed earlier, and Form 8606. You must complete Form 8606rules for 2009. For 2009, you are not required
and attach it to your return if you receive ato take a minimum distribution from your tradi- • The return of nondeductible contributions,
distribution from a traditional IRA and have evertional IRA (as well as most defined contribution discussed later under Distributions Fully or
made nondeductible contributions or rolled overplans). This waiver applies to IRA participants Partly Taxable.
after-tax amounts to any of your traditional IRAs.as well as to beneficiaries. The waiver also ap-
Using the form, you will figure the nontaxableplies to you if you turn 70 1/2 in 2009 and delay Although a conversion of a traditional distributions for 2009 and your total IRA basis foryour 2009 required minimum distribution until IRA is considered a rollover for Roth 2009 and earlier years.April 1, 2010. The waiver does not apply to IRA purposes, it is not an exception to
CAUTION
!minimum required distributions for 2008, even if the rule that distributions from a traditional IRA Note. If you are required to file Form 8606,you turned 70 1/2 in 2008 and chose to take the are taxable in the year you receive them. Con- but you are not required to file an income tax2008 required minimum distribution by April 1, version distributions are includible in your gross return, you still must file Form 8606. Send it to2009. income subject to this rule and the special rules the IRS at the time and place you would other-If you are a beneficiary receiving distribu- for conversions explained in Publication 590. wise file an income tax return.tions over a 5-year period, you can now waive
the distribution for 2009, effectively taking distri- Qualified charitable distributions. A quali- Distributions reported on Form 1099-R. Ifbutions over a 6-year rather than a 5-year pe- fied charitable distribution (QCD) is a nontax- you receive a distribution from your traditionalriod. able distribution made directly by the trustee of IRA, you will receive Form 1099-R, DistributionsIf you received a distribution in 2009 that your IRA (other than a SEP or SIMPLE IRA) to From Pensions, Annuities, Retirement orwould otherwise be a required minimum distri- an organization eligible to receive tax-deductible Profit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insurance Con-bution, you generally can roll over that amount contributions. You must have been at least age tracts, etc., or a similar statement. IRA distribu-into another IRA or eligible retirement plan 701/2 when the distribution was made. Your total tions are shown in boxes 1 and 2a of Formwithin 60 days of the distribution. QCDs for the year cannot be more than 1099-R. A number or letter code in box 7 tellsFor 2009 RMDs, the 60-day rollover period $100,000. If you file a joint return, your spouse you what type of distribution you received fromwas extended so that it ended no earlier than can also have a QCD of up to $100,000. How- your IRA.November 30, 2009, or 60 days after the distri- ever, the amount of the QCD is limited to thebution was received, whichever was later. Withholding. Federal income tax is withheldamount of the distribution that would otherwise from distributions from traditional IRAs unlessbe included in income. If your IRA includes non-IRA owners. If you are the owner of a tradi- you choose not to have tax withheld. See chap-deductible contributions, the distribution is firsttional IRA, you must generally start receiving ter 4.considered to be paid out of otherwise taxabledistributions from your IRA by April 1 of the year
income. For more information see Publication IRA distributions delivered outside thefollowing the year in which you reach age 70 1/2.
590. United States. In general, if you are a U.S.April 1 of the year following the year in which you
citizen or resident alien and your home addressreach age 70 1/2 is referred to as the required You cannot claim a charitable contribu- is outside the United States or its possessions,beginning date. tion deduction for any QCD not in- you cannot choose exemption from withholdingcluded in your income.
CAUTION
!Distributions by the required beginning date. on distributions from your traditional IRA.You must receive at least a minimum amount for
Reporting taxable distributions on your re-Ordinary income. Distributions from tradi-each year starting with the year you reach age
turn. Report fully taxable distributions, includ-tional IRAs that you include in income are taxed701/2 (your 701/2 year). If you do not (or did not)
ing early distributions on Form 1040, line 15b, oras ordinary income.receive that minimum amount in your 701/2 year,
Form 1040A, line 11b (no entry is required onthen you must receive distributions for your 701/2
No special treatment. In figuring your tax, Form 1040, line 15a, or Form 1040A, line 11a). Ifyear by April 1 of the next year. you cannot use the 10-year tax option or capital only part of the distribution is taxable, enter theIf an IRA owner dies after reaching age 701/2, gain treatment that applies to lump-sum distribu- total amount on Form 1040, line 15a, or Formbut before April 1 of the next year, no minimum tions from qualified employer plans. 1040A, line 11a, and the taxable part on Formdistribution is required because death occurred
1040, line 15b, or Form 1040A, line 11b. Youbefore the required beginning date.
cannot report distributions on Form 1040EZ.Even if you begin receiving distribu- Distributions Fully or Partly
tions before you attain age 70 1/2, you Taxable What Acts Result inmust begin calculating and receiving
CAUTION
!
required minimum distributions by your required Distributions from your traditional IRA may be Penalties or Additionalbeginning date. fully or partly taxable, depending on whether
Taxes?your IRA includes any nondeductible contribu-Distributions after the required beginning tions.date. The required minimum distribution for The tax advantages of using traditional IRAs for
any year after the year you turn 70 1/2 must be Fully taxable. If only deductible contributions retirement savings can be offset by additional
made by December 31 of that later year. were made to your traditional IRA (or IRAs, if taxes and penalties if you do not follow the rules.
Page 128 Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

Page 131 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
There are additions to the regular tax for • Antiques, contributions from your IRA and not include the
using your IRA funds in prohibited transactions. amount withdrawn in your gross income.• Metals,There are also additional taxes for the following • Total contributions (other than rollover• Gems,activities. contributions) for 2009 to your IRA were
• Stamps,• Investing in collectibles. not more than $5,000 ($6,000 if you are
50 or older, or $8,000 for certain employer• Coins,• Making excess contributions. bankruptcies).
• Alcoholic beverages, and• Taking early distributions. • You did not take a deduction for the ex-
• Certain other tangible personal property.• Allowing excess amounts to accumulate cess contribution being withdrawn.
(failing to take required distributions). The withdrawal can take place at any time, evenException. Your IRA can invest in one, after the due date, including extensions, for filingone-half, one-quarter, or one-tenth ounce U.S.There are penalties for overstating the your tax return for the year.amount of nondeductible contributions and for gold coins, or one-ounce silver coins minted by
failure to file a Form 8606, if required. the Treasury Department. It can also invest in Excess contribution deducted in an earliercertain platinum coins and certain gold, silver, year. If you deducted an excess contribution inpalladium, and platinum bullion. an earlier year for which the total contributionsProhibited Transactions were not more than the maximum deductible
amount for that year ($2,000 for 2001 and earlierGenerally, a prohibited transaction is any im- Excess Contributions years, $3,000 for 2002 through 2004 ($3,500 ifproper use of your traditional IRA by you, your you were age 50 or older), $4,000 for 2005beneficiary, or any disqualified person. Generally, an excess contribution is the amount ($4,500 if you were age 50 or older), $4,000 forDisqualified persons include your fiduciary contributed to your traditional IRA(s) for the year 2006 or 2007 ($5,000 if you were age 50 orand members of your family (spouse, ancestor, that is more than the smaller of: older), $5,000 for 2008 ($6,000 if you were agelineal descendent, and any spouse of a lineal • The maximum deductible amount for the 50 or older)), you can still remove the excessdescendent). year. For 2009, this is $5,000 ($6,000 if from your traditional IRA and not include it inThe following are examples of prohibited you are 50 or older, or $8,000 for certain your gross income. To do this, file Form 1040Xtransactions with a traditional IRA. employer bankruptcies), or for that year and do not deduct the excess con-
• Borrowing money from it. tribution on the amended return. Generally, you• Your taxable compensation for the year. can file an amended return within 3 years after• Selling property to it. you filed your return, or 2 years from the time the
• Receiving unreasonable compensation for Tax on excess contributions. In general, if tax was paid, whichever is later.
managing it. the excess contributions for a year are not with-
drawn by the date your return for the year is due Excess due to incorrect rollover information.• Using it as security for a loan. (including extensions), you are subject to a 6% If an excess contribution in your traditional IRA is
• Buying property for personal use (present tax. You must pay the 6% tax each year on the result of a rollover and the excess occurred
or future) with IRA funds. because the information the plan was requiredexcess amounts that remain in your traditional
to give you was incorrect, you can withdraw theIRA at the end of your tax year. The tax cannot
excess contribution. The limits mentioned abovebe more than 6% of the combined value of allEffect on an IRA account. Generally, if you or are increased by the amount of the excess thatyour IRAs as of the end of your tax year.your beneficiary engages in a prohibited trans- is due to the incorrect information. You will haveaction in connection with your traditional IRA Excess contributions withdrawn by due date to amend your return for the year in which theaccount at any time during the year, the account of return. You will not have to pay the 6% tax if excess occurred to correct the reporting of thestops being an IRA as of the first day of that rollover amounts in that year. Do not include inyou withdraw an excess contribution made dur-year. your gross income the part of the excess contri-ing a tax year and you also withdraw interest or
Effect on you or your beneficiary. If your bution caused by the incorrect information.other income earned on the excess contribution.
account stops being an IRA because you or your You must complete your withdrawal by the date
beneficiary engaged in a prohibited transaction, your tax return for that year is due, including
the account is treated as distributing all its as- Early Distributionsextensions.
sets to you at their fair market values on the first How to treat withdrawn contributions. Do You must include early distributions of taxableday of the year. If the total of those values is not include in your gross income an excess amounts from your traditional IRA in your grossmore than your basis in the IRA, you will have a contribution that you withdraw from your tradi- income. Early distributions are also subject to antaxable gain that is includible in your income. For tional IRA before your tax return is due if both additional 10% tax. See the discussion of Forminformation on figuring your gain and reporting it the following conditions are met. 5329 under Reporting Additional Taxes, later, toin income, see Are Distributions Taxable , ear-
figure and report the tax.lier. The distribution may be subject to additional • No deduction was allowed for the excess
taxes or penalties. contribution. Early distributions defined. Early distribu-
Taxes on prohibited transactions. If some- • You withdraw the interest or other income tions generally are amounts distributed from
one other than the owner or beneficiary of a earned on the excess contribution. your traditional IRA account or annuity before
traditional IRA engages in a prohibited transac- you are age 591/2.You can take into account any loss on the contri-tion, that person may be liable for certain taxes. bution while it was in the IRA when calculatingIn general, there is a 15% tax on the amount of Age 591/2 rule. Generally, if you are under agethe amount that must be withdrawn. If there wasthe prohibited transaction and a 100% additional 591/2, you must pay a 10% additional tax on thea loss, the net income you must withdraw maytax if the transaction is not corrected. distribution of any assets (money or other prop-be a negative amount. erty) from your traditional IRA. DistributionsMore information. For more information on How to treat withdrawn interest or other before you are age 591/2 are called early distribu-prohibited transactions, see Publication 590. income. You must include in your gross in- tions.
come the interest or other income that was The 10% additional tax applies to the part of
earned on the excess contribution. Report it on the distribution that you have to include in grossInvestment in Collectibles income. It is in addition to any regular income taxyour return for the year in which the excess
on that amount.contribution was made. Your withdrawal of inter-If your traditional IRA invests in collectibles, the est or other income may be subject to an addi-amount invested is considered distributed to you Exceptions. There are several exceptionstional 10% tax on early distributions, discussedin the year invested. You may have to pay the to the age 59 1/2 rule. Even if you receive alater.10% additional tax on early distributions, dis- distribution before you are age 59 1/2, you may
cussed later. not have to pay the 10% additional tax if you areExcess contributions withdrawn after due in one of the following situations.date of return. In general, you must include allCollectibles. These include:
distributions (withdrawals) from your traditional • You have unreimbursed medical expenses• Artworks, IRA in your gross income. However, if the follow- that are more than 7.5% of your adjusted
ing conditions are met, you can withdraw excess• Rugs, gross income.
Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) Page 129

Page 132 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• The distributions are not more than the relief, attach a statement of explanation and Reporting Additional Taxes
cost of your medical insurance. complete Form 5329 as instructed under Waiver
Generally, you must use Form 5329 to report theof tax in the Instructions for Form 5329.• You are disabled. tax on excess contributions, early distributions,Exemption from tax. If you are unable to take and excess accumulations. If you must file Form• You are the beneficiary of a deceased IRA required distributions because you have a tradi- 5329, you cannot use Form 1040A or Formowner. tional IRA invested in a contract issued by an 1040EZ.• You are receiving distributions in the form insurance company that is in state insurer delin-
of an annuity. quency proceedings, the 50% excise tax does Filing a tax return. If you must file an individ-
not apply if the conditions and requirements of ual income tax return, complete Form 5329 and• The distributions are not more than your Revenue Procedure 92-10 are satisfied. attach it to your Form 1040. Enter the total addi-qualified higher education expenses.
tional taxes due on Form 1040, line 58.More information. For more information on• You use the distributions to buy, build, or excess accumulations, see Publication 590.rebuild a first home. Not filing a tax return. If you do not have to
file a tax return but do have to pay one of the• The distribution is due to an IRS levy of additional taxes mentioned earlier, file the com-the qualified plan. pleted Form 5329 with the IRS at the time and
• The distribution is a qualified reservist dis- place you would have filed your Form 1040. Be
tribution. sure to include your address on page 1 and your
Most of these exceptions are explained in Publi-
cation 590. Worksheet 17-2. Modified Adjusted Gross
Income for Roth IRA Purposes Keep for Your Records
Note. Distributions that are timely and prop-
erly rolled over, as discussed earlier, are not
subject to either regular income tax or the 10% Use this worksheet to figure your modified adjusted gross income for Roth IRA purposes.additional tax. Certain withdrawals of excess
contributions after the due date of your return
are also tax free and therefore not subject to the 1. Enter your adjusted gross income from Form 1040, line 38; or
10% additional tax. (See Excess contributions Form 1040A, line 22 ........................... . 1.
withdrawn after due date of return, earlier.) This 2. Enter any income resulting from the conversion of an IRA also applies to transfers incident to divorce, as (other than a Roth IRA) to a Roth IRA, a rollover from adiscussed earlier. qualified retirement plan to a Roth IRA, and a minimum
Receivership distributions. Early distribu- required distribution from an IRA (for conversions and rollovers
tions (with or without your consent) from savings from qualified retirement plans only) ................. . 2.institutions placed in receivership are subject to
3. Subtract line 2 from line 1 ........................ . 3.this tax unless one of the exceptions listed ear-
lier applies. This is true even if the distribution is 4. Enter any traditional IRA deduction from Form 1040, line 32; orfrom a receiver that is a state agency. Form 1040A, line 17 ........................... . 4.
Additional 10% tax. The additional tax on 5. Enter any student loan interest deduction from Form 1040, lineearly distributions is 10% of the amount of the 33; or Form 1040A, line 18 ....................... . 5.early distribution that you must include in your
gross income. This tax is in addition to any 6. Enter any tuition and fees deduction from Form 1040, line 34;regular income tax resulting from including the or Form 1040A, line 19 ......................... . 6.distribution in income.
7. Enter any domestic production activities deduction from FormNondeductible contributions. The tax on 1040, line 35 ................................ . 7.early distributions does not apply to the part of a
distribution that represents a return of your non- 8. Enter any foreign earned income and/or housing exclusion
deductible contributions (basis). from Form 2555, line 45; or Form 2555-EZ, line 18 ....... . 8.
More information. For more information on 9. Enter any foreign housing deduction from Form 2555, line 50 9.
early distributions, see Publication 590.
 10. Enter any excludable savings bond interest from Form 8815,
line 14 .................................... . 10.
Excess Accumulations 11. Enter any excluded employer-provided adoption benefits from
(Insufficient Distributions) Form 8839, line 30 ............................ . 11.
You cannot keep amounts in your traditional IRA 12. Add the amounts on lines 3 through 11 ............... . 12.
indefinitely. Generally, you must begin receiving
13. Enter:distributions by April 1 of the year following the
• $176,000 if married filing jointly or qualifying widow(er)year in which you reach age 701/2. The required
• $10,000 if married filing separately and you lived with your minimum distribution for any year after the year
spouse at any time during the yearin which you reach age 70 1/2 must be made by
• $120,000 for all others 13.December 31 of that later year.
Is the amount on line 12 more than the amount on line 13?Waiver for 2009. No minimum distribution is
If yes, then see the Note below.required for 2009.
If no, then the amount on line 12 is your modified AGI for Roth IRATax on excess. If distributions are less than purposes.the required minimum distribution for the year,
you may have to pay a 50% excise tax for that Note. If the amount on line 12 is more than the amount on line 13 and you have other
year on the amount not distributed as required. income or loss items, such as social security income or passive activity losses, that are
However, for 2009, you are not required to take subject to AGI-based phaseouts, you can refigure your AGI solely for the purpose of
a minimum distribution from your IRA. This is figuring your modified AGI for Roth IRA purposes. When figuring your modified AGI for
true even if you turn 70 1/2 in 2009 and your first conversion purposes, refigure your AGI without taking into account any income from
distribution is not required until April 1, 2010. conversions or minimum required distributions from IRAs. (If you receive social security
benefits, use Worksheet 1 in Appendix B of Publication 590 to refigure your AGI.) ThenRequest to waive the tax. If the excess ac-
go to list item (2) under Modified AGI or line 3 above in Worksheet 17-2 to refigure yourcumulation is due to reasonable error, and you
modified AGI. If you do not have other income or loss items subject to AGI-basedhave taken, or are taking, steps to remedy the
phaseouts, your modified AGI for Roth IRA purposes is the amount on line 12.insufficient distribution, you can request that the
tax be waived. If you believe you qualify for this
Page 130 Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

Page 133 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
signature and date on page 2. Enclose, but do Table 17-3. Effect of Modified AGI on Roth IRA Contribution
not attach, a check or money order payable to
This table shows whether your contribution to a Roth IRA is affected by the amount of yourthe United States Treasury for the tax you owe,
modified adjusted gross income (modified AGI).as shown on Form 5329. Enter your social se-
curity number and ª2009 Form 5329º on your
check or money order. IF you have taxable
compensation and your AND your modified 
filing status is... AGI is... THEN...Form 5329 not required. You do not have to
use Form 5329 if either of the following situa- less than $166,000 you can contribute up to $5,000married filing jointly, or tions exist. ($6,000 if you are 50 or older inqualifying widow(er)
• Distribution code 1 (early distribution) is 2009).
correctly shown in box 7 of Form 1099-R.
at least $166,000 the amount you can contribute isIf you do not owe any other additional tax
but less than $176,000 reduced as explained underon a distribution, multiply the taxable part
Contribution limit reduced inof the early distribution by 10% and enter
Publication 590.the result on Form 1040, line 58. Put ªNoº
to the left of the line to indicate that you do $176,000 or more you cannot contribute to a Roth IRA.not have to file Form 5329. However, if
you owe this tax and also owe any other zero (-0-) you can contribute up to $5,000married filing separately
additional tax on a distribution, do not ($6,000 if you are 50 or older inand you lived with your
enter this 10% additional tax directly on 2009).spouse at any time during
your Form 1040. You must file Form 5329 the year more than zero (-0-) the amount you can contribute isto report your additional taxes. 
but less than $10,000 reduced as explained under• If you rolled over part or all of a distribution Contribution limit reduced infrom a qualified retirement plan, the part Publication 590.rolled over is not subject to the tax on
early distributions. $10,000 or more you cannot contribute to a Roth IRA.
less than $105,000 you can contribute up to $5,000single,
($6,000 if you are 50 or older inhead of household, or
2009).married filing separately
Roth IRAs and you did not live with at least $105,000 the amount you can contribute isyour spouse at any time but less than $120,000 reduced as explained underRegardless of your age, you may be able to during the year Contribution limit reduced inestablish and make nondeductible contributions
Publication 590.to a retirement plan called a Roth IRA.
$120,000 or more you cannot contribute to a Roth IRA.
Contributions not reported. You do not re-
port Roth IRA contributions on your return.
• $176,000 for married filing jointly or quali- a. Roth IRA conversions included on Form
fying widow(er), 1040, line 15b; or Form 1040A, lineWhat Is a Roth IRA?
11b.• $120,000 for single, head of household, orA Roth IRA is an individual retirement plan that, married filing separately and you did not b. Roth IRA rollovers from qualified retire-except as explained in this chapter, is subject to live with your spouse at any time during ment plans included on Form 1040, linethe rules that apply to a traditional IRA (defined the year, or 16b; or Form 1040A, line 12b.earlier). It can be either an account or an annu-
• $10,000 for married filing separately and c. Minimum required distributions fromity. Individual retirement accounts and annuities
you lived with your spouse at any time IRAs (for conversions and rolloversare described in Publication 590.
during the year. from qualified retirement plans only).To be a Roth IRA, the account or annuity
must be designated as a Roth IRA when it is set
2. Add the following deductions and exclu-up. A deemed IRA can be a Roth IRA, but You may be eligible to claim a credit for sions:neither a SEP IRA nor a SIMPLE IRA can be contributions to your Roth IRA. Fordesignated as a Roth IRA. more information, see chapter 37. a. Traditional IRA deduction,
TIPUnlike a traditional IRA, you cannot deduct
contributions to a Roth IRA. But, if you satisfy b. Student loan interest deduction,Is there an age limit for contributions? Con-the requirements, qualified distributions (dis- c. Tuition and fees deduction,tributions can be made to your Roth IRA regard-cussed later) are tax free. Contributions can be
less of your age.made to your Roth IRA after you reach age 701/2 d. Domestic production activities deduc-
and you can leave amounts in your Roth IRA as tion,Can you contribute to a Roth IRA for yourlong as you live. spouse? You can contribute to a Roth IRA for e. Foreign earned income exclusion,
your spouse provided the contributions satisfy f. Foreign housing exclusion or deduction,When Can a Roth IRA Be the spousal IRA limit (discussed in How Much
Can Be Contributed  under Traditional IRAs ), g. Exclusion of qualified savings bond in-Set Up? you file jointly, and your modified AGI is less terest shown on Form 8815, and
than $176,000.You can set up a Roth IRA at any time. How- h. Exclusion of employer-provided adop-ever, the time for making contributions for any tion benefits shown on Form 8839.Compensation. Compensation includesyear is limited. See When Can You Make Contri- wages, salaries, tips, professional fees, bo-butions, later under Can You Contribute to a You can use Worksheet 17-2 to figure yournuses, and other amounts received for providingRoth IRA? modified AGI.personal services. It also includes commissions,
self-employment income, nontaxable combat
pay, military differential pay, and taxable ali-Can You Contribute to a
mony and separate maintenance payments.Roth IRA? How Much Can Be Contributed?
Modified AGI. Your modified AGI for Roth IRA
Generally, you can contribute to a Roth IRA if The contribution limit for Roth IRAs generallypurposes is your adjusted gross income (AGI)
you have taxable compensation (defined later) depends on whether contributions are madeas shown on your return modified as follows.
and your modified AGI (defined later) is less only to Roth IRAs or to both traditional IRAs and
than: 1. Subtract the following. Roth IRAs.
Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) Page 131

Page 134 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Roth IRAs only. If contributions are made Excess contributions. These are the contri- an amount from the traditional IRA to the
Roth IRA.only to Roth IRAs, your contribution limit gener- butions to your Roth IRAs for a year that equal
the total of:ally is the lesser of the following amounts.
Same trustee. Conversions made with the• $5,000 ($6,000 if you are 50 or older in 1. Amounts contributed for the tax year to same trustee can be made by redesignating the2009). your Roth IRAs (other than amounts prop- traditional IRA as a Roth IRA, rather than open-
erly and timely rolled over from a Roth IRA ing a new account or issuing a new contract.• Your taxable compensation.
or properly converted from a traditional Rollover from an employer's plan into a RothHowever, if your modified AGI is above a certain IRA or rolled over from a qualified retire- IRA. You can roll over into a Roth IRA all oramount, your contribution limit may be reduced, ment plan, as described later) that are part of an eligible rollover distribution you re-as explained later under Contribution limit re- more than your contribution limit for the ceive from your (or your deceased spouse's):duced. year, plus
• Employer's qualified pension,2. Any excess contributions for the precedingRoth IRAs and traditional IRAs. If contribu- profit-sharing or stock bonus plan,year, reduced by the total of:tions are made to both Roth IRAs and traditional
• Annuity plan,IRAs established for your benefit, your contribu- a. Any distributions out of your Roth IRAstion limit for Roth IRAs generally is the same as • Tax-sheltered annuity plan (section 403(b)for the year, plusyour limit would be if contributions were made plan), orb. Your contribution limit for the year mi-only to Roth IRAs, but then reduced by all contri-
• Governmental deferred compensationnus your contributions to all your IRAsbutions for the year to all IRAs other than Roth plan (section 457 plan).for the year.IRAs. Employer contributions under a SEP or
SIMPLE IRA plan do not affect this limit. Any amount rolled over is subject to the same
This means that your contribution limit is rules for converting a traditional IRA into a RothWithdrawal of excess contributions. For
IRA. Also, the rollover contribution must meetgenerally the lesser of the following amounts. purposes of determining excess contributions,
the rollover requirements that apply to the spe-any contribution that is withdrawn on or before• $5,000 ($6,000 if you are 50 or older in cific type of retirement plan.the due date (including extensions) for filing your2009) minus all contributions (other than tax return for the year is treated as an amount Income. You must include in your gross in-employer contributions under a SEP or not contributed. This treatment applies only if come distributions from a qualified retirementSIMPLE IRA plan) for the year to all IRAs any earnings on the contributions are also with- plan that you would have had to include in in-other than Roth IRAs. drawn. The earnings are considered to have come if you had not rolled them over into a Roth• Your taxable compensation minus all con- been earned and received in the year the excess IRA. You do not include in gross income any parttributions (other than employer contribu- contribution was made. of a distribution from a qualified retirement plantions under a SEP or SIMPLE IRA plan) that is a return of contributions (after-tax contri-for the year to all IRAs other than Roth Applying excess contributions. If contribu- butions) to the plan that were taxable to youIRAs. tions to your Roth IRA for a year were more than when paid.
the limit, you can apply the excess contributionHowever, if your modified AGI is above a certain If you must include any amount in yourin one year to a later year if the contributions foramount, your contribution limit may be reduced, gross income, you may have to in-that later year are less than the maximum al-as explained later under Contribution limit re- crease your withholding or make esti-
CAUTION
!lowed for that year.duced. mated tax payments. See Publication 505, Tax
Withholding and Estimated Tax.
Catch-up contributions in certain employer Can You Move Amounts For more information, see Rollover Frombankruptcies. If you participated in a 401(k) Employer's Plan Into a Roth IRA in chapter 2 ofInto a Roth IRA?plan and the employer who maintained the plan Publication 590.went into bankruptcy, you may be able to con- You may be able to convert amounts from either Converting from a SIMPLE IRA. Generally,tribute an additional $3,000 to your IRA. See a traditional, SEP, or SIMPLE IRA into a Roth you can convert an amount in your SIMPLE IRAPublication 590 to see if you qualify to make IRA. You may be able to roll amounts over from to a Roth IRA under the same rules explainedthese additional contributions. If you qualify and a qualified retirement plan to a Roth IRA. You earlier under Converting From Any Traditionalchoose to make these catch-up contributions, may be able to recharacterize contributions IRA to a Roth IRA.the higher contribution and deduction limits for made to one IRA as having been made directly  However, you cannot convert any amountindividuals who are age 50 or older do not apply. to a different IRA. You can roll amounts over distributed from the SIMPLE IRA during theThe most that you can contribute to your Roth from a designated Roth account or from one 2-year period beginning on the date you firstIRA is $8,000. Roth IRA to another Roth IRA. participated in any SIMPLE IRA plan maintained
by your employer.Contribution limit reduced. If your modified
AGI is above a certain amount, your contribution More information. For more detailed informa-Conversions
limit is gradually reduced. Use Table 17-3 to tion on conversions, see Publication 590.
determine if this reduction applies to you. You can convert a traditional IRA to a Roth IRA.
The conversion is treated as a rollover, regard-Figuring the reduction. If the amount you less of the conversion method used. Most of the Failed Conversions and Rolloverscan contribute to your Roth IRA is reduced, see rules for rollovers, described earlier under Rollo-Publication 590 for how to figure the reduction. If, when you converted amounts from a tradi-ver From One IRA Into Another  under Tradi-
tional IRA or SIMPLE IRA into a Roth IRA ortional IRAs, apply to these rollovers. However,
when you rolled over amounts from a qualifiedthe 1-year waiting period does not apply.When Can You Make retirement plan into a Roth IRA, you expected to
have modified AGI of less than $100,000 and aContributions? Conversion methods. You can convert filing status other than married filing separately,amounts from a traditional IRA to a Roth IRA inYou can make contributions to a Roth IRA for a but your expectations did not come true, youany of the following ways.year at any time during the year or by the due have made a failed conversion or failed rollover.
date of your return for that year (not including • Rollover. You can receive a distribution Note. For tax years starting in 2010, theextensions). from a traditional IRA and roll it over (con- $100,000 modified AGI limit on conversions andtribute it) to a Roth IRA within 60 daysYou can make contributions for 2009 rollovers is eliminated and married taxpayersafter the distribution.by the due date (not including exten- filing a separate return can now convert or rollo-
sions) for filing your 2009 tax return. • Trustee-to-trustee transfer. You can di- ver amounts to a Roth IRA.
TIP
rect the trustee of the traditional IRA to Results of failed conversions and failed roll-transfer an amount from the traditional IRA overs. If the converted or rolled over amountto the trustee of the Roth IRA. (contribution) is not recharacterized (explainedWhat if You Contribute Too Much? • Same trustee transfer. If the trustee of earlier), the contribution will be treated as a
A 6% excise tax applies to any excess contribu- the traditional IRA also maintains the Roth regular contribution to the Roth IRA and subject
tion to a Roth IRA. IRA, you can direct the trustee to transfer to the following tax consequences.
Page 132 Chapter 17 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)

Page 135 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• A 6% excise tax per year will apply to any converted or rolled over (the conversion or rollo- after 1984 and to payments under instruments
excess contribution not withdrawn from ver contribution) that you had to include in in- executed before 1985. This chapter discusses
the Roth IRA. come. A separate 5-year period applies to each the rules for payments under instruments exe-
conversion and rollover. See Ordering rules for cuted after 1984. If you need the rules for pay-• The distributions from the traditional IRA distributions, later, to determine the amount, if ments under pre-1985 instruments, get andor qualified retirement plan must be in- any, of the distribution that is attributable to the keep a copy of the 2004 version of Publicationcluded in your gross income. part of the conversion or rollover contribution 504. That was the last year the information on
• The 10% additional tax on early distribu- that you had to include in income. pre-1985 instruments was included in Publica-
tions may apply to any distribution. tion 504.Additional tax on other early distributions. Use Table 18-1 in this chapter as a guide toUnless an exception applies, you must pay theHow to avoid. You must move the amount determine whether certain payments are con-10% additional tax on the taxable part of anyconverted or rolled over (including all earnings sidered alimony.distributions that are not qualified distributions.from the date of conversion or roll over) into a See Publication 590 for more information.traditional IRA by the due date (including exten- Definitions. The following definitions apply
sions) for your tax return for the year during throughout this chapter.Ordering rules for distributions. If you re-which you made the conversion or roll over to ceive a distribution from your Roth IRA that is Spouse or former spouse. Unless other-the Roth IRA. You do not have to include this not a qualified distribution, part of it may be wise stated, the term ªspouseº includes formerdistribution (withdrawal) in income. See taxable. There is a set order in which contribu- spouse.Recharacterizations, earlier, for more informa- tions (including conversion contributions andtion. Divorce or separation instrument. Therollover contributions from qualified retirement term ªdivorce or separation instrumentº means:plans) and earnings are considered to be distrib-
uted from your Roth IRA. Regular contributions • A decree of divorce or separate mainte-Rollover From a Roth IRA are distributed first. See Publication 590 for nance or a written instrument incident to
more information. that decree,You can withdraw, tax free, all or part of the
assets from one Roth IRA if you contribute them • A written separation agreement, orMust you withdraw or use Roth IRA assets?
within 60 days to another Roth IRA. Most of the You are not required to take distributions from • A decree or any type of court order requir-rules for rollovers, explained earlier under Rollo- your Roth IRA at any age. The minimum distri- ing a spouse to make payments for thever From One IRA Into Another  under Tradi- bution rules that apply to traditional IRAs do not support or maintenance of the othertional IRAs, apply to these rollovers. apply to Roth IRAs while the owner is alive. spouse. This includes a temporary decree,However, after the death of a Roth IRA owner, an interlocutory (not final) decree, and aRollover from designated Roth account. A certain of the minimum distribution rules that decree of alimony pendente lite (whilerollover from a designated Roth account can apply to traditional IRAs also apply to Roth IRAs. awaiting action on the final decree oronly be made to another designated Roth ac-
agreement).count or to a Roth IRA. More information. For more detailed informa-
tion on Roth IRAs, see Publication 590.
Are Distributions Taxable? Useful Items
You may want to see:You do not include in your gross income quali-
fied distributions or distributions that are a return Publicationof your regular contributions from your Roth
IRA(s). You also do not include distributions ❏ 504 Divorced or Separated Individuals18.from your Roth IRA that you roll over tax free into
another Roth IRA. You may have to include part
of other distributions in your income. See Order-
ing rules for distributions, later. Alimony General RulesWhat are qualified distributions? A qualified
distribution is any payment or distribution from The following rules apply to alimony regardlessyour Roth IRA that meets the following require- Introduction of when the divorce or separation instrumentments. was executed.This chapter discusses the rules that apply if you
1. It is made after the 5-year period beginning pay or receive alimony. It covers the following Payments not alimony. Not all paymentswith the first taxable year for which a con- topics. under a divorce or separation instrument aretribution was made to a Roth IRA set up • What payments are alimony. alimony. Alimony does not include:for your benefit, and
• What payments are not alimony, such as • Child support, 2. The payment or distribution is: child support. • Noncash property settlements,a. Made on or after the date you reach • How to deduct alimony you paid. • Payments that are your spouse's part ofage 591/2,
• How to report alimony you received as in- community income as explained underb. Made because you are disabled, come. Community Property in Publication 504,
c. Made to a beneficiary or to your estate • Whether you must recapture the tax bene- • Payments to keep up the payer's property,after your death, or fits of alimony. Recapture means adding or
back in your income all or part of a deduc-d. To pay up to $10,000 (lifetime limit) of • Use of the payer's property.tion you took in a prior year.certain qualified first-time homebuyer
amounts. See Publication 590 for more
Alimony is a payment to or for a spouse or Payments to a third party. Cash payments,information.
former spouse under a divorce or separation checks, or money orders to a third party on
instrument. It does not include voluntary pay- behalf of your spouse under the terms of your
Additional tax on distributions of conversion ments that are not made under a divorce or divorce or separation instrument can be ali-
and certain rollover contributions within separation instrument. mony, if they otherwise qualify. These include
5-year period. If, within the 5-year period Alimony is deductible by the payer and must payments for your spouse's medical expenses,
starting with the first day of your tax year in be included in the spouse's or former spouse's housing costs (rent, utilities, etc.), taxes, tuition,
which you convert an amount from a traditional income. Although this chapter is generally writ- etc. The payments are treated as received by
IRA or rollover an amount from a qualified retire- ten for the payer of the alimony, the recipient can your spouse and then paid to the third party.
ment plan to a Roth IRA, you take a distribution use the information to determine whether an
from a Roth IRA, you may have to pay the 10% amount received is alimony. Life insurance premiums. Alimony includes
additional tax on early distributions. You gener- To be alimony, a payment must meet certain premiums you must pay under your divorce or
ally must pay the 10% additional tax on any requirements. Different requirements generally separation instrument for insurance on your life
amount attributable to the part of the amount apply to payments under instruments executed to the extent your spouse owns the policy.
Chapter 18 Alimony Page 133

Page 136 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• The payment is in cash.Table 18-1. Alimony Requirements (Instruments Executed After 1984)
• The instrument does not designate the
Payments ARE alimony if all of the Payments are NOT alimony if any of the payment as not alimony.
following are true: following are true: • The spouses are not members of the
Payments are required by a divorce or Payments are not required by a divorce or same household at the time the payments
separation instrument. separation instrument. are made. This requirement applies only if
the spouses are legally separated under aPayer and recipient spouse do not file a joint Payer and recipient spouse file a joint return decree of divorce or separate mainte-return with each other. with each other. nance.
Payment is in cash (including checks or Payment is: • There is no liability to make any paymentmoney orders). • Not in cash, (in cash or property) after the death of the
recipient spouse.• A noncash property settlement,
• Spouse's part of community income, or • The payment is not treated as child sup-
• To keep up the payer's property. port. 
Payment is not designated in the instrument Payment is designated in the instrument as Each of these requirements is discussed next.
as not alimony. not alimony.
Cash payment requirement. Only cash pay-Spouses legally separated under a decree of Spouses legally separated under a decree of ments, including checks and money orders,divorce or separate maintenance are not divorce or separate maintenance are qualify as alimony. The following do not qualifymembers of the same household. members of the same household. as alimony.
Payments are not required after death of the Payments are required after death of the • Transfers of services or property (includ-
recipient spouse. recipient spouse. ing a debt instrument of a third party or an
annuity contract).Payment is not treated as child support. Payment is treated as child support.
• Execution of a debt instrument by the
payer.These payments are deductible by the payer These payments are neither deductible by the
and includible in income by the recipient. payer nor includible in income by the recipient. • The use of the payer's property.
Payments to a third party. Cash payments
Payments for jointly-owned home. If your Exception for instruments executed before to a third party under the terms of your divorce or
1985. There are two situations where the rulesdivorce or separation instrument states that you separation instrument can qualify as cash pay-
for instruments executed after 1984 apply tomust pay expenses for a home owned by you ments to your spouse. See Payments to a third
instruments executed before 1985.and your spouse or former spouse, some of your party under General Rules, earlier.
payments may be alimony. Also, cash payments made to a third party at1. A divorce or separation instrument exe- the written request of your spouse may qualifyMortgage payments. If you must pay all the cuted before 1985 and then modified after as alimony if all the following requirements aremortgage payments (principal and interest) on a 1984 to specify that the after-1984 rules met.jointly-owned home, and they otherwise qualify will apply.
as alimony, you can deduct one-half of the total • The payments are in lieu of payments of2. A temporary divorce or separation instru-payments as alimony. If you itemize deductions alimony directly to your spouse.ment executed before 1985 and incorpo-and the home is a qualified home, you can claim rated into, or adopted by, a final decree • The written request states that bothhalf of the interest in figuring your deductible executed after 1984 that: spouses intend the payments to be treatedinterest. Your spouse must report one-half of the as alimony.payments as alimony received. If your spouse a. Changes the amount or period of pay-
• You receive the written request from youritemizes deductions and the home is a qualified ment, or
spouse before you file your return for thehome, he or she can claim one-half of the inter- b. Adds or deletes any contingency or year you made the payments.est on the mortgage in figuring deductible inter- condition.est.
Payments designated as not alimony. YouTaxes and insurance. If you must pay all For the rules for alimony payments under
and your spouse can designate that otherwisethe real estate taxes or insurance on a home pre-1985 instruments not meeting these excep-
qualifying payments are not alimony. You do thistions, see the 2004 revision of Publication 504held as tenants in common, you can deduct
by including a provision in your divorce or sepa-on the IRS website at www.irs.gov.one-half of these payments as alimony. Your
ration instrument that states the payments arespouse must report one-half of these payments
not deductible as alimony by you and are ex-Example 1. In November 1984, you andas alimony received. If you and your spouse
cludable from your spouse's income. For thisyour former spouse executed a written separa-itemize deductions, you can each claim one-half
purpose, any instrument (written statement)tion agreement. In February 1985, a decree ofof the real estate taxes and none of the home
divorce was substituted for the written separa- signed by both of you that makes this designa-insurance. 
tion agreement. The decree of divorce did not tion and that refers to a previous written separa- If your home is held as tenants by the en- change the terms for the alimony you pay your tion agreement is treated as a written separationtirety or joint tenants, none of your payments for former spouse. The decree of divorce is treated agreement (and therefore a divorce or separa-taxes or insurance are alimony. But if you item- as executed before 1985. Alimony payments tion instrument). If you are subject to temporaryize deductions, you can claim all of the real under this decree are not subject to the rules for support orders, the designation must be made inestate taxes and none of the home insurance. payments under instruments executed after the original or a later temporary support order.
Other payments to a third party. If you 1984. Your spouse can exclude the payments frommade other third-party payments, see Publica- income only if he or she attaches a copy of thetion 504 to see whether any part of the payments Example 2. Assume the same facts as in instrument designating them as not alimony toqualifies as alimony. Example 1  except that the decree of divorce his or her return. The copy must be attachedchanged the amount of the alimony. In this ex- each year the designation applies.ample, the decree of divorce is not treated as
executed before 1985. The alimony payments Spouses cannot be members of the sameare subject to the rules for payments under in- household.  Payments to your spouse whileInstruments struments executed after 1984. you are members of the same household are not
alimony if you are legally separated under aExecuted After 1984 Alimony requirements. A payment to or for a
decree of divorce or separate maintenance. Aspouse under a divorce or separation instrument
The following rules for alimony apply to pay- home you formerly shared is considered oneis alimony if the spouses do not file a joint return
ments under divorce or separation instruments household, even if you physically separate your-with each other and all the following require-
selves in the home.executed after 1984. ments are met.
Page 134 Chapter 18 Alimony

Page 137 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You are not treated as members of the same These facts indicate that the lump-sum pay-
household if one of you is preparing to leave the ment to be made after your former spouse's How To Deducthousehold and does leave no later than 1 month death is a substitute for the full amount of the
after the date of the payment. $30,000 annual payments. None of the annual Alimony Paidpayments are alimony. The result would be theException. If you are not legally separated same if the payment required at death were tounder a decree of divorce or separate mainte- You can deduct alimony you paid, whether orbe discounted by an appropriate interest factornance, a payment under a written separation not you itemize deductions on your return. You
to account for the prepayment.agreement, support decree, or other court order must file Form 1040. You cannot use Form
may qualify as alimony even if you are members 1040A or Form 1040EZ.
Child support. A payment that is specificallyof the same household when the payment is Enter the amount of alimony you paid on
designated as child support or treated as specifi-made. Form 1040, line 31a. In the space provided on
cally designated as child support under your line 31b, enter your spouse's social security
divorce or separation instrument is not alimony. number.Liability for payments after death of recipient
The amount of child support may vary over time.spouse. If any part of payments you make  If you paid alimony to more than one person,
Child support payments are not deductible bymust continue to be made for any period after enter the social security number of one of the
the payer and are not taxable to the recipient.your spouse's death, that part of your payments recipients. Show the social security number and
is not alimony, whether made before or after the amount paid to each other recipient on an at-Specifically designated as child support.death. If all of the payments would continue, tached statement. Enter your total payments onA payment will be treated as specifically desig-then none of the payments made before or after line 31a.nated as child support to the extent that thethe death are alimony. payment is reduced either: If you do not provide your spouse'sThe divorce or separation instrument does social security number, you may have• On the happening of a contingency relat-not have to expressly state that the payments to pay a $50 penalty and your deduc-
CAUTION
!ing to your child, orcease upon the death of your spouse if, for tion may be disallowed.example, the liability for continued payments • At a time that can be clearly associatedwould end under state law. with the contingency.
A payment may be treated as specifically desig-Example. You must pay your former
nated as child support even if other separatespouse $10,000 in cash each year for 10 years. How To Report
payments are specifically designated as childYour divorce decree states that the payments
support.will end upon your former spouse's death. You Alimony Received
must also pay your former spouse or your former Contingency relating to your child. Aspouse's estate $20,000 in cash each year for Report alimony you received as income on Formcontingency relates to your child if it depends on10 years. The death of your spouse would not 1040, line 11. You cannot use Form 1040A orany event relating to that child. It does not matterterminate these payments under state law. Form 1040EZ.whether the event is certain or likely to occur.The $10,000 annual payments may qualify Events relating to your child include the child's: You must give the person who paid theas alimony. The $20,000 annual payments that alimony your social security number. If• Becoming employed,do not end upon your former spouse's death are you do not, you may have to pay a $50
CAUTION
!not alimony. • Dying, penalty.
Substitute payments. If you must make • Leaving the household,any payments in cash or property after your
• Leaving school,spouse's death as a substitute for continuing
otherwise qualifying payments before the death, • Marrying, or Recapture Rulethe otherwise qualifying payments are not ali-
• Reaching a specified age or income level.mony. To the extent that your payments begin, If your alimony payments decrease or terminateaccelerate, or increase because of the death of during the first 3 calendar years, you may beClearly associated with a contingency.your spouse, otherwise qualifying payments you subject to the recapture rule. If you are subject toPayments that would otherwise qualify as ali-made may be treated as payments that were not this rule, you have to include in income in themony are presumed to be reduced at a timealimony. Whether or not such payments will be third year part of the alimony payments youclearly associated with the happening of a con-treated as not alimony depends on all the facts previously deducted. Your spouse can deduct intingency relating to your child only in the follow-and circumstances. the third year part of the alimony payments he oring situations. she previously included in income.Example 1. Under your divorce decree, you • The payments are to be reduced not more The 3-year period starts with the first calen-must pay your former spouse $30,000 annually. than 6 months before or after the date the dar year you make a payment qualifying asThe payments will stop at the end of 6 years or child will reach 18, 21, or local age of alimony under a decree of divorce or separateupon your former spouse's death, if earlier. majority. maintenance or a written separation agreement.Your former spouse has custody of your mi- Do not include any time in which payments were• The payments are to be reduced on two ornor children. The decree provides that if any being made under temporary support orders.more occasions that occur not more thanchild is still a minor at your spouse's death, you The second and third years are the next 2 calen-1 year before or after a different one ofmust pay $10,000 annually to a trust until the dar years, whether or not payments are madeyour children reaches a certain age fromyoungest child reaches the age of majority. The during those years.18 to 24. This certain age must be thetrust income and corpus (principal) are to be
The reasons for a reduction or termination ofsame for each child, but need not be aused for your children's benefit.
alimony payments that can require a recapturewhole number of years.These facts indicate that the payments to be include:made after your former spouse's death are a In all other situations, reductions in payments
substitute for $10,000 of the $30,000 annual • A change in your divorce or separationare not treated as clearly associated with the
payments. Of each of the $30,000 annual pay- instrument,happening of a contingency relating to your
ments, $10,000 is not alimony. child. • A failure to make timely payments,
Either you or the IRS can overcome the pre-Example 2. Under your divorce decree, you • A reduction in your ability to provide sup-
sumption in the two situations just described.must pay your former spouse $30,000 annually. port, or
This is done by showing that the time at whichThe payments will stop at the end of 15 years or • A reduction in your spouse's supportthe payments are to be reduced was determinedupon your former spouse's death, if earlier. The needs.independently of any contingencies relating todecree provides that if your former spouse dies
your children. For example, if you can show thatbefore the end of the 15-year period, you must
the period of alimony payments is customary inpay the estate the difference between $450,000 When to apply the recapture rule. You are
the local jurisdiction, such as a period equal to($30,000 ×  15) and the total amount paid up to subject to the recapture rule in the third year if
one-half of the duration of the marriage, you canthat time. For example, if your spouse dies at the the alimony you pay in the third year decreases
overcome the presumption and may be able toend of the tenth year, you must pay the estate by more than $15,000 from the second year or
treat the amount as alimony.$150,000 ($450,000 − $300,000). the alimony you pay in the second and third
Chapter 18 Alimony Page 135

Page 138 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
years decreases significantly from the alimony How the deduction is claimed. To claim the
you pay in the first year. deduction, enter the allowable amount on FormIntroduction 1040, line 23, or Form 1040A, line 16.When you figure a decrease in alimony, do
This chapter discusses the education-relatednot include the following amounts.
adjustments you can deduct in figuring your ad-• Payments made under a temporary sup- justed gross income.port order. This chapter covers: Student Loan Interest• Payments required over a period of at • Educator expenses,least 3 calendar years that vary because Deductionthey are a fixed part of your income from a • The student loan interest deduction, and
business or property, or from compensa- Generally, personal interest you pay, other than• The tuition and fees deduction.tion for employment or self-employment. certain mortgage interest, is not deductible on
your tax return. However, if your modified ad-• Payments that decrease because of the
Useful Items justed gross income (MAGI) is less thandeath of either spouse or the remarriage
$75,000 ($150,000 if filing a joint return) there isof the spouse receiving the payments You may want to see:
a special deduction allowed for paying interestbefore the end of the third year.
on a student loan (also known as an educationPublication
loan) used for higher education. For most tax-Figuring the recapture. You can use Work- ❏ 970 Tax Benefits for Education payers, MAGI is the adjusted gross income assheet 1 in Publication 504 to figure recaptured figured on their federal income tax return beforealimony. Form (and Instructions) subtracting any deduction for student loan inter-
est. This deduction can reduce the amount ofIncluding the recapture in income. If you ❏ 8917 Tuition and Fees Deduction your income subject to tax by up to $2,500 inmust include a recapture amount in income, 2009. Table 19-1 summarizes the features ofshow it on Form 1040, line 11 (ªAlimony re- the student loan interest deduction.ceivedº). Cross out ªreceivedº and enter ªrecap-
ture.º On the dotted line next to the amount, Table 19-1. Student Loan Interestenter your spouse's last name and social secur- Educator Expenses Deduction at a Glanceity number.
Do not rely on this table alone.If you were an eligible educator in 2009, you can Refer to the text for more details.Deducting the recapture. If you can deduct a deduct up to $250 of qualified expenses you
recapture amount, show it on Form 1040, line paid in 2009 as an adjustment to gross income, Feature Description31a (ªAlimony paidº). Cross out ªpaidº and enter rather than as a miscellaneous itemized deduc-
ªrecapture.º In the space provided, enter your Maximum You can reduce your incometion. If you and your spouse are filing jointly and
benefit subject to tax by up to $2,500.spouse's social security number. both of you were eligible educators, the maxi-
mum deduction is $500. However, neither Your student loan:Loanspouse can deduct more than $250 of his or her qualifications • must have been taken out
qualified expenses. You may be able to deduct solely to pay qualified
expenses that are more than the $250 (or $500) education expenses, and
limit on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 21. • cannot be from a related
person or made under a
qualified employer plan.Eligible educator. An eligible educator is a19.
kindergarten through grade 12 teacher, instruc- The student must be:Student
tor, counselor, principal, or aide who worked in a qualifications • you, your spouse, or your
school for at least 900 hours during a school dependent, and
year. • enrolled at least half-time inEducation-
a degree program.
Qualified expenses. Qualified expenses in- Time limit on You can deduct interest paidRelated clude ordinary and necessary expenses paid in deduction during the remaining period ofconnection with books, supplies, equipment (in- your student loan.
cluding computer equipment, software, andAdjustments Phaseout The amount of your deductionservices), and other materials used in the class-
depends on your income level.room. An ordinary expense is one that is com-
mon and accepted in your educational field. A  necessary expense is one that is helpful andWhat's New appropriate for your profession as an educator.
Student Loan InterestAn expense does not have to be required to beIncome limits increased. The amount of your considered necessary. Definedstudent loan interest deduction for 2009 is grad- Qualified expenses do not include expensesually reduced (phased out) if your modified ad- Student loan interest is interest you paid duringfor home schooling or for nonathletic suppliesjusted gross income (MAGI) is between $60,000 the year on a qualified student loan. It includesfor courses in health or physical education.and $75,000 ($120,000 and $150,000 if you file both required and voluntary interest payments.You must reduce your qualified expenses bya joint return). You cannot take a deduction if
the following amounts.your MAGI is $75,000 or more ($150,000 or
more if you file a joint return). This is an increase • Excludable U.S. series EE and I savings Qualified Student Loanfrom the 2008 limits of $55,000 and $70,000 bond interest from Form 8815. See Figur-($115,000 and $145,000 if filing a joint return). ing the Tax-Free Amount in chapter 11 of This is a loan you took out solely to pay qualifiedSee chapter 5 of Publication 970 for more infor- Publication 970. education expenses (defined later) that were:mation.
• Nontaxable distribution of earnings from a • For you, your spouse, or a person who
qualified tuition program (QTP). See Figur- was your dependent (defined in chapter 3)
ing the Taxable Portion of a Distribution in when you took out the loan,
chapter 9 of Publication 970. • Paid or incurred within a reasonable pe-Reminders • Nontaxable distribution of earnings from a riod of time before or after you took out the
Coverdell education savings account. See loan, andStudents in Midwestern disaster areas. The Figuring the Taxable Portion of a Distribu-definition of qualified education expenses for the • For education provided during an aca-tion in chapter 8 of Publication 970.tuition and fees deduction is expanded for stu- demic period for an eligible student.
dents in Midwestern disaster areas. See Stu- • Any reimbursements you received for
dents in Midwestern disaster areas , for more these expenses that were not reported to Loans from the following sources are not qual-
information. you in box 1 of your Form W-2. ified student loans.
Page 136 Chapter 19 Education- Related Adjustments

Page 139 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• A related person. • Certain corporations, partnerships, trusts, Include as Interest
and exempt organizations.• A qualified employer plan. In addition to simple interest on the loan, certain
loan origination fees, capitalized interest, inter-Exceptions. For purposes of the student Qualified employer plan. You cannot deduct est on revolving lines of credit, and interest onloan interest deduction, the following are excep- interest on a loan made under a qualified em- refinanced student loans can be student loantions to the general rules for dependents. ployer plan or under a contract purchased under interest if all other requirements are met.
such a plan.• An individual can be your dependent even Loan origination fee. In general, this is aif you are the dependent of another tax- one-time fee charged by the lender when a loanpayer. is made. To be deductible as interest, the feeQualified Education Expenses• An individual can be your dependent even must be for the use of money rather than for
if the individual files a joint return with a property or services (such as commitment feesFor purposes of the student loan interest deduc-spouse. or processing costs) provided by the lender. Ation, these expenses are the total costs of at- loan origination fee treated as interest accrues• An individual can be your dependent even tending an eligible educational institution, over the life of the loan.if the individual had gross income for the including graduate school. They include
year that was equal to or more than the Capitalized interest.  This is unpaid interestamounts paid for the following items.
exemption amount for the year ($3,650 for on a student loan that is added by the lender to• Tuition and fees.2009). the outstanding principal balance of the loan.
• Room and board. Interest on revolving lines of credit. This
Reasonable period of time. Qualified educa- interest, which includes interest on credit card• Books, supplies, and equipment.
tion expenses are treated as paid or incurred debt, is student loan interest if the borrower uses• Other necessary expenses (such as trans-within a reasonable period of time before or after the line of credit (credit card) only to pay quali-portation).you take out the loan if they are paid with the fied education expenses. See Qualified Educa-
proceeds of student loans that are part of a tion Expenses, earlier.The cost of room and board qualifies only tofederal postsecondary education loan program. Interest on refinanced student loans. Thisthe extent that it is not more than the greater of:Even if not paid with the proceeds of that includes interest on both:type of loan, the expenses are treated as paid or • The allowance for room and board, as de-incurred within a reasonable period of time if • Consolidated loansÐloans used to refi-termined by the eligible educational institu-both of the following requirements are met. nance more than one student loan of thetion, that was included in the cost of same borrower, and• The expenses relate to a specific aca- attendance (for federal financial aid pur-
demic period. • Collapsed loansÐtwo or more loans ofposes) for a particular academic period
the same borrower that are treated byand living arrangement of the student, or• The loan proceeds are disbursed within a both the lender and the borrower as oneperiod that begins 90 days before the start • The actual amount charged if the student loan.of that academic period and ends 90 days is residing in housing owned or operatedafter the end of that academic period. by the eligible educational institution. If you refinance a qualified student loan
If neither of the above situations applies, the for more than your original loan and
reasonable period of time usually is determined Eligible educational institution. An eligible you use the additional amount for any
CAUTION
!
based on all the relevant facts and circum- educational institution is any college, university, purpose other than qualified education ex-
stances. penses, you cannot deduct any interest paid onvocational school, or other postsecondary edu-
the refinanced loan.cational institution eligible to participate in a stu-Academic period. An academic period in- dent aid program administered by thecludes a semester, trimester, quarter, or other Voluntary interest payments. These areDepartment of Education. It includes virtually allperiod of study (such as a summer school ses- payments made on a qualified student loan dur-accredited public, nonprofit, and proprietary (pri-sion) as reasonably determined by an educa- ing a period when interest payments are not
vately owned profit-making) postsecondary in-tional institution. In the case of an educational required, such as when the borrower has been
institution that uses credit hours or clock hours stitutions. granted a deferment or the loan has not yet
and does not have academic terms, each pay- entered repayment status.Certain educational institutions locatedment period can be treated as an academic outside the United States also participate in theperiod. U.S. Department of Education's Federal Stu- Do Not Include as Interestdent Aid (FSA) programs.Eligible student. This is a student who was
enrolled at least half-time in a program leading You cannot claim a student loan interest deduc-For purposes of the student loan interest
to a degree, certificate, or other recognized edu- tion for any of the following items.deduction, an eligible educational institution
cational credential. also includes an institution conducting an intern- • Interest you paid on a loan if, under the
ship or residency program leading to a degree orEnrolled at least half-time. A student was terms of the loan, you are not legally obli-
enrolled at least half-time if the student was certificate from an institution of higher educa- gated to make interest payments.
taking at least half the normal full-time work load tion, a hospital, or a health care facility that • Loan origination fees that are paymentsfor his or her course of study. offers postgraduate training. for property or services provided by theThe standard for what is half of the normal An educational institution must meet the lender, such as commitment fees orfull-time work load is determined by each eligible processing costs.above criteria only during the academic pe-educational institution. However, the standard riod(s) for which the student loan was incurred.may not be lower than any of those established • Interest you paid on a loan to the extent
The deductibility of interest on the loan is notby the Department of Education under the payments were made through your partici-
affected by the institution's subsequent loss ofHigher Education Act of 1965. pation in the National Health Service
eligibility. Corps Loan Repayment Program (the
Related person. You cannot deduct interest ªNHSC Loan Repayment Programº) orThe educational institution should beon a loan you get from a related person. Related certain other loan repayment assistanceable to tell you if it is an eligible educa-persons include: programs. For more information, see Stu-tional institution.
TIP dent Loan Repayment Assistance in chap-• Your spouse, ter 6 of Publication 970. 
• Your brothers and sisters,
Adjustments to qualified education ex-• Your half brothers and half sisters, penses. You must reduce your qualified edu- Can You Claim the• Your ancestors (parents, grandparents, cation expenses by certain tax-free items (such Deductionetc.), as the tax-free part of scholarships and fellow-
ships). See chapter 5 of Publication 970 for• Your lineal descendants (children, grand- Generally, you can claim the deduction if all four
details.children, etc.), and of the following requirements are met.
Chapter 19 Education- Related Adjustments Page 137

Page 140 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Your filing status is any filing status except credit in 2009 with respect to expenses of
the student for whom the qualified educa-married filing separately. Tuition and Fees tion expenses were paid.• No one else is claiming an exemption for
you on his or her tax return. Deduction
• You are legally obligated to pay interest on Table 19-2. Tuition and FeesYou may be able to deduct qualified educationa qualified student loan. Deduction at a Glanceexpenses paid during the year for yourself, your
Do not rely on this table alone.• You paid interest on a qualified student spouse, or your dependent(s). You cannot claim
Refer to the text for more details.loan. this deduction if your filing status is married filing
separately or if another person can claim an Question Answerexemption for you as a dependent on his or herInterest paid by others. If you are the person tax return. The qualified expenses must be for What is the You can reduce your incomelegally obligated to make interest payments and higher education, as explained later under What maximum subject to tax by up to $4,000.someone else makes a payment of interest on benefit?Expenses Qualify.your behalf, you are treated as receiving the
The tuition and fees deduction can reduce Where is As an adjustment to income onpayments from the other person and, in turn,
the amount of your income subject to tax by up the Form 1040, line 34, or Formpaying the interest. See chapter 5 of Publication deduction 1040A, line 19.to $4,000.970 for more information. taken?Table 19-2 summarizes the features of the
tuition and fees deduction. For whom A student enrolled in an eligible
must the educational institution who isNo Double Benefit Allowed You may be able to take a credit for expenses either: your education expenses instead of a be paid? • you, You cannot deduct as interest on a student loan deduction. You can choose the one • your spouse, or 
TIPany amount that is an allowable deduction under that will give you the lower tax. See chapter 35, • your dependent for whom youany other provision of the tax law (for example, claim an exemption.Education Credits, for details about the credits.home mortgage interest).
What tuition Tuition and fees required for
and fees enrollment or attendance at anCan You Claim theHow Much Can You are eligible postsecondary
deductible? educational institution, but notDeductionDeduct including personal, living, or
family expenses, such as roomThe following rules will help you determine if youYour student loan interest deduction for 2009 is and board.can claim the tuition and fees deduction.generally the smaller of:
• $2,500, or
Who Can Claim the Deduction• The interest you paid in 2009. What Expenses Qualify
Generally, you can claim the tuition and feesHowever, the amount determined above is The tuition and fees deduction is based on quali-deduction if all three of the following require-phased out (gradually reduced) if your MAGI is fied education expenses you pay for yourself,ments are met.between $60,000 and $75,000 ($120,000 and your spouse, or a dependent for whom you claim
$150,000 if you file a joint return). You cannot an exemption on your tax return. Generally, the1. You paid qualified education expenses oftake a student loan interest deduction if your deduction is allowed for qualified education ex-higher education. penses paid in 2009 in connection with enroll-MAGI is $75,000 or more ($150,000 or more if
2. You paid the education expenses for an ment at an institution of higher education duringyou file a joint return). For details on figuring eligible student. 2009 or for an academic period (defined earlieryour MAGI, see chapter 5 of Publication 970.
under Student Loan Interest Deduction ) begin-3. The eligible student is yourself, your
ning in 2009 or in the first 3 months of 2010.spouse, or your dependent for whom youHow Do You Figure the claim an exemption (defined in chapter 3)
Deduction Payments with borrowed funds. You canon your tax return.
claim a tuition and fees deduction for qualifiedQualified education expenses are definedGenerally, you figure the deduction using the education expenses paid with the proceeds of aunder What Expenses Qualify. Eligible studentsStudent Loan Interest Deduction Worksheet in loan. Use the expenses to figure the deductionare defined later under Who Is an Eligible Stu-the Form 1040 or Form 1040A instructions. for the year in which the expenses are paid, notdent.However, if you are filing Form 2555, 2555-EZ, the year in which the loan is repaid. Treat loan
or 4563, or you are excluding income from payments sent directly to the educational institu-
sources within Puerto Rico, you must complete tion as paid on the date the institution credits theWho Cannot Claim the DeductionWorksheet 5-1 in chapter 5 of Publication 970. student's account.
To help you figure your student loan interest You cannot claim the tuition and fees deduction Student withdraws from class(es). You candeduction, you should receive Form 1098-E, if any of the following apply. claim a tuition and fees deduction for qualifiedStudent Loan Interest Statement. Generally, an
• Your filing status is married filing sepa- education expenses not refunded when a stu-institution (such as a bank or governmental
rately. dent withdraws.agency) that received interest payments of $600
or more during 2009 on one or more qualified • Another person can claim an exemption
student loans must send Form 1098-E (or ac- for you as a dependent on his or her tax Qualified Education Expensesceptable substitute) to each borrower by Febru- return. You cannot take the deduction
ary 1, 2010. even if the other person does not actually For purposes of the tuition and fees deduction,claim that exemption.For qualified student loans taken out before qualified education expenses are tuition andSeptember 1, 2004, the institution is required to certain related expenses required for enrollment• Your modified adjusted gross incomeinclude on Form 1098-E only payments of stated or attendance at an eligible educational institu-(MAGI) is more than $80,000 ($160,000 ifinterest. Other interest payments, such as cer- tion.filing a joint return).tain loan origination fees and capitalized inter-
• You (or your spouse) were a nonresidentest, may not appear on the form you receive. Eligible educational institution. An eligiblealien for any part of 2009 and the nonresi-However, if you pay qualifying interest that is not educational institution is any college, university,dent alien did not elect to be treated as aincluded on Form 1098-E, you can also deduct vocational school, or other postsecondary edu-resident alien for tax purposes. More infor-those amounts. For information on allocating cational institution eligible to participate in a stu-mation on nonresident aliens can be foundpayments between interest and principal, see dent aid program administered by the U.S.in Publication 519, U.S. Tax Guide forchapter 5 of Publication 970. Department of Education. It includes virtually allAliens.  To claim the deduction, enter the allowable accredited public, nonprofit, and proprietary (pri-
amount on Form 1040, line 33, or Form 1040A, • You or anyone else claims an American vately owned profit-making) postsecondary in-
line 18. opportunity, Hope, or lifetime learning stitutions. The educational institution should be
Page 138 Chapter 19 Education- Related Adjustments

Page 141 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
able to tell you if it is an eligible educational U.S. savings bonds (Form 8815). See Fig- are not qualified (such as room and
uring the Tax-Free Amount in chapter 11 board).institution.
of Publication 970.Certain educational institutions located
outside the United States also participate in the • Deduct qualified education expenses that Expenses That Do Not QualifyU.S. Department of Education's Federal Stu- have been paid with tax-free educational
dent Aid (FSA) programs. Qualified education expenses do not includeassistance such as a scholarship, grant, or
amounts paid for:employer-provided educational assis-
Related expenses. Student-activity fees and tance. See the following section on Adjust- • Insurance,expenses for course-related books, supplies, ments to qualified education expenses.
• Medical expenses (including studentand equipment are included in qualified educa-
health fees),tion expenses only if the fees and expenses Adjustments to qualified education ex-must be paid to the institution as a condition of • Room and board (but see Students in Mid-penses. If you pay qualified education ex-enrollment or attendance. western disaster areas under Qualifiedpenses with certain tax-free funds, you cannot
Education Expenses, earlier, for an excep-claim a deduction for those amounts. You mustStudents in Midwestern disaster areas. The tion,reduce the qualified education expenses by the
definition of qualified education expenses is ex- amount of any tax-free educational assistance • Transportation, orpanded for students in Midwestern disaster ar- and refunds you received.
eas. In addition to tuition and fees required for • Similar personal, living, or family ex-Tax-free educational assistance. This in-enrollment or attendance at an eligible educa- penses.cludes:tional institution, qualified education expenses This is true even if the amount must be paid tofor students in Midwestern disaster areas in- • The tax-free part of scholarships and fel- the institution as a condition of enrollment orclude the following. lowships (see chapter 1 of Publication attendance.970),1. Books, supplies, and equipment required
Sports, games, hobbies, and noncredit• Pell grants (see chapter 1 of Publicationfor enrollment or attendance at an eligible
courses. Qualified education expenses gen-970),educational institution.
erally do not include expenses that relate to any• Employer-provided educational assistance2. For a special needs student, expenses that course of instruction or other education that in-(see chapter 12 of Publication 970),are necessary for that person's enrollment volves sports, games or hobbies, or any non-
or attendance at an eligible educational in- credit course. However, if the course of• Veterans' educational assistance (seestitution. instruction or other education is part of the stu-chapter 1 of Publication 970), and
dent's degree program, these expenses can3. For a student who is at least a half-time • Any other nontaxable (tax-free) payments qualify.student, the reasonable costs of room and (other than gifts or inheritances) receivedboard, but only to the extent that the costs as educational assistance. Comprehensive or bundled fees. Some eli-are not more than the greater of the follow-
gible educational institutions combine all of theiring two amounts. Refunds. Qualified education expenses do fees for an academic period into one amount. Ifnot include expenses for which you, or someonea. The allowance for room and board, as you do not receive, or do not have access to, anelse who paid qualified education expenses ondetermined by the eligible educational allocation showing how much you paid for quali-behalf of a student, receive a refund. (For infor-institution, that was included in the cost fied education expenses and how much youmation on expenses paid by a dependent stu-of attendance (for federal financial aid paid for personal expenses, such as those listeddent or third party, see Who Can Claim apurposes) for a particular academic pe- above, contact the institution. The institution isDependent's Expenses, later.)riod and living arrangement of the stu- required to make this allocation and provide youIf a refund of expenses paid in 2009 is re-dent. with the amount you paid (or were billed) forceived before you file your tax return for 2009, qualified education expenses on Form 1098-T,b. The actual amount charged if the stu- simply reduce the amount of the expenses paid Tuition Statement. See How Do You Figure thedent is residing in housing owned or by the amount of the refund received. If the Deduction, later, for more information aboutoperated by the eligible educational in- refund is received after you file your 2009 tax Form 1098-T.stitution. return, see When Must the Deduction Be Repaid
(Recaptured), in chapter 7 of Publication 970.
You will need to contact the eligible educa- Who Is an Eligible StudentYou are considered to receive a refund oftional institution for qualified room and board expenses when an eligible educational institu- For purposes of the tuition and fees deduction,costs. tion refunds loan proceeds to the lender on be- an eligible student is a student who is enrolled inhalf of the borrower. Follow the above one or more courses at an eligible educationalinstructions according to when you are consid- institution (defined earlier). The student mustNo Double Benefit Allowed ered to receive the refund. have either a high school diploma or a General
 You cannot do any of the following. Educational Development (GED) credential.Amounts that do not reduce qualified educa-• Deduct qualified education expenses you tion expenses. Do not reduce qualified edu-deduct under any other provision of the Who Can Claim acation expenses by amounts paid with funds the
law, for example, as a business expense. student receives as: Dependent's Expenses
• Deduct qualified education expenses for a • Payment for services, such as wages, Generally, in order to claim the tuition and feesstudent on your income tax return if you or
• A loan, deduction for qualified education expenses for aanyone else claims an American opportu-
dependent, you must:nity, Hope, or lifetime learning credit for • A gift,
that same student for the same year. • Have paid the expenses, and• An inheritance, or
• Deduct qualified education expenses that • Claim an exemption for the student as a• A withdrawal from the student's personalhave been used to figure the tax-free por- dependent.savings.tion of a distribution from a Coverdell edu-
Table 19-3 summarizes who can claim the de-cation savings account (ESA) or a Do not reduce the qualified education ex- duction.qualified tuition program (QTP). For a penses by any scholarship or fellowship re-QTP, this applies only to the amount of ported as income on the student's tax return intax-free earnings that were distributed, not How Much Can Youthe following situations.to the recovery of contributions to the pro- Deductgram. See Figuring the Taxable Portion of • The use of the money is restricted to costs
a Distribution in chapter 8 (Coverdell ESA) of attendance (such as room and board) The maximum tuition and fees deduction inand chapter 9 (QTP) of Publication 970. other than qualified education expenses. 2009 is $4,000, $2,000, or $0, depending on the
• Deduct qualified education expenses that • The use of the money is not restricted and amount of your MAGI. For details on figuring
have been paid with tax-free interest on is used to pay education expenses that your MAGI, see chapter 7 of Publication 970.
Chapter 19 Education- Related Adjustments Page 139

Page 142 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 19-3. Who Can Claim aHow Do You Figure the Deduction
Dependent's Expenses
Figure the deduction using Form 8917. Do not rely on this table alone.To help you figure your tuition and fees de- See Who Can Claim aduction, you should receive Form 1098-T, Tui- Dependent's Expenses in chaptertion Statement. Generally, an eligible 7 of Publication 970.
educational institution (such as a college or uni-
versity) must send Form 1098-T (or acceptable IF your
dependent issubstitute) to each enrolled student by February
an eligible1, 2010.
student andTo claim the deduction, enter the allowable you... AND... THEN...amount on Form 1040, line 34, or Form 1040A,
line 19, and attach your completed Form 8917. claim an you paid only you can
exemption for all deduct the
your qualified qualified
dependent education education
expenses expenses that you
for your paid. Your
dependent dependent cannot
take a deduction.
claim an your no one is allowed
exemption for dependent to take a
your paid all deduction.
dependent qualified
education
expenses
do not claim you paid no one is allowed
an exemption all to take a
for your qualified deduction.
dependent, education
but are expenses
eligible to
do not claim your no one is allowed
an exemption dependent to take a
for your paid all deduction.
dependent, qualified
but are education
eligible to expenses
are not you paid only your
eligible to all dependent can
claim an qualified deduct the
exemption for education amount you paid.
your expenses The amount you
dependent paid is treated as
a gift to your
dependent.
are not your only your
eligible to dependent dependent can
claim an paid all take a deduction.
exemption for qualified
your education
dependent expenses
Page 140 Chapter 19 Education- Related Adjustments

Page 143 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Part Five.
After you have figured your adjusted gross income, you are ready to subtractStandard the deductions used to figure taxable income. You can subtract either the
standard deduction or itemized deductions. Itemized deductions are deduc-Deduction and tions for certain expenses that are listed on Schedule A (Form 1040). The ten
chapters in this part discuss the standard deduction, each itemized deduction,
Itemized and the limit on some of your itemized deductions if your adjusted gross
income exceeds certain amounts. See chapter 20 for the factors to consider
when deciding whether to subtract the standard deduction or itemized deduc-Deductions
tions.
The standard deduction is higher for taxpayers
who: Standard Deduction
• Are 65 or older,20. Amount• Are blind,
• Pay state or local real estate taxes,
Standard • Have a net disaster loss from a federally
declared disaster, or The standard deduction amount depends on
Deduction your filing status, whether you are 65 or older or• Paid state or local sales or excise taxes
blind, whether an exemption can be claimed for(or certain other taxes or fees in a state
you by another taxpayer, whether you pay statewithout a sales tax) on the purchase of a
or local real estate taxes, whether you have anew motor vehicle after February 16,What's New net disaster loss from a federally declared disas-2009.   ter, and whether you paid state or local sales orStandard deduction increased. The stan- excise tax (or certain other taxes or fees in adard deduction for most taxpayers who do not You benefit from the standard deduc- state without a sales tax) on the purchase of aitemize their deductions on Schedule A of Form tion if your standard deduction is more new motor vehicle after February 16, 2009.1040 is higher in 2009 than it was in 2008. The than the total of your allowable item-
TIP Generally, the standard deduction amounts areamount depends on your filing status. In addition ized deductions. adjusted each year for inflation. Use Worksheetto the annual increase due to inflation adjust- 20-1 to figure your standard deduction amount.Persons not eligible for the standard deduc-ments, your 2009 standard deduction is in-
tion. Your standard deduction is zero and youcreased by: Decedent's final return. The amount of theshould itemize any deductions you have if: standard deduction for a decedent's final tax• Any state or local real estate taxes you
• You are married and filing a separate re- return is the same as it would have been had thepaid that would be deductible on Schedule
turn, and your spouse itemizes deduc- decedent continued to live. However, if the de-A if you were itemizing deductions, up to
tions, cedent was not 65 or older at the time of death,$500 ($1,000 if married filing jointly),
the higher standard deduction for age cannot be• You are filing a tax return for a short tax• Any state or local sales or excise taxes claimed.year because of a change in your annualyou paid on the purchase of a new motor
accounting period, orvehicle after February 16, 2009, and
• You are a nonresident or dual-status alien Higher Standard Deduction• Any net disaster loss from a federally de-
during the year. You are considered aclared disaster. for Age (65 or Older)dual-status alien if you were both a nonresi-You can use the 2009 Standard Deduction dent and resident alien during the year. If you do not itemize deductions, you are entitledWorksheet in this chapter to figure your stan- Note. If you are a nonresident alien who is to a higher standard deduction if you are age 65dard deduction. But to increase your standard married to a U.S. citizen or resident alien at or older at the end of the year. You are consid-deduction by taxes paid on the purchase of a the end of the year, you can choose to be ered 65 on the day before your 65th birthday.new motor vehicle, you must use Schedule L treated as a U.S. resident. (See Publication Therefore, you can take a higher standard de-(Form 1040A or 1040) and attach it to your 519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens.) If you duction for 2009 if you were born before Januaryreturn. make this choice, you can take the stan- 2, 1945.
dard deduction.
Higher Standard DeductionIf an exemption for you can be claimedIntroduction for Blindnesson another person's return (such as
This chapter discusses the following topics. your parents' return), your standard
CAUTION
! If you are blind on the last day of the year anddeduction may be limited. See Standard Deduc-• How to figure the amount of your standard you do not itemize deductions, you are entitledtion for Dependents, later.deduction. to a higher standard deduction. You qualify for
this benefit if you are totally or partly blind.• The standard deduction for dependents. Useful Items
• Who should itemize deductions. Partly blind. If you are partly blind, you mustYou may want to see:
get a certified statement from an eye doctor or
Most taxpayers have a choice of either taking registered optometrist that:Form (and Instructions)
a standard deduction or itemizing their deduc- • You cannot see better than 20/200 in the❏ Schedule L (Form 1040A or 1040)tions. If you have a choice, you can use the better eye with glasses or contact lenses,Standard Deduction for Certainmethod that gives you the lower tax. orFilersThe standard deduction is a dollar amount
that reduces the amount of income on which you • Your field of vision is not more than 20
are taxed. It is a benefit that eliminates the need degrees.
for many taxpayers to itemize actual deductions,
such as medical expenses, charitable contribu- If your eye condition will never improve be-
tions, and taxes, on Schedule A of Form 1040. yond these limits, the statement should include
Chapter 20 Standard Deduction Page 141

Page 144 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
this fact. You must keep the statement in your Higher Standard Deduction for Net
records. Disaster Loss Standard Deduction
If your vision can be corrected beyond these Your standard deduction is increased by any net for Dependentslimits only by contact lenses that you can wear disaster loss from a federally declared disasteronly briefly because of pain, infection, or ulcers, that occurred in 2009. This amount is on Form The standard deduction for an individual foryou can take the higher standard deduction for 4684, line 18. whom an exemption can be claimed on anotherblindness if you otherwise qualify. person's tax return is generally limited to theIf you are increasing your standard deduc- greater of:tion by the amount of your net disaster loss,
complete Schedule L (Form 1040A or 1040), • $950, orSpouse 65 or Older or Blind
attach it to your return, and be sure to check the • The individual's earned income for theYou can take the higher standard deduction if box on line 40b of Form 1040. year + $300 (but not more than the regularyour spouse is age 65 or older or blind and: standard deduction amount, generally
$5,700).• You file a joint return, or Examples
• You file a separate return and can claim However, the standard deduction may beThe following examples illustrate how to deter-an exemption for your spouse because higher if the individual is 65 or older or blind, paidmine your standard deduction using Worksheetyour spouse had no gross income and an state or local real estate taxes, paid state or local20-1.exemption for your spouse could not be sales or excise taxes on the purchase of a new
motor vehicle, or had a net disaster loss from aclaimed by another taxpayer. Example 1. Larry, 46, and Donna, 33, are federally declared disaster.filing a joint return for 2009. Neither is blind, and If an exemption for you (or your spouse if youYou cannot claim the higher standard neither can be claimed as a dependent. They did are filing jointly) can be claimed on someonededuction for an individual other than not pay real estate taxes or sales or excise taxes else's return, use Worksheet 20-1 to determineyourself and your spouse. on the purchase of a new motor vehicle or have
CAUTION
! your standard deduction.
a net disaster loss. They decide not to itemize Earned income defined. Earned income istheir deductions. Because they are married filing salaries, wages, tips, professional fees, andjointly, they enter $11,400 on line 1 of Work-Higher Standard Deduction for other amounts received as pay for work yousheet 20-1. They check the ªNoº box on line 2, actually perform.Real Estate Taxes so they also enter $11,400 on lines 4 and 10.  For purposes of the standard deduction,Their standard deduction is $11,400.Your standard deduction is increased by any earned income also includes any part of a schol-
state and local real estate taxes you paid in arship or fellowship grant that you must includeExample 2. The facts are the same as in2009, up to $500 ($1,000 if married filing jointly). in your gross income. See Scholarships andExample 1 except that Larry is blind at the end of fellowships in chapter 12 for more informationThe taxes must be state or local real estate 2009, so he and Donna enter $1,100 on line 5 of on what qualifies as a scholarship or fellowshiptaxes that would be deductible on Form 1040 Worksheet 20-1 . They then enter $12,500 grant.(Schedule A) if you were itemizing your deduc- ($11,400 + $1,100) on line 10, so their standardtions. Taxes deductible in arriving at adjusted deduction is $12,500. Example 1. Michael is single. His parentsgross income, such as taxes on business real claim an exemption for him on their 2009 taxestate and taxes on foreign real estate, cannot Example 3. Bill and Lisa are filing a joint return. He has interest income of $780 and
be used to increase your standard deduction. return for 2009. Both are over age 65. Neither is wages of $150. He did not pay real estate taxes
or sales or excise taxes on the purchase of ablind, and neither can be claimed as a depen-If you are increasing your standard deduc- new motor vehicle or have a net disaster loss.dent. They did not pay real estate taxes or salestion by the amount of real estate taxes you paid, He has no itemized deductions. Michael usesor excise taxes on the purchase of a new motorcomplete Schedule L (Form 1040A or 1040), Worksheet 20-1 to find his standard deduction.vehicle or have a net disaster loss. They do notattach it to your return, and be sure to check the Because he is single, he enters $5,700 on line 1.itemize deductions, so they use Worksheetbox on line 40b of Form 1040 or line 24b of Form He checks the ªYesº box on line 2, enters $95020-1. Because they are married filing jointly,1040A. on line 3, and also enters $950 (the smaller ofthey enter $11,400 on line 1. They check the line 1 and line 3) on line 4. He leaves lines 5, 6,ªNoº box on line 2, so they also enter $11,400 on 7, 8, and 9 blank and enters $950 on line 10. Hisline 4. Because they are both over age 65, theyHigher Standard Deduction for standard deduction is $950.enter $2,200 ($1,100 ×  2) on line 5. They enterSales Taxes on New Motor $13,600 ($11,400 + $2,200) on line 10, so their Example 2. Joe, a 22-year-old full-time col-Vehicles standard deduction is $13,600. lege student, is claimed on his parents' 2009 tax
return. Joe is married and files a separate return.Your standard deduction is increased by any Example 4. The facts are the same as in His wife does not itemize deductions on herstate or local sales or excise taxes you paid in Example 3 except that Bill and Lisa paid $3,000 separate return. Joe has $1,500 in interest in-2009 on the purchase of a new vehicle after in local real estate taxes on their home in 2009, come and wages of $3,800. He did not pay realFebruary 16, 2009. The amount is limited to tax so they enter $3,000 on line 7 of the worksheet. estate taxes or sales or excise taxes on theon the first $49,500 of the purchase price. The purchase of a new motor vehicle or have a netThey then enter $1,000 on lines 8 and 9 and
taxes must be state or local sales or excise disaster loss. He has no itemized deductions.$14,600 ($11,400 + $2,200 + $1,000) on line 10.
taxes that would be deductible on Form 1040 Joe finds his standard deduction by using Work-Their standard deduction is $14,600. Because
sheet 20-1. Because he is married filing a sepa-(Schedule A) if you were itemizing your deduc- line 9 is greater than zero, they must complete
rate return, he enters $5,700 on line 1. Hetions. In states without a sales tax, certain other Schedule L (Form 1040A or 1040) and attach it checks the ªYesº box on line 2, enters $4,100taxes or fees qualify if they are assessed on the to their return. ($3,800 + $300) on line 3, and also enterspurchase of the vehicle and are based on the $4,100 (the smaller of line 1 and line 3) on line 4.Example 5. The facts are the same as invehicle's sales price or as a per unit fee. Taxes He leaves lines 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9 blank and entersExample 4 except that Bill and Lisa had a netdeductible in arriving at adjusted gross income, $4,100 on line 10. His standard deduction isdisaster loss from a federally declared disastersuch as taxes on a vehicle used in your busi- $4,100.of $8,000. That is the amount on line 18 of theirness, cannot be used to increase your standard
Form 4684. They enter $8,000 on line 6 of theirdeduction. Example 3. Amy, who is single, is claimedStandard Deduction Worksheet. On line 10 of on her parents' 2009 return. She is 18 years oldIf you are increasing your standard deduc- the worksheet, they enter $22,600 ($11,400 + and blind. She has interest income of $1,300tion by the amount of these state or local sales $2,200 + $8,000 + $1,000), which is their stan- and wages of $2,900. She did not pay real es-or excise taxes, complete Schedule L (Form dard deduction. Because line 6 (and line 9) is tate taxes or sales or excise taxes on the
1040A or 1040), attach it to your return, and be greater than zero, they must complete Schedule purchase of a new motor vehicle or have a net
sure to check the box on line 40b of Form 1040 L (Form 1040A or 1040) and attach it to their disaster loss. She has no itemized deductions.
or line 24b of Form 1040A. return. Amy finds her standard deduction by using
Page 142 Chapter 20 Standard Deduction

Page 145 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet 20-1 . Because she is single, she When to itemize. You may benefit from federal return rather than take the standard de-
enters $5,700 on line 1. She checks the ªYesº itemizing your deductions on Schedule A (Form duction. You may want to do this, for example, if
box on line 2, enters $3,200 ($2,900 + $300) on 1040) if you: the tax benefit of being able to itemize your
line 3, and also enters $3,200 (the smaller of line deductions on your state tax return is greater• Do not qualify for the standard deduction,1 and line 3) on line 4. Because she is blind, she than the tax benefit you lose on your federalor the amount you can claim is limited,enters $1,400 on line 5. She leaves lines 6, 7, 8, return by not taking the standard deduction. To
• Had large uninsured medical and dentaland 9 blank and enters $4,600 ($3,200 + make this election, you must check the box on
expenses during the year,$1,400) on line 10. Her standard deduction is line 30 of Schedule A.
$4,600. • Paid interest and taxes on your home, Changing your mind. If you do not itemize
your deductions and later find that you should• Had large unreimbursed employee busi- have itemized Ð or if you itemize your deduc-ness expenses or other miscellaneous de- tions and later find you should not have Ð youductions,Who Should Itemize can change your return by filing Form 1040X,
• Had large uninsured casualty or theft Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return.
You should itemize deductions if your total de- losses, See Amended Returns and Claims for Refund in
ductions are more than the standard deduction chapter 1 for more information on amended re-• Made large contributions to qualified chari-amount. Also, you should itemize if you do not turns.ties, orqualify for the standard deduction, as discussed Married persons who filed separate re-earlier under Persons not eligible for the stan- • Have total itemized deductions that are turns. You can change methods of taking de-dard deduction. more than the standard deduction to which ductions only if you and your spouse both makeyou otherwise are entitled. You should first figure your itemized deduc- the same changes. Both of you must file a con-tions and compare that amount to your standard These deductions are explained in chapters sent to assessment for any additional tax eitherdeduction to make sure you are using the 21±28. one may owe as a result of the change.method that gives you the greater benefit. You and your spouse can use the methodIf you decide to itemize your deductions, com-You may be subject to a limit on some that gives you the lower total tax, even thoughplete Schedule A and attach it to your Formof your itemized deductions if your ad- one of you may pay more tax than you would1040. Enter the amount from Schedule A, linejusted gross income (AGI) is more than have paid by using the other method. You both
CAUTION
!29, on Form 1040, line 40a.$166,800 ($83,400 if you are married filing sep- must use the same method of claiming deduc-
arately). See chapter 29 and the instructions for Electing to itemize for state tax or other pur- tions. If one itemizes deductions, the other
Schedule A (Form 1040), line 29, for more infor- poses. Even if your itemized deductions are should itemize because he or she will not qualify
mation on figuring the correct amount of your less than the amount of your standard deduc- for the standard deduction. See Persons not
itemized deductions. tion, you can elect to itemize deductions on your eligible for the standard deduction, earlier.
Chapter 20 Standard Deduction Page 143

Page 146 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet 20-1. 2009 Standard Deduction Worksheet Keep for Your Records
Caution. If you are married filing a separate return and your spouse itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien, do not complete this
worksheet. You cannot take the standard deduction even if you were born before January 2, 1945, are blind, paid real estate taxes, had a net
disaster loss, or paid state or local sales or excise tax on the purchase of a new motor vehicle.
If you paid state or local sales or excise tax on the purchase of a new motor vehicle after February 16, 2009, you cannot use this worksheet to
figure your standard deduction. You must use Schedule L (Form 1040A or 1040) and attach it to your return.
If you are filing Form 1040EZ, do not use this worksheet. Instead, see line 5 of Form 1040EZ.
1. Enter the amount shown below for your filing status.
• Single or married filing separately Ð $5,700
...................... . 1.• Married filing jointly or Qualifying widow(er) Ð
$11,400 }
• Head of household Ð $8,350
2. Can you (or your spouse if filing jointly) be claimed as a dependent on someone else's
return?
 No. Skip line 3; enter the amount from line 1 on line 4, and go to line 5. 
 Yes. Go to line 3.
3. Is your earned income* more than $650?
 Yes. Add $300 to your earned income. Enter the total } ...................... . 3.
 No. Enter $950
4. Enter the smaller of line 1 or line 3 .................................................... . 4.
5. If born before January 2, 1945, or blind, multiply the number on Form 1040, line 39a (or Form 1040A, line
23a**) by $1,100 ($1,400 if single or head of household). Otherwise, enter -0- ..................... . 5.
6. Enter any net disaster loss from Form 4684, line 18** ...................................... . 6.
7. Enter the state and local real estate taxes you paid that would be deductible on Schedule A
(Form 1040), line 6, if you were itemizing your deductions. See the instructions for Schedule
A (Form 1040), line 6. Do not include foreign real estate taxes .................... . 7.
8. Enter $500 ($1,000 if married filing jointly) ................................... . 8.
9. Enter the smaller of line 7 or line 8** .................................................. . 9.
10.  Add lines 4, 5, 6, and 9. This is your standard deduction for 2009. ........................... . 10.
*Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees, and other compensation received for personal services you performed. It also
includes any amount received as a scholarship that you must include in your income. Generally, your earned income is the total of the amount(s)
you reported on Form 1040, lines 7, 12, and 18, minus the amount, if any, on line 27 (or the amount you reported on Form 1040A, line 7). 
**If the amount on line 6 or line 9 of this worksheet is more than zero, you must complete Schedule L (Form 1040A or 1040) and attach it to your
return. Also, if the amount on line 6 of this worksheet is more than zero, you cannot file Form 1040A; you must file Form 1040.
Page 144 Chapter 20 Standard Deduction

Page 147 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form (and Instructions)
How Much of the❏ Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized
Deductions21. Expenses Can You
Deduct?
Medical and You can deduct on Schedule A (Form 1040) onlyWhat Are Medical
the amount of your medical and dental ex-
Dental Expenses penses that is more than 7.5% of your AGIExpenses?
(Form 1040, line 38).
Medical expenses are the costs of diagnosis, In this chapter, the term ª7.5% limitº is used
cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention of dis- to refer to 7.5% of your AGI. The phrase ªsubjectWhat's New ease, and the costs for treatments affecting any to the 7.5% limitº is also used. This phrase
part or function of the body. These expenses means that you must subtract 7.5% (.075) of
Standard mileage rate. The standard mile- include payments for legal medical services ren- your AGI from your medical expenses to figureage rate allowed for operating expenses for a dered by physicians, surgeons, dentists, and your medical expense deduction.car when you use it for medical reasons is 24 other medical practitioners. They include thecents per mile. See Transportation under What Example. Your AGI is $40,000, 7.5% ofcosts of equipment, supplies, and diagnosticMedical Expenses Are Includible. which is $3,000. You paid medical expenses ofdevices needed for these purposes.
$2,500. You cannot deduct any of your medicalCOBRA Premium Assistance. If you involun- Medical care expenses must be primarily to expenses because they are not more than 7.5%tarily lost your job after August 31, 2008, and alleviate or prevent a physical or mental defect of your AGI.before January 1, 2010, you may qualify for a or illness. Do not include expenses that are
65% reduction in premiums for COBRA continu- merely beneficial to general health, such as vita-ation coverage for up to nine months. The pre- mins or a vacation.mium reduction is not included in your gross Medical expenses include the premiums youincome. You cannot claim the health coverage Whose Medicalpay for insurance that covers the expenses oftax credit for any month that you receive this
medical care, and the amounts you pay forpremium. Also, certain TAA-eligible and PBGC Expensestransportation to get medical care. Medical ex-recipients qualify for an extension of COBRA
penses also include amounts paid for qualifiedbenefits. Can You Include?long-term care services and limited amounts For more information, see Publication 502,
paid for any qualified long-term care insuranceMedical and Dental Expenses. You can generally include medical expensescontract. you pay for yourself as well as those you pay forHealth coverage tax credit. The health cov- someone who was your spouse or your depen-erage tax credit (HCTC) is increased to 80% of
dent either when the services were provided oryour premium for qualified health insurance for
when you paid for them. There are different ruleseligible coverage months beginning after April
What Expenses Can for decedents and for individuals who are the30, 2009, and before 2011. The increase also
subject of multiple support agreements. Seeapplies to the advance payment of credit for
You Include This Year? Support claimed under a multiple support agree-health insurance costs under the advance pay-
ment program. ment, later.
You can include only the medical and dental For more information, see Health Coverage expenses you paid this year, regardless of whenTax Credit in chapter 37. Yourselfthe services were provided. If you pay medical
expenses by check, the day you mail or deliver You can include medical expenses you paid for
the check generally is the date of payment. If yourself.
you use a ªpay-by-phoneº or ªonlineº account toIntroduction pay your medical expenses, the date reported SpouseThis chapter will help you determine the follow- on the statement of the financial institution
ing. showing when payment was made is the date of You can include medical expenses you paid for
payment. If you use a credit card, include medi- your spouse. To include these expenses, you• What medical expenses are. cal expenses you charge to your credit card in must have been married either at the time your• What expenses you can include this year. the year the charge is made, not when you spouse received the medical services or at the
actually pay the amount charged.• How much of the expenses you can de- time you paid the medical expenses.
duct.
Example 1. Mary received medical treat-• Whose medical expenses you can include. Separate returns. If you and your spouse live ment before she married Bill. Bill paid for thein a noncommunity property state and file sepa-• What medical expenses are includible. treatment after they married. Bill can includerate returns, each of you can include only the these expenses in figuring his medical expense• How to treat reimbursements. medical expenses you actually paid. Any medi- deduction even if Bill and Mary file separatecal expenses paid out of a joint checking ac-• How to report the deduction on your tax returns.count in which you and your spouse have thereturn. If Mary had paid the expenses, Bill could notsame interest are considered to have been paid• How to report impairment-related work ex- include Mary's expenses on his separate return.equally by each of you, unless you can showpenses. Mary would include the amounts she paid duringotherwise.
the year in her separate return. If they filed a• How to report health insurance costs if you Community property states. If you and joint return, the medical expenses both paidare self-employed. your spouse live in a community property state during the year would be used to figure their
and file separate returns, any medical expenses medical expense deduction.
paid out of community funds are divided equally.Useful Items
Each of you should include half the expenses. If Example 2. This year, John paid medicalYou may want to see:
medical expenses are paid out of the separate expenses for his wife Louise, who died last year.
funds of one spouse, only the spouse who paidPublications John married Belle this year and they file a joint
the medical expenses can include them. If you return. Because John was married to Louise❏ 502 Medical and Dental Expenses live in a community property state, are married, when she received the medical services, he can
and file a separate return, see Publication 555, include those expenses in figuring his medical❏ 969 Health Savings Accounts and Other
expense deduction for this year.Community Property.Tax-Favored Health Plans
Chapter 21 Medical and Dental Expenses Page 145

Page 148 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
substantiate that the payment is directly attribu- Support claimed under a multiple supportDependent table to the medical care of the child. agreement. If you are considered to have pro-
vided more than half of a qualifying relative'sYou can include medical expenses you paid for But if you pay the agency or other person for
support under a multiple support agreement,your dependent. For you to include these ex- medical care that was provided and paid for
penses, the person must have been your depen- you can include medical expenses you pay forbefore adoption negotiations began, you cannotdent either at the time the medical services were that person. A multiple support agreement isinclude them as medical expenses.provided or at the time you paid the expenses. A used when two or more people provide moreYou may be able to take an adoptionperson generally qualifies as your dependent for than half of a person's support, but no one alonecredit for other expenses related to anpurposes of the medical expense deduction if provides more than half.adoption. See the Instructions for Formboth of the following requirements are met.
TIP
For rules regarding what expenses you can8839, Qualified Adoption Expenses, for more
1. The person was a qualifying child (defined information. include this year, see What Expenses Can You
later) or a qualifying relative (defined later), Include This Year, earlier.and Any medical expenses paid by others whoChild of divorced or separated parents. For2. The person was a U.S. citizen or national, joined you in the agreement cannot be includedpurposes of the medical and dental expensesor a resident of the United States, Canada, as medical expenses by anyone. However, youdeduction, a child of divorced or separated par-or Mexico. If your qualifying child was can include the entire unreimbursed amount youents can be treated as a dependent of bothadopted, see Exception for adopted child, paid for medical expenses.parents. Each parent can include the medicalnext.
expenses he or she pays for the child, even if theYou can include medical expenses you paid for Example. You and your three brothers eachother parent claims the child's dependency ex-an individual that would have been your depen- provide one-fourth of your mother's total sup-emption, if:dent except that: port. Under a multiple support agreement, you
treat your mother as your dependent. You paid1. The child is in the custody of one or both1. He or she received gross income of $3,650 all of her medical expenses. Your brothers reim-parents for more than half the year,or more in 2009,
bursed you for three-fourths of these expenses.2. The child receives over half of his or her2. He or she filed a joint return for 2009, or In figuring your medical expense deduction, yousupport during the year from his or her3. You, or your spouse if filing jointly, could can include only one-fourth of your mother'sparents, andbe claimed as a dependent on someone medical expenses. Your brothers cannot include
3. The child's parents:else's 2009 return. any part of the expenses. However, if you and
your brothers share the nonmedical supporta. Are divorced or legally separated under
items and you separately pay all of yourException for adopted child. If you are a a decree of divorce or separate mainte-
mother's medical expenses, you can include theU.S. citizen or U.S. national and your adopted nance,
unreimbursed amount you paid for her medicalchild lived with you as a member of your house- b. Are separated under a written separa-hold for 2009, that child does not have to be a expenses in your medical expenses.tion agreement, orU.S. citizen or national or a resident of the
United States, Canada, or Mexico. c. Live apart at all times during the last 6 Decedent
months of the year.
Medical expenses paid before death by the de-Qualifying Child This does not apply if the child's exemption is cedent are included in figuring any deduction for
being claimed under a multiple support agree- medical and dental expenses on the decedent'sA qualifying child is a child who: ment (discussed later). final income tax return. This includes expenses
1. Is your son, daughter, stepchild, foster for the decedent's spouse and dependents as
child, brother, sister, stepbrother, stepsis- well as for the decedent.Qualifying Relativeter, or a descendant of any of them (for The survivor or personal representative of aexample, your grandchild, niece, or
decedent can choose to treat certain expensesA qualifying relative is a person:nephew),
paid by the decedent's estate for the decedent's2. Was: 1. Who is your: medical care as paid by the decedent at the time
the medical services were provided. The ex-a. Under age 19 at the end of 2009 and a. Son, daughter, stepchild, foster child, or
penses must be paid within the 1-year periodyounger than you (or your spouse, if a descendant of any of them (for exam-
beginning with the day after the date of death. Iffiling jointly), ple, your grandchild),
you are the survivor or personal representativeb. Under age 24 at the end of 2009, a b. Brother, sister, or a son or daughter of making this choice, you must attach a statementfull-time student, and younger than you either of them, to the decedent's Form 1040 (or the decedent's(or your spouse, if filing jointly), or
c. Father, mother, or an ancestor or sib- amended return, Form 1040X) saying that thec. Any age and permanently and totally ling of either of them (for example, your expenses have not been and will not be claimeddisabled, grandmother, grandfather, aunt, or un- on the estate tax return.
cle),3. Lived with you for more than half of 2009, Qualified medical expenses paid
d. Stepbrother, stepsister, stepfather, before death by the decedent are not4. Did not provide over half of his or her own deductible if paid with a tax-free distri-stepmother, son-in-law, daugh-
CAUTION
!support for 2009, and bution from any Archer MSA, Medicare Advan-ter-in-law, father-in-law, mother-in-law,
5. Did not file a joint return, other than to tage MSA, or health savings account.brother-in-law, or sister-in-law, or
claim a refund. Amended returns and claims for refund aree. Any other person (other than your
discussed in chapter 1.spouse) who lived with you all year as aAdopted child. A legally adopted child is member of your household if your rela-treated as your own child. This includes a child tionship did not violate local law, What if you pay medical expenses of a de-lawfully placed with you for legal adoption. ceased spouse or dependent? If you paidYou can include medical expenses that you 2. Who was not a qualifying child (see Quali- medical expenses for your deceased spouse orpaid for a child before adoption if the child quali- fying Child earlier) of any other person for dependent, include them as medical expensesfied as your dependent when the medical serv- 2009, and on your Form 1040 in the year paid, whetherices were provided or when the expenses were
they are paid before or after the decedent's3. For whom you provided over half of thepaid.
death. The expenses can be included if thesupport in 2009. But see Child of divorcedIf you pay back an adoption agency or other
person was your spouse or dependent either ator separated parents, earlier, and Supportpersons for medical expenses they paid under
the time the medical services were provided orclaimed under a multiple support agree-an agreement with you, you are treated as hav-
at the time you paid the expenses.ment, next.ing paid those expenses provided you clearly
Page 146 Chapter 21 Medical and Dental Expenses

Page 149 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Replacement of lost or damaged contact amount paid is included in box 1 of your Form
W-2.lenses, orWhat Medical • Long-term care (subject to additional limi- Example. You are a federal employee par-tations). See Qualified Long-term Care In-Expenses Are ticipating in the premium conversion plan of thesurance Contracts in Publication 502. Federal Employee Health Benefits (FEHB) pro-
Includible? gram. Your share of the FEHB premium is paidIf you have a policy that provides payments for by making a pre-tax reduction in your salary.other than medical care, you can include theUse Table 21-1 below, as a guide to determine Because you are an employee whose insurancepremiums for the medical care part of the policywhich medical and dental expenses you can premiums are paid with money that is neverif the charge for the medical part is reasonable.include on Schedule A (Form 1040). included in your gross income, you cannot de-The cost of the medical part must be separately duct the premiums paid with that money.This table does not include all possible medi- stated in the insurance contract or given to you
cal expenses. To determine if an expense not Long-term care services. Contributionsin a separate statement.
listed can be included in figuring your medical made by your employer to provide coverage for
expense deduction, see What Are Medical Ex- qualified long-term care services under a flexibleNote. When figuring the amount of insur-
penses, earlier. spending or similar arrangement must be in-ance premiums you can include in medical ex-
cluded in your income. This amount will be re-penses on Schedule A, do not include any
ported as wages in box 1 of your Form W-2.health coverage tax credit advance paymentsInsurance Premiums shown in box 1 of Form 1099-H, Health Cover- Health reimbursement arrangement (HRA).age Tax Credit (HCTC) Advance Payments.You can include in medical expenses insurance If you have medical expenses that are reim-
premiums you pay for policies that cover medi- bursed by a health reimbursement arrange-Employer-sponsored health insurance plan.cal care. Medical care policies can provide pay- ment, you cannot include those expenses inDo not include in your medical and dental ex- your medical expenses. This is because an HRAment for treatment that includes: penses any insurance premiums paid by an em- is funded solely by the employer.ployer-sponsored health insurance plan unless• Hospitalization, surgical services, X-rays,
the premiums are included in box 1 of your Form Retired public safety officers. If you are a• Prescription drugs and insulin, W-2. Also, do not include any other medical and retired public safety officer, do not include as
• Dental Care, dental expenses paid by the plan unless the medical expenses any health or long-term care
Table 21-1. Medical and Dental Expenses Checklist See Publication 502 for more information for these and other
expenses.
You can include: You cannot include:
• Bandages • Medical and hospital • Baby sitting and childcare • Medical insurance included
• Birth control pills prescribed insurance premiums in a car insurance policy• Bottled water
by your doctor covering all persons• Oxygen equipment and • Contributions to Archer MSAs
injured in or by your car• Body scan oxygen (see Publication 969)
• Medicine you buy without a• Capital expenses for • Part of life-care fee paid to • Diaper service
prescriptionequipment or improvements retirement home designated • Expenses for your general
to your home needed for for medical care • Nursing care for a healthyhealth (even if following your
medical care (see the baby• Physical examination doctor's advice) such asÐ
worksheet in Publication • Prescription drugs you• Pregnancy test kit ÐHealth club dues
502) brought in (or orderedÐHousehold help (even if• Prescription medicines
• Diagnostic devices shipped) from anotherrecommended by a doctor)(prescribed by a doctor) and
country, in most cases• Expenses of an organ ÐSocial activities, such asinsulin
donor dancing or swimming lessons • Nutritional supplements,• Psychiatric and
ÐTrip for general health vitamins, herbal• Eye surgeryÐto promote psychological treatment
improvement supplements, ªnaturalthe correct function of the • Social security tax, medicines,º etc., unlesseye • Flexible spending accountMedicare tax, FUTA, and recommended by areimbursements for medical• Fertility enhancement, state employment tax for medical practitioner as aexpenses (if contributionscertain procedures worker providing medical treatment for a specificwere on a pre-tax basis)• Guide dogs or other care (see Wages for medical condition• Funeral, burial, or cremationanimals aiding the blind, nursing services, below) diagnosed by a physicianexpensesdeaf, and disabled • Special items (artificial • Surgery for purely• Health savings account• Hospital services fees (lab limbs, false teeth, cosmetic reasonspayments for medicalwork, therapy, nursing eye-glasses, contact
• Toothpaste, toiletries,expenses services, surgery, etc.) lenses, hearing aids,
cosmetics, etc.crutches, wheelchair, etc.) • Illegal operation or treatment• Lead-based paint removal
• Teeth whitening• Special education for • Life insurance or income• Legal abortion
• Weight-loss expenses notmentally or physically protection policies, or policies• Legal operation to prevent for the treatment of obesitydisabled persons providing payment for loss ofhaving children such as a or other diseaselife, limb, sight, etc.• Stop-smoking programsvasectomy or tubal ligation
• Maternity clothes• Transportation for needed• Long-term care contracts,
medical carequalified
• Treatment at a drug or• Meals and lodging provided
alcohol center (includesby a hospital during medical
meals and lodging providedtreatment
by the center)• Medical services fees (from
• Wages for nursing servicesdoctors, dentists, surgeons,
specialists, and other • Weight-loss, certain
medical practitioners) expenses for obesity
• Medicare Part D premiums
Chapter 21 Medical and Dental Expenses Page 147

Page 150 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
premiums that you elect to have paid with • The lodging is not lavish or extravagant the $772 is more than the $530 he figured using
tax-free distributions from your retirement plan. under the circumstances. actual expenses.
This applies only to distributions that would oth- • There is no significant element of personal Transportation expenses you cannot in-erwise be included in income. pleasure, recreation, or vacation in the clude. You cannot include in medical ex-travel away from home.Medicare A. If you are covered under social penses the cost of transportation expenses in
security (or if you are a government employee the following situations.The amount you include in medical expenses forwho paid Medicare tax), you are enrolled in lodging cannot be more than $50 for each night • Going to and from work, even if your con-Medicare A. The payroll tax paid for Medicare A for each person. You can include lodging for a dition requires an unusual means of trans-is not a medical expense. person traveling with the person receiving the portation.If you are not covered under social security medical care. For example, if a parent is travel-(or were not a government employee who paid • Travel for purely personal reasons to an-ing with a sick child, up to $100 per night can beMedicare tax), you can voluntarily enroll in Medi- other city for an operation or other medicalincluded as a medical expense for lodging.care A. In this situation you can include the care.Meals are not included.premiums you paid for Medicare A as a medical • Travel that is merely for the general im-expense. Nursing home. You can include in medical provement of one's health.expenses the cost of medical care in a nursingMedicare B. Medicare B is supplemental • The costs of operating a speciallyhome, home for the aged, or similar institution,medical insurance. Premiums you pay for Medi- equipped car for other than medical rea-for yourself, your spouse, or your dependents.care B are a medical expense. If you applied for sons.This includes the cost of meals and lodging init at age 65 or after you became disabled, you
the home if a principal reason for being there iscan include in medical expenses the monthly
to get medical care.premiums you paid. Check the information you Disabled Dependentreceived from the Social Security Administration Do not include the cost of meals and lodging
to find out your premium. if the reason for being in the home is personal. Care Expenses
You can, however, include in medical expensesMedicare D.  Medicare D is a voluntary pre- Some disabled dependent care expenses maythe part of the cost that is for medical or nursingscription drug insurance program for persons qualify as either:care.with Medicare A or B. You can include as a
• Medical expenses ormedical expense premiums you pay for Medi-
Transportationcare D. • Work-related expenses for purposes of
taking a credit for dependent care. (SeePrepaid insurance premiums. Premiums Include in medical expenses amounts paid for chapter 32.)you pay before you are age 65 for insurance for transportation primarily for, and essential to,medical care for yourself, your spouse, or your medical care. You can include: You can choose to apply them either way asdependents after you reach age 65 are medical long as you do not use the same expenses to• Bus, taxi, train, or plane fares, or ambu-care expenses in the year paid if they are: claim both a credit and a medical expense de-lance service, duction.• Payable in equal yearly installments, or
• Transportation expenses of a parent whomore often, and
must go with a child who needs medical• Payable for at least 10 years, or until you care,reach age 65 (but not for less than 5 How Do You Treat• Transportation expenses of a nurse oryears).
other person who can give injections,
Reimbursements?medications, or other treatment requiredUnused sick leave used to pay premiums. by a patient who is traveling to get medicalYou must include in gross income cash pay- You can include in medical expenses only thosecare and is unable to travel alone, andments you receive at the time of retirement for amounts paid during the taxable year for which• Transportation expenses for regular visitsunused sick leave. You also must include in you received no insurance or other reimburse-to see a mentally ill dependent, if thesegross income the value of unused sick leave ment.visits are recommended as a part of treat-that, at your option, your employer applies to the
ment.cost of your continuing participation in your em- Insurance Reimbursementployer's health plan after you retire. You can
include this cost of continuing participation in the Car expenses. You can include out-of-pocket You must reduce your total medical expenseshealth plan as a medical expense. expenses, such as the cost of gas and oil, when for the year by all reimbursements for medicalIf you participate in a health plan where your you use your car for medical reasons. You can- expenses that you receive from insurance oremployer automatically applies the value of un- not include depreciation, insurance, general re- other sources during the year. This includesused sick leave to the cost of your continuing pair, or maintenance expenses. payments from Medicare.participation in the health plan (and you do not If you do not want to use your actual ex- Even if a policy provides reimbursement forhave the option to receive cash), do not include penses for 2009, you can use a standard rate of only certain specific medical expenses, youthe value of the unused sick leave in gross 24 cents a mile for use of a car for medical must use amounts you receive from that policyincome. You cannot include this cost of continu- reasons in 2009. to reduce your total medical expenses, includinging participation in that health plan as a medical those it does not provide reimbursement for. You can also include parking fees and tolls.expense. You can add these fees and tolls to your medical
Example. You have insurance policies thatexpenses whether you use actual expenses or
Meals and Lodging cover your hospital and doctors' bills but notuse the standard mileage rate.
your nursing bills. The insurance you receive for
You can include in medical expenses the cost of the hospital and doctors' bills is more than theirExample. Bill Jones drove 2,800 miles formeals and lodging at a hospital or similar institu- charges. In figuring your medical deduction, youmedical reasons during the year. He spent $400tion if a principal reason for being there is to get must reduce the total amount you spent for med-for gas, $30 for oil, and $100 for tolls and park-medical care. See Nursing home, later. ical care by the total amount of insurance youing. He wants to figure the amount he can in-You may be able to include in medical ex- received, even if the policies do not cover someclude in medical expenses both ways to seepenses the cost of lodging not provided in a of your medical expenses.which gives him the greater deduction.hospital or similar institution. You can include He figures the actual expenses first. He adds Health reimbursement arrangement (HRA).the cost of such lodging while away from home if the $400 for gas, the $30 for oil, and the $100 for A health reimbursement arrangement is an em-all of the following requirements are met. tolls and parking for a total of $530. ployer-funded plan that reimburses employees• The lodging is primarily for and essential He then figures the standard mileage for medical care expenses and allows unusedto medical care. amount. He multiplies the 2,800 miles by 24 amounts to be carried forward. An HRA is
cents a mile for a total of $672. He then adds the• The medical care is provided by a doctor funded solely by the employer and the reim-
$100 in tolls and parking for a total of $772.in a licensed hospital or in a medical care bursements for medical expenses, up to a maxi-
facility related to, or the equivalent of, a Bill includes the $772 of car expenses with mum dollar amount for a coverage period, are
licensed hospital. his other medical expenses for the year because not included in your income.
Page 148 Chapter 21 Medical and Dental Expenses

Page 151 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
$500 in medical expenses, you do not include
the amount reimbursed in your gross income.
Damages for Personal
Injuries
If you receive an amount in settlement of a
personal injury suit, part of that award may be for
medical expenses that you deducted in an ear-
lier year. If it is, you must include that part in your
income in the year you receive it to the extent it
reduced your taxable income in the earlier year.
See Reimbursement in a Later Year, discussed
under How Do You Treat Reimbursements.
Future medical expenses. If you receive an
amount in settlement of a damage suit for per-
sonal injuries, part of that award may be for
future medical expenses. If it is, you must re-
duce any future medical expenses for these
injuries until the amount you received has been
completely used.
How Do You Figure
and Report the
Deduction on Your 
Tax Return?
Once you have determined which medical ex-
penses you can include, you figure and report
the deduction on your tax return.
Figure 21-A. Is Your Excess Medical Reimbursement Taxable?
*See Premiums paid by you and your employer in this chapter.
Was any part of your
premiums paid by
your employer?
Were your employer’s
contributions to your
premiums included in
your income?
Did you pay any part
of the premiums?
NONE of the excess
reimbursement is
taxable.
ALL of the excess
reimbursement is
taxable.
PART of the excess
reimbursement is
taxable.*
No
/H17076
/H17075
/H17074
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
/H17074
/H17074
/H17075
Other reimbursements. Generally, you do Premiums paid by you and your employer. What Tax Form Do You
If both you and your employer contribute to yournot reduce medical expenses by payments you Use?medical insurance plan and your employer'sreceive for:
contributions are not included in your gross in-• Permanent loss or loss of use of a mem- You figure your medical expense deduction oncome, you must include in your gross income lines 1 ±4 of Schedule A, Form 1040. You can-ber or function of the body (loss of limb, the part of your excess reimbursement that is not claim medical expenses on Form 1040A, orsight, hearing, etc.) or disfigurement to the from your employer's contribution. Form 1040EZ. If you need more information onextent the payment is based on the nature See Publication 502 to figure the amount of itemized deductions or you are not sure if youof the injury without regard to the amount the excess reimbursement you must include in can itemize, see chapters 20 and 29.of time lost from work, or gross income. Enter the amount you paid for medical and• Loss of earnings. dental expenses on line 1, Schedule A (FormReimbursement in a later year. If you are 1040). This should be your expenses that werereimbursed in a later year for medical expensesYou must, however, reduce your medical ex- not reimbursed by insurance or any otheryou deducted in an earlier year, you generallypenses by any part of these payments that is sources.must report the reimbursement as income up todesignated for medical costs. See How Do You You can deduct only the amount of yourthe amount you previously deducted as medicalFigure and Report the Deduction on Your Tax medical and dental expenses that is more thanexpenses.Return, later. 7.5% of your AGI shown on line 38, Form 1040.However, do not report as income theFor how to treat damages received for per- For an example, see the partial Schedule A,amount of reimbursement you received up to the above.sonal injury or sickness, see Damages for Per- amount of your medical deductions that did notsonal Injuries, later. reduce your tax for the earlier year. For more
You do not have a medical deduction if you information about the recovery of an amount
are reimbursed for all of your medical expenses that you claimed as an itemized deduction in an
for the year. earlier year, see Itemized Deduction Recoveries Impairment-Related
in chapter 12.  
Work ExpensesExcess reimbursement. If you are reim-
Medical expenses not deducted. If you didbursed more than your medical expenses, you
If you are disabled, you can take a businessnot deduct a medical expense in the year youmay have to include the excess in income. You
deduction for expenses that are necessary forpaid it because your medical expenses were notmay want to use Figure 21-A to help you decide
you to be able to work. If you take a businessmore than 7.5% of your AGI, or because you didif any of your reimbursement is taxable.
deduction for these impairment-related work ex-not itemize deductions, do not include the reim-Premiums paid by you. If you pay either penses, they are not subject to the 7.5% limitbursement up to the amount of the expense inthe entire premium for your medical insurance or that applies to medical expenses.income. However, if the reimbursement is more
all of the costs of a plan similar to medical than the expense, see Excess reimbursement, You are disabled if you have:
insurance and your insurance payments or other earlier. • A physical or mental disability (for exam-reimbursements are more than your total medi- ple, blindness or deafness) that function-cal expenses for the year, you have an excess Example. Last year, you had medical ex- ally limits your being employed, orreimbursement. Generally, you do not include penses of $500. You cannot deduct the $500
the excess reimbursement in your gross in- • A physical or mental impairment (for ex-because it is less than 7.5% of your AGI. If, in a
come. ample, a sight or hearing impairment) thatlater year, you are reimbursed for any of the
Chapter 21 Medical and Dental Expenses Page 149

Page 152 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
SCHEDULE A  
(Form 1040) 
Department of the Treasury  
Internal Revenue Service (99) 
Itemized Deductions
/H17075 Attach to Form 1040. /H17075 See Instructions for Schedule A (Form 1040). 
OMB No. 1545-0074
2009
Attachment   
Sequence No. 07 
Name(s) shown on Form 1040 Your social security number
Medical 
and 
Dental  
Expenses 
Caution.  Do not include expenses reimbursed or paid by others. 
1 Medical and dental expenses (see page A-1) ..... 1 
2 Enter amount from Form 1040, line 38 2 
3 Multiply line 2 by 7.5% (.075) ..........  3 
4 Subtract line 3 from line 1. If line 3 is more than line 1, enter -0- ......... 4 
Bill and Helen Jones 000-00-0000
3,434
33,000
2,475
959
EPS Filename: 10311g91 Size: Width = 44.0 picas, Depth = 11.6 picas
substantially limits one or more of your business and the deduction cannot be more
major life activities, such as performing than your earned income from that trade or busi-
manual tasks, walking, speaking, breath- ness.
22.ing, learning, or working. You cannot deduct payments for medical
insurance for any month in which you were eligi-
ble to participate in a health plan subsidized byImpairment-related expenses defined. Im- your employer or your spouse's employer. Youpairment-related expenses are those ordinary Taxescannot deduct payments for a qualifiedand necessary business expenses that are: long-term care insurance contract for any month
• Necessary for you to do your work satis- in which you were eligible to participate in a
factorily, long-term care insurance plan subsidized by What's Newyour employer or your spouse's employer.• For goods and services not required or If you qualify to take the deduction, use theused, other than incidentally, in your per- New motor vehicle taxes. You can deduct aSelf-Employed Health Insurance Deductionsonal activities, and limited amount of state and local sales or exciseWorksheet in the Form 1040 instructions to fig-
taxes you paid on the purchase of a new motor• Not specifically covered under other in- ure the amount you can deduct. But if any of the
vehicle. You can deduct these taxes either as ancome tax laws. following applies, do not use the worksheet.
itemized deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040),• You had more than one source of income line 7, or as an increase to your standard deduc-Where to report. If you are self-employed, subject to self-employment tax. tion. To figure the amount of your standard de-deduct the business expenses on the appropri- duction, complete Schedule L (Form 1040A or• You file Form 2555, Foreign Earned In-ate form (Schedule C, C-EZ, E, or F) used to 1040).come, or Form 2555-EZ, Foreign Earnedreport your business income and expenses. Income Exclusion.
If you are an employee, complete Form • You are using amounts paid for qualified2106, Employee Business Expenses, or Form long-term care insurance to figure the de-2106-EZ, Unreimbursed Employee Business Reminderduction.Expenses. Enter on Schedule A (Form 1040),
line 28, that part of the amount on Form 2106, If you cannot use the worksheet in the Form Limit on itemized deductions. If your adjustedline 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, that is related to 1040 instructions, use the worksheet in Publica- gross income is more than $166,800 ($83,400 ifyour impairment. Enter the amount that is unre- tion 535, Business Expenses, to figure your de- you are married filing separately), the overalllated to your impairment on Schedule A (Form duction. amount of your itemized deductions may be1040), line 21. Your impairment-related work limited. See chapter 29 for more informationexpenses are not subject to the about this limit.Note. When figuring the amount you can2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that applies deduct for insurance premiums, do not includeto other employee business expenses. any advance payments shown in box 1 of Form
1099-H, Health Coverage Tax Credit (HCTC)Example. You are blind. You must use a Advance Payments. Also, if you are claiming the Introductionreader to do your work. You use the reader both health coverage tax credit, subtract the amountduring your regular working hours at your place This chapter discusses which taxes you canshown on Form 8885, line 4, from the total insur-of work and outside your regular working hours deduct if you itemize deductions on Schedule Aance premiums you paid.away from your place of work. The reader's (Form 1040). It also explains which taxes youAlso, do not include amounts paid for healthservices are only for your work. You can deduct can deduct on other schedules or forms andinsurance coverage with retirement plan distri-your expenses for the reader as business ex- which taxes you cannot deduct.butions that were tax-free because you are apenses. This chapter covers the following topics.retired public safety officer.
• Income taxes (federal, state, local, andWhere to report. You take this deduction on
foreign).Form 1040, line 29. If you itemize your deduc-
tions and do not claim 100% of your • General sales taxes (state and local).Health Insurance Costs self-employed health insurance on line 29, in-
• Real estate taxes (state, local, and for-clude any remaining premiums with all other
for Self-Employed eign).medical care expenses on Schedule A (Form
1040), subject to the 7.5% limit. See chapter 6 of • New motor vehicle taxes (state and local).Persons Publication 535, Business Expenses, for more
• Personal property taxes (state and local).information.If you were self-employed and had a net profit • Taxes and fees you cannot deduct.for the year, you may be able to deduct, as an
adjustment to income, amounts paid for medical Use Table 22-1 as a guide to determine whichand qualified long-term care insurance on behalf taxes you can deduct.of yourself, your spouse, and your dependents. The end of the chapter contains a sectionFor this purpose, you were self-employed if you that explains which forms you use to deductwere a general partner (or a limited partner re- different types of taxes.ceiving guaranteed payments) or you received
wages from an S corporation in which you were
more than a 2% shareholder. The insurance Business taxes. You can deduct certain
plan must be established under your trade or taxes only if they are ordinary and necessary
Page 150 Chapter 22 Taxes

Page 153 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
expenses of your trade or business or of produc- contested liability). See Publication 538, Ac- income tax returns, you each can deduct on your
ing income. For information on these taxes, see counting Periods and Methods, for details. federal return only the amount of your own state
Publication 535, Business Expenses. If you use an accrual method of accounting, and local income tax that you paid during the tax
see Publication 538, for more information. year.
State or local taxes. These are taxes im-
Joint state and local returns. If you andposed by the 50 states, U.S. possessions, or
your spouse file joint state and local returns andany of their political subdivisions (such as a
separate federal returns, each of you can deductcounty or city), or by the District of Columbia. Income Taxes on your separate federal return a part of the totalIndian tribal government. An Indian tribal state and local income taxes paid during the taxThis section discusses the deductibility of stategovernment that is recognized by the Secretary year. You can deduct only the amount of theand local income taxes (including employeeof the Treasury as performing substantial gov- total taxes that is proportionate to your grosscontributions to state benefit funds), and foreignernment functions will be treated as a state for income compared to the combined gross in-income taxes.purposes of claiming a deduction for taxes. In- come of you and your spouse. However, youcome taxes, real estate taxes, and personal cannot deduct more than the amount you actu-property taxes imposed by that Indian tribal gov- State and Local Income ally paid during the year. You can avoid thisernment (or by any of its subdivisions that are calculation if you and your spouse are jointly andTaxestreated as political subdivisions of a state) are individually liable for the full amount of the statedeductible. and local income taxes. If so, you and yourYou can deduct state and local income taxes.
spouse can deduct on your separate federalHowever, you can elect to deduct state and localGeneral sales taxes. These are taxes im-
general sales taxes instead of state and local returns the amount you each actually paid.posed at one rate on retail sales of a broad
income taxes. See General Sales Taxes, later.range of classes of items.
Joint federal return. If you file a joint federalException.  You cannot deduct state and localForeign taxes. These are taxes imposed by a return, you can deduct the total of the state andincome taxes you pay on income that is exemptforeign country or any of its political subdivi- local income taxes both of you paid.from federal income tax, unless the exempt in-sions.
come is interest income. For example, you can- Contributions to state benefit funds. As annot deduct the part of a state's income tax that isUseful Items employee, you can deduct mandatory contribu-on a cost-of-living allowance that is exempt fromYou may want to see: tions to state benefit funds withheld from yourfederal income tax. wages that provide protection against loss of
Publication wages. For example, certain states require em-
ployees to make contributions to state funds❏ 514 Foreign Tax Credit for Individuals What To Deduct providing disability or unemployment insurance❏ 530 Tax Information for Homeowners benefits. Mandatory payments made to the fol-Your deduction may be for withheld taxes, esti-
lowing state benefit funds are deductible asmated tax payments, or other tax payments asForm (and Instructions) state income taxes on Schedule A (Form 1040),follows.
❏ Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized line 5.
Withheld taxes. You can deduct state andDeductions • Alaska Unemployment Compensationlocal income taxes withheld from your salary in❏ Schedule E (Form 1040) Supplemental Fund.the year they are withheld. For 2009, theseIncome and Loss taxes will be shown in boxes 17 and 19 of your • California Nonoccupational Disability Ben-
Form W-2. You may also have state or local❏ 1116 Foreign Tax Credit efit Fund.
income tax withheld on Form W-2G (box 14), • New Jersey Nonoccupational DisabilityForm 1099-MISC (box 16), or Form 1099-R Benefit Fund.(boxes 10 and 13).
• New Jersey Unemployment Compensa-Estimated tax payments. You can deduct es-Tests To Deduct tion Fund.timated tax payments you made during the year
• New York Nonoccupational Disability Ben-to a state or local government. However, youAny Tax
efit Fund.must have a reasonable basis for making the
estimated tax payments. Any estimated state orThe following two tests must be met for you to • Pennsylvania Unemployment Compensa-local tax payments that are not made in gooddeduct any tax. tion Fund.faith at the time of payment are not deductible.• The tax must be imposed on you. • Rhode Island Temporary Disability BenefitFor example, you made an estimated state in-
Fund.• You must pay the tax during your tax year. come tax payment. However, the estimate of
your state tax liability shows that you will get a • Washington State Supplemental Work-refund of the full amount of your estimated pay- men's Compensation Fund.The tax must be imposed on you. Generally, ment. You had no reasonable basis to believeyou can deduct only taxes that are imposed on you had any additional liability for state incomeyou. Employee contributions to private ortaxes and you cannot deduct the estimated taxGenerally, you can deduct property taxes voluntary disability plans are not de-payment.only if you are an owner of the property. If your ductible.
CAUTION
!spouse owns the property and pays the real Refund applied to taxes. You can deduct anyestate taxes, the taxes are deductible on your part of a refund of prior-year state or local in-spouse's separate return or on your joint return. Refund (or credit) of state or local incomecome taxes that you chose to have credited to
taxes. If you receive a refund of (or credit for)your 2009 estimated state or local income taxes.You must pay the tax during your tax year. state or local income taxes in a year after the Do not reduce your deduction by either ofIf you are a cash basis taxpayer, you can deduct the following items. year in which you paid them, you may have toonly those taxes you actually paid during your include the refund in income on Form 1040, linetax year. If you pay your taxes by check, the day • Any state or local income tax refund (or 10, in the year you receive it. This includesyou mail or deliver the check is the date of credit) you expect to receive for 2009. refunds resulting from taxes that werepayment, provided the check is honored by the • Any refund of (or credit for) prior-year overwithheld, applied from a prior year return,financial institution. If you use a pay-by-phone state and local income taxes you actually not figured correctly, or figured again because ofaccount (such as a credit card or electronic received in 2009. an amended return. If you did not itemize yourfunds withdrawal), the date reported on the
deductions in the previous year, do not includestatement of the financial institution showing However, part or all of this refund (or credit) may
the refund in income. If you deducted the taxeswhen payment was made is the date of pay- be taxable. See Refund (or credit) of state or
in the previous year, include all or part of thement. If you contest a tax liability and are a cash local income taxes, later.
refund on Form 1040, line 10, in the year youbasis taxpayer, you can deduct the tax only in
receive the refund. For a discussion of howthe year you actually pay it (or transfer money or Separate federal returns. If you and your
much to include, see Recoveries in chapter 12.other property to provide for satisfaction of the spouse file separate state, local, and federal
Chapter 22 Taxes Page 151

Page 154 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
4. Multiply line 1 by line 3. This isForeign Income Taxes
your deduction. Enter it onReal Estate Taxes Schedule A (Form 1040), line 6Generally, you can take either a deduction or a
credit for income taxes imposed on you by a Note. Repeat steps 1 through 4 for each property youDeductible real estate taxes are any state, local,foreign country or a U.S. possession. However, bought or sold during the real property tax year. Youror foreign taxes on real property levied for the total deduction is the sum of the line 4 amounts for allyou cannot take a deduction or credit for foreign general public welfare. You can deduct these of the properties.income taxes paid on income that is exempt taxes only if they are based on the assessedfrom U.S. tax under the foreign earned income value of the real property and charged uniformlyexclusion or the foreign housing exclusion. For Real estate taxes for prior years. Do notagainst all property under the jurisdiction of theinformation on these exclusions, see Publication divide delinquent taxes between the buyer and
taxing authority.54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resident seller if the taxes are for any real property tax
Aliens Abroad. For information on the foreign tax year before the one in which the property is sold.Deductible real estate taxes generally do not
credit, see Publication 514. Even if the buyer agrees to pay the delinquentinclude taxes charged for local benefits and im-
taxes, the buyer cannot deduct them. The buyerprovements that increase the value of the prop- must add them to the cost of the property. Theerty. They also do not include itemized charges seller can deduct these taxes paid by the buyer.for services (such as trash collection) assessed However, the seller must include them in theagainst specific property or certain people, evenGeneral Sales Taxes selling price.if the charge is paid to the taxing authority. For
Examples. The following examples illus-You can elect to deduct state and local general more information about taxes and charges that
trate how real estate taxes are divided betweensales taxes, instead of state and local income are not deductible, see Real Estate-Related
buyer and seller.taxes, as an itemized deduction on Schedule A Items You Cannot Deduct, later.
(Form 1040), line 5. Generally, you can use
Example 1. Dennis and Beth White's realeither your actual expenses or the state and
Tenant-shareholders in a cooperative hous- property tax year for both their old home andlocal sales tax tables to figure your sales tax
ing corporation. Generally, if you are a ten- their new home is the calendar year, with pay-deduction.
ment due August 1. The tax on their old home,ant-stockholder in a cooperative housingIf you make this election, you cannot sold on May 7, was $620. The tax on their newcorporation, you can deduct the amount paid todeduct new motor vehicle taxes on home, bought on May 3, was $732. Dennis andthe corporation that represents your share of theSchedule A (Form 1040), line 7.
CAUTION
! Beth are considered to have paid a proportion-real estate taxes the corporation paid or incurred ate share of the real estate taxes on the oldfor your dwelling unit. The corporation should home even though they did not actually payprovide you with a statement showing yourActual expenses. Generally, you can deduct them to the taxing authority. On the other hand,the actual state and local general sales taxes share of the taxes. For more information, see they can claim only a proportionate share of the(including compensating use taxes) if the tax Special Rules for Cooperatives in Publication taxes they paid on their new property evenrate was the same as the general sales tax rate. 530. though they paid the entire amount.However, sales taxes on food, clothing, medical
Dennis and Beth owned their old home dur-supplies, and motor vehicles are deductible as a
Division of real estate taxes between buyers ing the real property tax year for 126 days (Janu-general sales tax even if the tax rate was less
ary 1 to May 6, the day before the sale). Theyand sellers. If you bought or sold real estatethan the general sales tax rate. If you paid sales
figure their deduction for taxes on their old homeduring the year, the real estate taxes must betax on a motor vehicle at a rate higher than the
as follows.general sales tax rate, you can deduct only the divided between the buyer and the seller.
amount of tax that you would have paid at the The buyer and the seller must divide the real Worksheet 22-1. Figuring Your Real Estategeneral sales tax rate on that vehicle. If you use estate taxes according to the number of days in Tax Deduction Ð Taxes on Old Homethe actual expenses method, you must have the real property tax year (the period to whichreceipts to show the general sales taxes paid. 1. Enter the total real estate taxes forthe tax is imposed relates) that each owned the
the real property tax year .... . $620property. The seller is treated as paying theOptional sales tax tables. Instead of using taxes up to, but not including, the date of sale. 2. Enter the number of days in theyour actual expenses, you can figure your state The buyer is treated as paying the taxes begin- real property tax year that youand local general sales tax deduction using the owned the property ........ . 126ning with the date of sale. This applies regard-state and local sales tax tables in the Instruc-
less of the lien dates under local law. Generally,tions for Schedule A (Form 1040). You may also 3. Divide line 2 by 365 (for leap
this information is included on the settlementbe able to add the state and local general sales years, divide line 2 by 366) ... . .3452
statement provided at the closing.taxes paid on certain specified items, such as 4. Multiply line 1 by line 3. This ismotor vehicles (purchased or leased), aircraft, If you (the seller) cannot deduct taxes until your deduction. Enter it onboats, homes (including mobile and prefabri- Schedule A (Form 1040), line 6 $214they are paid because you use the cash methodcated homes) and home building materials. of accounting, and the buyer of your property is
Your applicable table amount is based on the Since the buyers of their old home paid all of thepersonally liable for the tax, you are considered
state where you live, your income, and the num- taxes, Dennis and Beth also include the $214 into have paid your part of the tax at the time of theber of exemptions claimed on your tax return. the selling price of the old home. (The buyerssale. This lets you deduct the part of the tax toYour income is your adjusted gross income plus add the $214 to their cost of the home.)the date of sale even though you did not actuallyany nontaxable items such as the following. Dennis and Beth owned their new home dur-pay it. However, you must also include the ing the real property tax year for 243 days (May• Tax-exempt interest. amount of that tax in the selling price of the 3 to December 31, including their date ofproperty. The buyer must include the same• Veterans' benefits. purchase). They figure their deduction for taxesamount in his or her cost of the property. on their new home as follows.• Nontaxable combat pay. You figure your deduction for taxes on each
• Workers' compensation. Worksheet 22-1. Figuring Your Real Estateproperty bought or sold during the real property
Tax Deduction Ð Taxes on New Hometax year as follows.• Nontaxable unemployment compensation.
1. Enter the total real estate taxes for• Nontaxable part of social security and rail- Worksheet 22-1. Figuring Your the real property tax year .... . $732road retirement benefits. Real Estate Tax Deduction
Keep for Your Records
 2. Enter the number of days in the• Nontaxable part of IRA, pension, or annu- real property tax year that youity distributions, excluding rollovers. 1. Enter the total real estate taxes for owned the property ........ . 243the real property tax year .... .• Public assistance payments. 3. Divide line 2 by 365 (for leap2. Enter the number of days in the years, divide line 2 by 366) ... . .6658If you lived in different states during the same real property tax year that youtax year, you must prorate your applicable table 4. Multiply line 1 by line 3. This isowned the property ........ .amount for each state based on the days you your deduction. Enter it onlived in each state. See the instructions for 3. Divide line 2 by 365 (for leap Schedule A (Form 1040), line 6 $487years, divide line 2 by 366) ... . .Schedule A (Form 1040), line 5, for details.
Page 152 Chapter 22 Taxes

Page 155 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 22-1.  Which Taxes Can You Deduct?
Type of Tax You Can Deduct You Cannot Deduct
Fees and Charges Fees and charges that are expenses of your trade or Fees and charges that are not expenses of your trade
business or of producing income. or business or of producing income, such as fees for
driver's licenses, car inspections, parking, or charges
for water bills (see Taxes and Fees You Cannot
Deduct).
Fines and penalties.
General Sales Taxes State and local general sales taxes, including State and local income taxes if you choose to deduct
compensating use taxes. state and local general sales taxes.
New motor vehicle taxes on Schedule A (Form 1040),
line 7, if you choose to deduct state and local general
sales taxes.
New Motor Vehicle State or local sales or excise taxes you paid after New motor vehicle taxes on Schedule A (Form 1040),
Taxes February 16, 2009 for the purchase of any new line 7, if you choose to deduct state and local general
motor vehicle, including certain fees charged to sales taxes.
purchase new motor vehicles in states that do not
have a sales tax.
Income Taxes State and local income taxes. Federal income taxes.
Foreign income taxes. Employee contributions to private or voluntary disability
Employee contributions to state funds listed under plans.
Contributions to state benefit funds.
State and local general sales taxes if you choose to
deduct state and local income taxes.
Other Taxes Taxes that are expenses of your trade or business. Federal excise taxes, such as tax on gasoline, that are
Taxes on property producing rent or royalty income. not expenses of your trade or business or of
Occupational taxes. See chapter 28. producing income.
One-half of self-employment tax paid. Per capita taxes.
Personal Property State and local personal property taxes. Customs duties that are not expenses of your trade or
Taxes business or of producing income.
Real Estate Taxes State and local real estate taxes. More than $500 ($1,000 if your filing status is married
Foreign real estate taxes. filing jointly), if you take the standard deduction and
Tenant's share of real estate taxes paid by the real property is not used in your trade or business
cooperative housing corporation. or does not produce rental income.
Foreign real estate taxes, if you take the standard
deduction and the real property is not used in your
trade or business or does not produce rental income.
Real estate taxes that are treated as imposed on
someone else (see Division of real estate taxes
between buyers and sellers).
Taxes for local benefits (with exceptions). See Real
Estate-Related Items You Cannot Deduct.
Trash and garbage pickup fees (with exceptions). See
Real Estate-Related Items You Cannot Deduct.
Rent increase due to higher real estate taxes.
Homeowners' association charges.
Since Dennis and Beth paid all of the taxes on were for the 2008 real property tax year. The 3. Divide line 2 by 365 (for leapthe new home, they add $245 ($732 paid less Browns cannot deduct them since they did not years, divide line 2 by 366) ... . .6658$487 deduction) to their cost of the new home. own the property until 2009. Instead, they must
4. Multiply line 1 by line 3. This is(The sellers add this $245 to their selling price add $680 to the cost of their new home. your deduction. Claim it onand deduct the $245 as a real estate tax.) In January 2010, the Browns receive their Schedule A (Form 1040), line 6 $5012009 property tax statement for $752, whichDennis and Beth's real estate tax deduction
they will pay in 2010. The Browns owned theirfor their old and new homes is the sum of $214 The remaining $251 ($752 paid less $501 de-new home during the 2009 real property tax yearand $487, or $701. They will enter this amount duction) of taxes paid in 2010, along with thefor 243 days (May 3 to December 31). They willon Schedule A (Form 1040), line 6. $680 paid in 2009, is added to the cost of theirfigure their 2010 deduction for taxes as follows.
new home.Example 2. George and Helen Brown Worksheet 22-1. Figuring Your Real Estate Because the taxes up to the date of sale arebought a new home on May 3, 2009. Their real Tax Deduction Ð Taxes on New Homeproperty tax year for the new home is the calen- considered paid by the seller on the date of sale,
dar year. Real estate taxes for 2008 were as- the seller is entitled to a 2009 tax deduction of1. Enter the total real estate taxes forsessed in their state on January 1, 2009. The $931. This is the sum of the $680 for 2008 andthe real property tax year .... . $752taxes became due on May 31, 2009, and Octo- the $251 for the 123 days the seller owned the2. Enter the number of days in theber 31, 2009. home in 2009. The seller must also include thereal property tax year that you $931 in the selling price when he or she figuresThe Browns agreed to pay all taxes due after owned the property ........ . 243 the gain or loss on the sale. The seller shouldthe date of purchase. Real estate taxes for 2008
contact the Browns in January 2010 to find outwere $680. They paid $340 on May 31, 2009,
how much real estate tax is due for 2009.and $340 on October 31, 2009. These taxes
Chapter 22 Taxes Page 153

Page 156 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form 1099-S. For certain sales or ex- • Homeowners' association charges. Rent increase due to higher real estate taxes.
changes of real estate, the person responsible If your landlord increases your rent in the form of
for closing the sale (generally the settlement a tax surcharge because of increased real es-Taxes for local benefits. Deductible real es-agent) prepares Form 1099-S, Proceeds From tate taxes, you cannot deduct the increase astate taxes generally do not include taxesReal Estate Transactions, to report certain infor- taxes.charged for local benefits and improvementsmation to the IRS and to the seller of the prop- tending to increase the value of your property. Homeowners' association charges. Theseerty. Box 2 of the form is for the gross proceeds These include assessments for streets, side- charges are not deductible because they arefrom the sale and should include the portion of walks, water mains, sewer lines, public parking imposed by the homeowners' association,the seller's real estate tax liability that the buyer facilities, and similar improvements. You should rather than the state or local government.will pay after the date of sale. The buyer includes increase the basis of your property by thethese taxes in the cost basis of the property, and amount of the assessment.the seller both deducts this amount as a tax paid Local benefit taxes are deductible only if theyand includes it in the sales price of the property. are for maintenance, repair, or interest chargesFor a real estate transaction that involves a New Motor Vehiclerelated to those benefits. If only a part of thehome, any real estate tax the seller paid in taxes is for maintenance, repair, or interest, youadvance but that is the liability of the buyer Taxesmust be able to show the amount of that part toappears on Form 1099-S, box 5. The buyer claim the deduction. If you cannot determinededucts this amount as a real estate tax, and the You cannot deduct new motor vehiclewhat part of the tax is for maintenance, repair, orseller reduces his or her real estate tax deduc- taxes if you elect to deduct state andinterest, none of it is deductible.tion (or includes it in income) by the same local general sales taxes on Schedule
CAUTION
!amount. See Refund (or rebate), later. Taxes for local benefits may be in- A (Form 1040), line 5.cluded in your real estate tax bill. If yourTaxes placed in escrow. If your monthly You can deduct state or local sales or excisetaxing authority (or mortgage lender)
CAUTION
!mortgage payment includes an amount placed taxes you paid after February 16, 2009, for thedoes not furnish you a copy of your real estatein escrow (put in the care of a third party) for real purchase of any motor vehicle(s) if you are thetax bill, ask for it. You should use the rules aboveestate taxes, you may not be able to deduct the original user of the vehicle (in other words, theto determine if the local benefit tax is deductible.total amount placed in escrow. You can deduct vehicle is ªnewº). A motor vehicle is any passen-Contact the taxing authority if you need addi-only the real estate tax that the third party actu- ger automobile, light truck, or motorcycle with ational information about a specific charge onally paid to the taxing authority. If the third party gross vehicle weight rating that is not more thanyour real estate tax bill.does not notify you of the amount of real estate 8,500 pounds, or a motor home.
tax that was paid for you, contact the third party If you purchase a new motor vehicle in aItemized charges for services.  An itemizedor the taxing authority to find the proper amount state that does not have a sales tax, you cancharge for services assessed against specificto show on your return. deduct certain fees that are charged to buyers ofproperty or certain people is not a tax, even if the new motor vehicles if the fee charged is similarTenants by the entirety. If you and your charge is paid to the taxing authority. For exam- to a sales tax. The states that do not have aspouse held property as tenants by the entirety ple, you cannot deduct the charge as a real sales tax are Alaska, Delaware, Hawaii, Mon-and you file separate federal returns, each of estate tax if it is: tana, New Hampshire, and Oregon.you can deduct only the taxes each of you paid The deduction for new motor vehicle taxes is• A unit fee for the delivery of a serviceon the property. subject to a limit based on vehicle price and an(such as a $5 fee charged for every 1,000
income limit. If both of these limits apply, yougallons of water you use),Divorced individuals. If your divorce or sepa-
figure the amount of your deduction by applyingration agreement states that you must pay the • A periodic charge for a residential service the income limit after you figure the amount ofreal estate taxes for a home owned by you and (such as a $20 per month or $240 annual your deduction subject to the limit based onyour spouse, part of your payments may be fee charged to each homeowner for trash vehicle price. These limits also apply to certaindeductible as alimony and part as real estate collection), or fees that are charged to buyers of new motortaxes. See Taxes and insurance  in chapter 18
vehicles in states that do not have a sales tax. If• A flat fee charged for a single service pro-for more information.
you itemize deductions, figure these limits usingvided by your government (such as a $30
Ministers' and military housing allowances. the worksheet on page 2 of Schedule A (Formcharge for mowing your lawn because it
If you are a minister or a member of the uni- 1040). Complete Schedule L (Form 1040A orwas allowed to grow higher than permitted
formed services and receive a housing allow- 1040) if you take the standard deduction.under your local ordinance).
ance that you can exclude from income, you still
Limit based on vehicle price. Your deduc-can deduct all of the real estate taxes you pay on You must look at your real estate tax tion is limited to the state or local sales or exciseyour home. bill to determine if any nondeductible taxes you paid on the first $49,500 of the
Refund (or rebate). If you received a refund itemized charges, such as those listed purchase price of each new motor vehicle. For
CAUTION
!
or rebate in 2009 of real estate taxes you paid in above, are included in the bill. If your taxing this purpose, the purchase price is the cost of
2009, you must reduce your deduction by the authority (or mortgage lender) does not furnish the new motor vehicle, not including any state or
amount refunded to you. If you received a refund you a copy of your real estate tax bill, ask for it. local sales or excise taxes. If the purchase price
or rebate in 2009 of real estate taxes you de- (before taxes) of your new motor vehicle isException. Service charges used to main-ducted in an earlier year (either as an itemized $49,500 or less, the amount of state or localtain or improve services (such as trash collec-deduction or an increase to your standard de- sales or excise taxes you paid on the purchasetion or police and fire protection) are deductibleduction), you generally must include the refund is not limited based on vehicle price. However, ifas real estate taxes if:or rebate in income in the year you receive it. the purchase price (before taxes) exceeds
However, the amount you include in income is $49,500, the amount of taxes you can deduct is• The fees or charges are imposed at a likelimited to the amount of the deduction that re- limited to the portion of the total taxes you paidrate against all property in the taxing juris-duced your tax in the earlier year. For more that are attributable to the first $49,500 of thediction,information, see Recoveries in chapter 12. purchase price.• The funds collected are not earmarked; To figure the amount of taxes you paid on theinstead, they are commingled with general first $49,500 of the purchase price, you will needReal Estate-Related Items revenue funds, and to know the rate(s) of tax that apply in the state
You Cannot Deduct and locality where you purchased each new• Funds used to maintain or improve serv-
motor vehicle. Some states and localities im-ices are not limited to or determined by thePayments for the following items generally are pose a fixed rate, while others may provide ratesamount of these fees or charges collected.not deductible as real estate taxes. that are limited to a certain dollar amount per
purchase. See the Example, later.• Taxes for local benefits. Transfer taxes (or stamp taxes). Transfer
taxes and similar taxes and charges on the sale Income limit. The income limit for the deduc-• Itemized charges for services (such as
of a personal home are not deductible. If they tion for new motor vehicle taxes is based ontrash and garbage pickup fees).
are paid by the seller, they are expenses of the modified adjusted gross income (AGI). If your• Transfer taxes (or stamp taxes). sale and reduce the amount realized on the sale. modified AGI is $135,000 or more ($260,000 or
• Rent increases due to higher real estate If paid by the buyer, they are included in the cost more if your filing status is married filing jointly)
taxes. basis of the property. you cannot deduct new motor vehicle taxes. Use
Page 154 Chapter 22 Taxes

Page 157 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the following table to see if the income limit will • Charged on a yearly basis, even if it is Many taxes and fees other than those listed
affect your deduction. above are also nondeductible, unless they arecollected more or less than once a year.
ordinary and necessary expenses of a business
IF your modified AGI THEN the income or income producing activity. For other nonde-A tax that meets the above requirements can
is... limit... ductible items, see Real Estate-Related Itemsbe considered charged on personal property
You Cannot Deduct, earlier.even if it is for the exercise of a privilege. For$125,000 or less will not affect your
($250,000 or less if deduction example, a yearly tax based on value qualifies
married filing jointly) as a personal property tax even if it is called a
registration fee and is for the privilege of regis-$125,001 to $134,999 will reduce your
tering motor vehicles or using them on the high- Where To Deduct($250,001 to $259,999 if deduction
ways.married filing jointly)
You deduct taxes on the following schedules.If the tax is partly based on value and partly$135,000 or more will eliminate your
based on other criteria, it may qualify in part.($260,000 or more if deduction State and local income taxes.  These taxesmarried filing jointly) are deducted on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 5,Example. Your state charges a yearly mo- even if your only source of income is from busi-tor vehicle registration tax of 1% of value plus 50 ness, rents, or royalties. Check box a on line 5Modified AGI. To figure your modified AGI, cents per hundredweight. You paid $32 based to indicate income taxes.add back the following items to your adjusted on the value ($1,500) and weight (3,400 lbs.) ofgross income (Form 1040, line 38, or Form your car. You can deduct $15 (1% ×  $1,500) as General sales taxes. Sales taxes are de-1040A, line 22). a personal property tax because it is based on ducted on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 5. You• The foreign earned income exclusion. the value. The remaining $17 ($.50 ×  34), based must check box b  on line 5. If you elect toon the weight, is not deductible.• The foreign housing exclusion and deduc- deduct sales taxes, you cannot deduct state and
tion. local income taxes on Schedule A (Form 1040),
line 5, box a, or new motor vehicle taxes on• The exclusions for income earned by bona Schedule A (Form 1040), line 7.fide residents of American Samoa and
Taxes and FeesPuerto Rico.
Foreign income taxes. Generally, income
taxes you pay to a foreign country or U.S. pos-You Cannot DeductExample. You purchased a new light truck on session can be claimed as an itemized deduc-May 3, 2009, for $60,000 before taxes. The total tion on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 8, or as aMany federal, state, and local government taxesamount of state and local sales taxes you paid credit against your U.S. income tax on Formare not deductible because they do not fall withinwere $3,650. The state where you purchased 1040, line 47. To claim the credit, you may havethe categories discussed earlier. Other taxesthe vehicle imposed a fixed general sales tax to complete and attach Form 1116. For moreand fees, such as federal income taxes, are notrate of 6% (.06), and the county charged an information, see chapter 37, the Form 1040 in-deductible because the tax law specifically pro-additional discretionary sales tax of 1/2% (.005) structions, or Publication 514.hibits a deduction for them. See Table 22-1.on the first $10,000 of the purchase price. The
amount of sales tax you can deduct is limited to Taxes and fees that are generally not de- Real estate taxes and personal property$3,020. This is the total of the state sales tax of ductible include the following items. taxes.  These taxes are deducted on Sched-$2,970, which is subject to the limit based on ule A (Form 1040), lines 6 and 8, respectively,• Employment taxes. This includes socialvehicle price ($49,500 x .06), plus the county unless they are paid on property used in yoursecurity, Medicare, and railroad retirementsales tax of $50 ($10,000 x .005). Because your business, in which case they are deducted ontaxes withheld from your pay. However,filing status is single and your modified AGI is Schedule C, Schedule C-EZ, or Schedule F$126,000, the income limit also applies. You one-half of self-employment tax you pay is (Form 1040). Taxes on property that producesenter $3,020 on line 3 of the worksheet on page deductible. In addition, the social security rent or royalty income are deducted on Sched-2 of Schedule A (Form 1040). You complete the and other employment taxes you pay on ule E (Form 1040).rest of the worksheet and determine that the the wages of a household worker may be If you do not itemize deductions on Scheduleamount you can deduct is further reduced by included in medical expenses that you can A (Form 1040), and you paid state or local real$302 (on line 10 of the worksheet) as a result of deduct or child care expenses that allow estate taxes on real property that is not used in athe income limit. The amount you can deduct for you to claim the child and dependent care trade or business and does not produce rentalnew motor vehicle taxes is $2,718 ($3,020 ± credit. For more information, see chapters income, you can increase the amount of your$302). You enter $2,718 on line 11 of the work- 21 and 32. standard deduction by the amount of state orsheet and on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 7.
local real estate taxes you paid. However, this• Estate, inheritance, legacy, or succes-Any amount you deduct for new motor vehi- additional standard deduction amount cannot besion taxes. However, you can deduct thecle taxes, either as an itemized deduction or as more than $500 ($1,000 if your filing status isestate tax attributable to income in respectan increase to your standard deduction, is not married filing jointly), and you cannot deductincluded in the cost of the motor vehicle for of a decedent if you, as a beneficiary, taxes paid on foreign real estate. To figure thepurposes of figuring any deduction for deprecia- must include that income in your gross amount of your standard deduction, if you paidtion (in the case of business property) or figuring income. In that case, deduct the estate tax state or local real estate taxes, complete Sched-gain or loss when you sell or otherwise dispose as a miscellaneous deduction that is not ule L (Form 1040A or 1040).of the motor vehicle. In the above Example, the subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-cost of the new light truck is $60,932. This is the income limit. For more information, see New motor vehicle taxes. These taxes areamount of the purchase price before taxes Publication 559, Survivors, Executors, and deducted on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 7. To($60,000) plus the amount of sales taxes you Administrators. figure the amount to enter on line 7, completepaid that you did not deduct ($3,650 ± $2,718 =
the worksheet on page 2 of Schedule A (Form$932). • Federal income taxes. This includes in-
1040).come taxes withheld from your pay.
If you do not itemize deductions on Schedule• Fines and penalties. You cannot deduct A (Form 1040), these taxes can increase yourfines and penalties paid to a government standard deduction. To figure the amount ofPersonal Property for violation of any law, including related your standard deduction, if you paid new motor
amounts forfeited as collateral deposits. vehicle taxes, complete Schedule L (FormTaxes 1040A or 1040).• Gift taxes. 
Personal property tax is deductible if it is a state • License fees. You cannot deduct license Self-employment tax. Deduct one-half ofor local tax that is: fees for personal purposes (such as mar- your self-employment tax on Form 1040, line 27.riage, driver's, and dog license fees). • Charged on personal property,
• Per capita taxes. You cannot deduct Other taxes. All other deductible taxes are• Based only on the value of the personal
deducted on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 8.state or local per capita taxes.property, and
Chapter 22 Taxes Page 155

Page 158 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• The mortgage is a secured debt on a qual- service performed in connection with your mort-
ified home in which you have an owner- gage loan.
ship interest. (Generally, your mortgage is
Mortgage prepayment penalty. If you pay off23. a secured debt if you put your home up as
your home mortgage early, you may have to paycollateral to protect the interest of the
a penalty. You can deduct that penalty as homelender. The term ªqualified homeº means
mortgage interest provided the penalty is not foryour main home or second home. For de-
a specific service performed or cost incurred inInterest tails, see Publication 936.)
connection with your mortgage loan.
Sale of home. If you sell your home, you canYou cannot deduct interest you pay for someoneExpense
deduct your home mortgage interest (subject toelse if you are not legally liable to pay it. Both
any limits that apply) paid up to, but not includ-you and the lender must intend that the loan be
ing, the date of sale.repaid.
What's New
Example. John and Peggy Harris sold theirAmount Deductible home on May 7. Through April 30, they madeLimit on itemized deductions. For 2009, if home mortgage interest payments of $1,220.your adjusted gross income is more than In most cases, you can deduct all of your home The settlement sheet for the sale of the home$166,800 ($83,400 if you are married filing sep- mortgage interest. How much you can deduct showed $50 interest for the 6-day period in Mayarately), the overall amount of your itemized depends on the date of the mortgage, the up to, but not including, the date of sale. Theirdeductions may be limited. See chapter 29 for amount of the mortgage, and how you use the mortgage interest deduction is $1,270 ($1,220 +more information about this limit. mortgage proceeds. $50).
Fully deductible interest. If all of your mort- Prepaid interest. If you pay interest in ad-gages fit into one or more of the following three vance for a period that goes beyond the end ofcategories at all times during the year, you can the tax year, you must spread this interest overIntroduction deduct all of the interest on those mortgages. (If the tax years to which it applies. You can deductany one mortgage fits into more than one cate-This chapter discusses what interest expenses in each year only the interest that qualifies asgory, add the debt that fits in each category toyou can deduct. Interest is the amount you pay home mortgage interest for that year. However,your other debt in the same category.)for the use of borrowed money. there is an exception that applies to points, dis-The three categories are as follows:The following are types of interest you can cussed later.
deduct as itemized deductions on Schedule A 1. Mortgages you took out on or before Octo- Mortgage interest credit. You may be able to(Form 1040). ber 13, 1987 (called grandfathered debt). claim a mortgage interest credit if you were• Home mortgage interest, including certain issued a mortgage credit certificate (MCC) by a2. Mortgages you took out after October 13,points and mortgage insurance premiums. state or local government. Figure the credit on1987, to buy, build, or improve your home
Form 8396, Mortgage Interest Credit. If you take(called home acquisition debt), but only if• Investment interest.
this credit, you must reduce your mortgage inter-throughout 2009 these mortgages plus anyThis chapter explains these deductions. It also est deduction by the amount of the credit.grandfathered debt totaled $1 million orexplains where to deduct other types of interest For more information on the credit, see chap-less ($500,000 or less if married filing sep-and lists some types of interest you cannot de- ter 37.arately).duct.
3. Mortgages you took out after October 13, Ministers' and military housing allowance.Use Table 23-1 to find out where to get more 1987, other than to buy, build, or improve If you are a minister or a member of the uni-information on various types of interest, includ- your home (called home equity debt), but formed services and receive a housing allow-ing investment interest. only if throughout 2009 these mortgages ance that is not taxable, you can still deduct your
totaled $100,000 or less ($50,000 or less if home mortgage interest.
Useful Items married filing separately) and totaled no
Mortgage assistance payments. If you qual-more than the fair market value of yourYou may want to see:
ify for mortgage assistance payments forhome reduced by (1) and (2).
lower-income families under section 235 of thePublication The dollar limits for the second and third catego- National Housing Act, part or all of the interestries apply to the combined mortgages on your❏ 936 Home Mortgage Interest Deduction on your mortgage may be paid for you. Youmain home and second home. cannot deduct the interest that is paid for you.❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses See Part II of Publication 936 for more de-
No other effect on taxes. Do not includetailed definitions of grandfathered, home acqui-
these mortgage assistance payments in yoursition, and home equity debt.
income. Also, do not use these payments toYou can use Figure 23-A to check whether
reduce other deductions, such as real estateyour home mortgage interest is fully deductible.Home Mortgage taxes.
Limits on deduction. You cannot fully deduct
Divorced or separated individuals. If a di-Interest interest on a mortgage that does not fit into any
vorce or separation agreement requires you orof the three categories listed above. If this ap-
your spouse or former spouse to pay homeGenerally, home mortgage interest is any inter- plies to you, see Part II of Publication 936 to
mortgage interest on a home owned by both ofest you pay on a loan secured by your home figure the amount of interest you can deduct.
you, the payment of interest may be alimony.(main home or a second home). The loan may
See the discussion of Payments forbe a mortgage to buy your home, a second
jointly-owned home in chapter 18.mortgage, a line of credit, or a home equity loan. Special Situations
You can deduct home mortgage interest if all Redeemable ground rents. If you make an-This section describes certain items that can bethe following conditions are met. nual or periodic rental payments on a redeem-included as home mortgage interest and others
able ground rent, you can deduct them as• You file Form 1040 and itemize deduc- that cannot. It also describes certain special
mortgage interest.tions on Schedule A (Form 1040). situations that may affect your deduction.
Payments made to end the lease and to buy• You are legally liable for the loan. Late payment charge on mortgage payment. the lessor's entire interest in the land are not
• There is a true debtor-creditor relationship You can deduct as home mortgage interest a deductible as mortgage interest. For more infor-
between you and the lender. late payment charge if it was not for a specific mation, see Publication 936.
Page 156 Chapter 23 Interest Expense

Page 159 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
EPS File Name: 10311G33 Size: Width = 44.0 picas, Depth = 49.0 picas
Figure 23-A. Is My Home Mortgage Interest Fully Deductible?
Were your total mortgage balances $100,000 or less
2 
($50,000 or less if married filing separately) at all
times during the year?
Start Here:
No
/H17075
Were all of your home mortgages taken out on or
before 10-13-87?
Were all of your home mortgages taken out after
10-13-87 used to buy, build, or improve the main
home secured by that main home mortgage or
used to buy, build, or improve the second home
secured by that second home mortgage, or both?
Were the mortgage balances $1,000,000 or less
($500,000 or less if married filing separately) at 
all times during the year?
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
No
No
Yes
/H17075
Yes
/H17075
No
/H17075
/H17075
Yes
No
No
Yes
(Instructions: Include balances of ALL mortgages secured by your main home and second home.)
Yes
/H17073
Yes
/H17076
/H17076
Your home mortgage interest is fully deductible.
You do not need Publication 936.
Go to Part II of Publication 936 to determine the
limits on your deductible home mortgage interest.
Were your grandfathered debt plus home
acquisition debt balances $1,000,000 or less
3
($500,000 or less if married filing separately)
at all times during the year?
Were your home equity debt balances $100,000 or
less
2 
($50,000 or less if married filing separately) at
all times during the year?
If all mortgages on your main or second home exceed the home’s fair market value, a lower limit may apply. See Home equity debt limit under Home Equity
Debt in Part II of Publication 936.
Amounts over the $1,000,000 limit ($500,000 if married filing separately) may qualify as home equity debt if they are not more than the total home equity debt
limit. See Publication 936 for more information about grandfathered debt, home acquisition debt, and home equity debt.
Do you meet the conditions to deduct home
mortgage interest?
/H17074
Yes
You cannot deduct the interest payments as home
mortgage interest.
4/H17075
No
You must itemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040) and be legally liable for the loan. The loan must be a secured debt on a qualified home. See Home
Mortgage Interest.
See Table 23-1 for where to deduct other types of interest payments.
4
3
2
1
1
Chapter 23 Interest Expense Page 157

Page 160 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Nonredeemable ground rents. Payments 6. The funds you provided at or before clos-General Rule
ing, plus any points the seller paid, were aton a nonredeemable ground rent are not mort-
You generally cannot deduct the full amount of least as much as the points charged. Thegage interest. You can deduct them as rent if
points in the year paid. Because they are pre- funds you provided do not have to havethey are a business expense or if they are for
paid interest, you generally deduct them ratably been applied to the points. They can in-rental property.
over the life (term) of the mortgage. See Deduc- clude a down payment, an escrow deposit,
earnest money, and other funds you paidtion Allowed Ratably, next.Reverse mortgages. A reverse mortgage is a
at or before closing for any purpose. YouFor exceptions to the general rule, see De-loan where the lender pays you (in a lump sum,
cannot have borrowed these funds fromduction Allowed in Year Paid, later.a monthly advance, a line of credit, or a combi-
your lender or mortgage broker.nation of all three) while you continue to live in
your home. With a reverse mortgage, you retain 7. You use your loan to buy or build your
Deduction Allowed Ratablytitle to your home. Depending on the plan, your main home.
reverse mortgage becomes due with interest 8. The points were computed as a percent-If you do not meet the tests listed under Deduc-when you move, sell your home, reach the end age of the principal amount of the mort-tion Allowed in Year Paid, later, the loan is not aof a pre-selected loan period, or die. Because gage.home improvement loan, or you choose not toreverse mortgages are considered loan ad- deduct your points in full in the year paid, you 9. The amount is clearly shown on the settle-vances and not income, the amount you receive can deduct the points ratably (equally) over the ment statement (such as the Settlementis not taxable. Any interest (including original life of the loan if you meet all the following tests. Statement, Form HUD-1) as pointsissue discount) accrued on a reverse mortgage
charged for the mortgage. The points mayis not deductible until the loan is paid in full. Your 1. You use the cash method of accounting. be shown as paid from either your funds ordeduction may be limited because a reverse This means you report income in the year the seller's.mortgage loan generally is subject to the limit on you receive it and deduct expenses in the
Home Equity Debt discussed in Publication 936. year you pay them. Most individuals use
this method. Note. If you meet all of these tests, you can
Rental payments. If you live in a house before choose to either fully deduct the points in the2. Your loan is secured by a home. (Thefinal settlement on the purchase, any payments year paid, or deduct them over the life of thehome does not need to be your mainyou make for that period are rent and not inter- loan.home.)est. This is true even if the settlement papers call Home improvement loan. You can also fully3. Your loan period is not more than 30them interest. You cannot deduct these pay- deduct in the year paid points paid on a loan toyears.ments as home mortgage interest. improve your main home, if tests (1) through (6)
4. If your loan period is more than 10 years, are met.Mortgage proceeds invested in tax-exempt the terms of your loan are the same as
Second home.  You cannot fully de-securities. You cannot deduct the home mort- other loans offered in your area for the
duct in the year paid points you pay ongage interest on grandfathered debt or home same or longer period.
loans secured by your second home.equity debt if you used the proceeds of the
CAUTION
! 5. Either your loan amount is $250,000 or You can deduct these points only over the life ofmortgage to buy securities or certificates that less, or the number of points is not more the loan.produce tax-free income. ªGrandfathered debtº than:and ªhome equity debtº are defined earlier under
Refinancing. Generally, points you pay toAmount Deductible. a. 4, if your loan period is 15 years or less, refinance a mortgage are not deductible in full inor the year you pay them. This is true even if theRefunds of interest. If you receive a refund of new mortgage is secured by your main home.b. 6, if your loan period is more than 15interest in the same tax year you paid it, you However, if you use part of the refinancedyears.must reduce your interest expense by the mortgage proceeds to improve your main homeamount refunded to you. If you receive a refund and you meet the first 6 tests listed under De-of interest you deducted in an earlier year, you duction Allowed in Year Paid , you can fully de-generally must include the refund in income in duct the part of the points related to theDeduction Allowed in Year Paidthe year you receive it. However, you need to improvement in the year you paid them with yourinclude it only up to the amount of the deduction You can fully deduct points in the year paid if you own funds. You can deduct the rest of the points
that reduced your tax in the earlier year. This is meet all the following tests. (You can use Figure over the life of the loan.
true whether the interest overcharge was re- 23-B as a quick guide to see whether your points
funded to you or was used to reduce the out- are fully deductible in the year paid.) Example 1. In 1994, Bill Fields got a mort-
standing principal on your mortgage. gage to buy a home. In 2009, Bill refinanced that
1. Your loan is secured by your main home.If you received a refund of interest you over- mortgage with a 15-year $100,000 mortgage
(Your main home is the one you ordinarilypaid in an earlier year, you generally will receive loan. The mortgage is secured by his home. To
live in most of the time.) get the new loan, he had to pay three pointsa Form 1098, Mortgage Interest Statement,
($3,000). Two points ($2,000) were for prepaidshowing the refund in box 3. For information 2. Paying points is an established business
interest, and one point ($1,000) was charged forabout Form 1098, see Form 1098, Mortgage practice in the area where the loan was
services, in place of amounts that ordinarily areInterest Statement, later. made.
stated separately on the settlement statement.For more information on how to treat refunds 3. The points paid were not more than the Bill paid the points out of his private funds, ratherof interest deducted in earlier years, see Recov- points generally charged in that area. than out of the proceeds of the new loan. Theeries in chapter 12.
payment of points is an established practice in4. You use the cash method of accounting.
the area, and the points charged are not moreThis means you report income in the yearPoints than the amount generally charged there. Bill'syou receive it and deduct expenses in the
first payment on the new loan was due July 1.year you pay them. (If you want more infor-The term ªpointsº is used to describe certain He made six payments on the loan in 2009 andmation about this method, see Accountingcharges paid, or treated as paid, by a borrower is a cash basis taxpayer.Methods in chapter 1.)to obtain a home mortgage. Points may also be Bill used the funds from the new mortgage to
called loan origination fees, maximum loan 5. The points were not paid in place of repay his existing mortgage. Although the new
charges, loan discount, or discount points. amounts that ordinarily are stated sepa- mortgage loan was for Bill's continued owner-
A borrower is treated as paying any points rately on the settlement statement, such as ship of his main home, it was not for the
that a home seller pays for the borrower's mort- appraisal fees, inspection fees, title fees, purchase or improvement of that home. He can-
gage. See Points paid by the seller, later. attorney fees, and property taxes. not deduct all of the points in 2009. He can
Page 158 Chapter 23 Interest Expense

Page 161 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure 23-B. Are My Points Fully Deductible This Year?
Is the loan secured by your main home?
Start Here:
/H17075
/H17074Yes
/H17075
No
/H17075
/H17075
/H17074
*The funds you provided do not have to have been applied to the points. They can include a down payment, an escrow deposit, earnest money, and other
funds you paid at or before closing for any purpose.
Is the payment of points an established
business practice in your area?
Were the points paid more than the amount
generally charged in your area?
Do you use the cash method of accounting?
Did you take out the loan to improve your
main home?
Did you take out the loan to buy or build
your main home?
Were the points computed as a percentage of
the principal amount of the mortgage?
Were the funds you provided (other than
those you borrowed from your lender or
mortgage broker), plus any points the seller
paid, at least as much as the points charged?*
Is the amount paid clearly shown as points on
the settlement statement?
You can fully deduct the points this year on
Schedule A (Form 1040).
/H17074Yes
/H17074No
/H17074Yes
/H17074No
/H17074Yes
/H17074Yes
/H17074Yes
/H17074Yes
You cannot fully deduct the points this year. See the
discussion on Points.
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
/H17075
Yes
Were the points paid in place of amounts that
ordinarily are separately stated on the
settlement sheet?
/H17074
/H17075
Yes
No
Chapter 23 Interest Expense Page 159

Page 162 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
deduct two points ($2,000) ratably over the life of Example 1. When you took out a $100,000 the mortgage insurance contract was issued in
the loan. He deducts $67 [($2,000 ÷  180 mortgage loan to buy your home in December, 2009. Contact the mortgage insurance issuer to
months) ×  6 payments] of the points in 2009. you were charged one point ($1,000). You meet determine the deductible amount if it is not re-
The other point ($1,000) was a fee for services all the tests for deducting points in the year paid, ported in box 4 of Form 1098.
and is not deductible. except the only funds you provided were a $750
Special rules for prepaid mortgage insur-down payment. Of the $1,000 charged for
ance. Generally, if you paid premiums forExample 2. The facts are the same as in points, you can deduct $750 in the year paid.
qualified mortgage insurance that are allocableExample 1, except that Bill used $25,000 of the You spread the remaining $250 over the life of
to periods after the close of the tax year, suchloan proceeds to improve his home and $75,000 the mortgage.
premiums are treated as paid in the period toto repay his existing mortgage. Bill deducts 25%
which they are allocated. You must allocate the($25,000 ÷  $100,000) of the points ($2,000) in Example 2. The facts are the same as in
premiums over the shorter of the stated term of2009. His deduction is $500 ($2,000 ×  25%). Example 1, except that the person who sold you
the mortgage or 84 months, beginning with theBill also deducts the ratable part of the re- your home also paid one point ($1,000) to help
month the insurance was obtained. No deduc-maining $1,500 ($2,000 − $500) that must be you get your mortgage. In the year paid, you can
tion is allowed for the unamortized balance if thespread over the life of the loan. This is $50 deduct $1,750 ($750 of the amount you were
mortgage is satisfied before its term. This para-[($1,500 ÷  180 months) ×  6 payments] in 2009. charged plus the $1,000 paid by the seller). You
graph does not apply to qualified mortgage in-The total amount Bill deducts in 2009 is $550 spread the remaining $250 over the life of the
surance provided by the Department of($500 + $50). mortgage. You must reduce the basis of your
Veterans Affairs or the Rural Housing Service.home by the $1,000 paid by the seller.
See the Example below.Excess points. If you meet all the tests inSpecial Situations Deduction Allowed in Year Paid, earlier, except Example. Ryan purchased a home in Maythat the points paid were more than generallyThis section describes certain special situations of 2009 and financed the home with a 15-yearpaid in your area (test (3)), you deduct in thethat may affect your deduction of points. mortgage. Ryan also prepaid all of the $9,240 inyear paid only the points that are generally private mortgage insurance required at the timecharged. You must spread any additional pointsOriginal issue discount. If you do not qualify of closing in May. Since the $9,240 in privateover the life of the mortgage.to either deduct the points in the year paid or mortgage insurance is allocable to periods afterdeduct them ratably over the life of the loan, or if 2009, Ryan must allocate the $9,240 over theMortgage ending early. If you spread youryou choose not to use either of these methods, shorter of the life of the mortgage or 84 months.deduction for points over the life of the mort-the points reduce the issue price of the loan. Ryan's adjusted gross income (AGI) for 2009 isgage, you can deduct any remaining balance inThis reduction results in original issue discount, $76,000. Ryan can deduct $880 ($9,240 ÷  84 ×the year the mortgage ends. However, if youwhich is discussed in chapter 4 of Publication 8 months) for qualified mortgage insurance pre-refinance the mortgage with the same lender,535. miums in 2009. For 2010, Ryan can deductyou cannot deduct any remaining balance of
$1,320 ($9,240 ÷  84 ×  12 months) if his AGI isspread points. Instead, deduct the remainingAmounts charged for services. Amounts $100,000 or less.balance over the term of the new loan.charged by the lender for specific services con-
In this example, the mortgage insurance pre-A mortgage may end early due to a prepay-nected to the loan are not interest. Examples of
miums are allocated over 84 months, which isment, refinancing, foreclosure, or similar event.these charges are:
shorter than the life of the mortgage of 15 years
• Appraisal fees, (180 months).Example. Dan paid $3,000 in points in 1998
that he had to spread out over the 15-year life of• Notary fees, and Limit on deduction. If your adjusted grossthe mortgage. He deducts $200 points per year.
• Preparation costs for the mortgage note or income on Form 1040, line 38, is more thanThrough 2008, Dan has deducted $2,200 of the
deed of trust. $100,000 ($50,000 if your filing status is marriedpoints.
filing separately), the amount of your mortgageDan prepaid his mortgage in full in 2009. HeYou cannot deduct these amounts as points insurance premiums that are otherwise deducti-can deduct the remaining $800 of points in 2009.either in the year paid or over the life of the ble is reduced and may be eliminated. See Linemortgage. Limits on deduction. You cannot fully deduct 13 in the instructions for Schedule A (Form
points paid on a mortgage unless the mortgage 1040) and complete the Qualified Mortgage In-Points paid by the seller. The term ªpointsº fits into one of the categories listed earlier under surance Premiums Deduction Worksheet to fig-includes loan placement fees that the seller Fully deductible interest. See Publication 936 for ure the amount you can deduct. If your adjustedpays to the lender to arrange financing for the details. gross income is more than $109,000 ($54,500 ifbuyer. married filing separately), you cannot deduct
Treatment by seller. The seller cannot de- your mortgage insurance premiums.Mortgage Insuranceduct these fees as interest. But they are a selling
Premiumsexpense that reduces the amount realized by Form 1098, Mortgagethe seller. See chapter 15  for information on
You can treat amounts you paid during 2009 forselling your home. Interest Statementqualified mortgage insurance as home mort-
Treatment by buyer. The buyer reduces gage interest. The insurance must be in connec- If you paid $600 or more of mortgage interestthe basis of the home by the amount of the tion with home acquisition debt and the (including certain points and mortgage insur-seller-paid points and treats the points as if he or insurance contract must have been issued after ance premiums) during the year on any oneshe had paid them. If all the tests under Deduc- 2006. mortgage, you generally will receive a Formtion Allowed in Year Paid , earlier, are met, the 1098 or a similar statement from the mortgageQualified mortgage insurance. Qualifiedbuyer can deduct the points in the year paid. If holder. You will receive the statement if you paymortgage insurance is mortgage insurance pro-any of those tests are not met, the buyer deducts interest to a person (including a financial institu-vided by the Department of Veterans Affairs, thethe points over the life of the loan. tion or a cooperative housing corporation) in theFederal Housing Administration, or the RuralFor information about basis, see chapter 13. course of that person's trade or business. AHousing Service, and private mortgage insur-
governmental unit is a person for purposes ofFunds provided are less than points. If you ance (as defined in section 2 of the Homeown-
furnishing the statement.meet all the tests in Deduction Allowed in Year ers Protection Act of 1998 as in effect on
The statement for each year should be sentPaid, earlier, except that the funds you provided December 20, 2006).
to you by January 31 of the following year. Awere less than the points charged to you (test Mortgage insurance provided by the Depart-
copy of this form will also be sent to the IRS.(6)), you can deduct the points in the year paid, ment of Veterans Affairs is commonly known as
up to the amount of funds you provided. In addi- a funding fee. If provided by the Rural Housing The statement will show the total interest you
tion, you can deduct any points paid by the Service, it is commonly known as a guarantee paid during the year, any mortgage insurance
seller. fee. These fees can be deducted fully in 2009 if premiums you paid, and if you purchased a main
Page 160 Chapter 23 Interest Expense

Page 163 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
home during the year, it also will show the de- Investment income of child reported on par-Allocation of Interestductible points paid during the year, including ent's return. Investment income includes the
Expenseseller-paid points. However, it should not show part of your child's interest and dividend income
any interest that was paid for you by a govern- that you choose to report on your return. If theIf you borrow money for business or personalment agency. child does not have qualified dividends, Alaskapurposes as well as for investment, you mustAs a general rule, Form 1098 will include Permanent Fund dividends, or capital gain distri-allocate the debt among those purposes. Onlyonly points that you can fully deduct in the year butions, this is the amount on line 6 of Formthe interest expense on the part of the debt usedpaid. However, certain points not included on 8814, Parents' Election To Report Child's Inter-for investment purposes is treated as invest-Form 1098 also may be deductible, either in the est and Dividends.ment interest. The allocation is not affected byyear paid or over the life of the loan. See Points,
the use of property that secures the debt.earlier, to determine whether you can deduct Child's qualified dividends. If part of the
points not shown on Form 1098. amount you report is your child's qualified divi-
dends, that part (which is reported on FormLimit on Deduction
Prepaid interest on Form 1098. If you pre- 1040, line 9b) generally does not count as in-
paid interest in 2009 that accrued in full by Janu- Generally, your deduction for investment inter- vestment income. However, you can choose to
ary 15, 2010, this prepaid interest may be est expense is limited to the amount of your net include all or part of it in investment income, asincluded in box 1 of Form 1098. However, you investment income. explained under Choosing to include qualifiedcannot deduct the prepaid amount for January You can carry over the amount of investment dividends, earlier.2010 in 2009. (See Prepaid interest , earlier.) interest that you could not deduct because of Your investment income also includes theYou will have to figure the interest that accrued this limit to the next tax year. The interest carried amount on Form 8814, line 12, (or, if applicable,for 2010 and subtract it from the amount in box over is treated as investment interest paid or the reduced amount figured next under Child's1. You will include the interest for January 2010 accrued in that next year.
with the other interest you pay for 2010. See Alaska Permanent Fund dividends).You can carry over disallowed investmentHow To Report, later. Child's Alaska Permanent Fund dividends.interest to the next tax year even if it is more than
your taxable income in the year the interest was If part of the amount you report is your child'sRefunded interest. If you received a refund of paid or accrued. Alaska Permanent Fund dividends, that partmortgage interest you overpaid in an earlier
does not count as investment income. To figureyear, you generally will receive a Form 1098
the amount of your child's income that you canshowing the refund in box 3. See Refunds of Net Investment Income consider your investment income, start with theinterest, earlier.
amount on Form 8814, line 6. Multiply thatDetermine the amount of your net investmentMortgage insurance premiums. The amount amount by a percentage that is equal to theincome by subtracting your investment ex-of mortgage insurance premiums you paid dur- Alaska Permanent Fund dividends divided bypenses (other than interest expense) from youring 2009 may be shown in box 4 of Form 1098. the total amount on Form 8814, line 4. Subtractinvestment income.See Mortgage Insurance Premiums, earlier. the result from the amount on Form 8814, line
12.Investment income. This generally includes
your gross income from property held for invest- Child's capital gain distributions. If partment (such as interest, dividends, annuities, and of the amount you report is your child's capitalroyalties). Investment income does not includeInvestment Interest gain distributions, that part (which is reported onAlaska Permanent Fund dividends. It also does Schedule D, line 13, or Form 1040, line 13)not include qualified dividends or net capital gainThis section discusses interest expenses you generally does not count as investment income.unless you choose to include them.may be able to deduct as an investor.
However, you can choose to include all or part ofIf you borrow money to buy property you hold Choosing to include qualified dividends. it in investment income, as explained in Choos-for investment, the interest you pay is invest- Investment income generally does not include ing to include net capital gain, earlier.ment interest. You can deduct investment inter- qualified dividends, discussed in chapter 8.est subject to the limit discussed later. However, Your investment income also includes theHowever, you can choose to include all or part ofyou cannot deduct interest you incurred to pro- amount on Form 8814, line 12 (or, if applicable,your qualified dividends in investment income.duce tax-exempt income. Nor can you deduct the reduced amount figured under Child'sYou make this choice by completing Forminterest expenses on straddles. Alaska Permanent Fund dividends, earlier).4952, line 4g, according to its instructions.Investment interest does not include any
If you choose to include any amount of yourqualified home mortgage interest or any interest
Investment expenses. Investment expensesqualified dividends in investment income, youtaken into account in computing income or loss
must reduce your qualified dividends that are are your allowed deductions (other than interestfrom a passive activity.
eligible for the lower capital gains tax rates by expense) directly connected with the production
the same amount. of investment income. Investment expensesInvestment Property that are included as a miscellaneous itemizedChoosing to include net capital gain. In-
deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040), are al-Property held for investment includes property vestment income generally does not include net
lowable deductions after applying the 2% limitthat produces interest, dividends, annuities, or capital gain from disposing of investment prop-
that applies to miscellaneous itemized deduc-royalties not derived in the ordinary course of a erty (including capital gain distributions from mu-
trade or business. It also includes property that tions. Use the smaller of:tual funds). However, you can choose to include
produces gain or loss (not derived in the ordi- all or part of your net capital gain in investment • The investment expenses included onnary course of a trade or business) from the sale income. Schedule A (Form 1040), line 23, oror trade of property producing these types of You make this choice by completing Form
income or held for investment (other than an • The amount on Schedule A, line 27.4952, line 4g, according to its instructions.
interest in a passive activity). Investment prop- If you choose to include any amount of yourerty also includes an interest in a trade or busi- net capital gain in investment income, you must Losses from passive activities. Income orness activity in which you did not materially reduce your net capital gain that is eligible for expenses that you used in computing income orparticipate (other than a passive activity). the lower capital gains tax rates by the same loss from a passive activity are not included in
amount. determining your investment income or invest-Partners, shareholders, and beneficiaries.
ment expenses (including investment interestBefore making either choice, considerTo determine your investment interest, combine
expense). See Publication 925, Passive Activitythe overall effect on your tax liability.your share of investment interest from a partner-
and At-Risk Rules, for information about passiveCompare your tax if you make one orship, S corporation, estate, or trust with your
TIP
activities.both of these choices with your tax if you do not.other investment interest.
Chapter 23 Interest Expense Page 161

Page 164 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form 4952 Table 23-1.  Where To Deduct Your Interest Expense
Use Form 4952, Investment Interest Expense AND for moreDeduction, to figure your deduction for invest- IF you have ... THEN deduct it on ... information go to ...ment interest.
deductible student loan interest Form 1040, line 33, or Publication 970.
Form 1040A, line 18Exception to use of Form 4952. You do not
deductible home mortgage interest and Schedule A (Form 1040), Publication 936.have to complete Form 4952 or attach it to your
points reported on Form 1098 line 10return if you meet all of the following tests.
deductible home mortgage interest not Schedule A (Form 1040), Publication 936.• Your investment interest expense is not
reported on Form 1098 line 11more than your investment income from
interest and ordinary dividends minus any deductible points not reported on Form Schedule A (Form 1040), Publication 936.
qualified dividends. 1098 line 12
• You do not have any other deductible in- deductible mortgage insurance Schedule A (Form 1040), Publication 936.
premiums line 13vestment expenses.
• You have no carryover of investment inter- deductible investment interest (other Schedule A (Form 1040), Publication 550.
than incurred to produce rents or line 14est expense from 2008.
royalties)If you meet all of these tests, you can deduct all
deductible business interest (non-farm) Schedule C or C-EZ (Form Publication 535.of your investment interest.
1040)
More Information deductible farm business interest Schedule F (Form 1040) Publications 225 and 535.
For more information on investment interest, deductible interest incurred to produce Schedule E (Form 1040) Publications 527 and 535.
rents or royaltiessee Interest Expenses in chapter 3 of Publica-
tion 550. personal interest not deductible.
You may be able to deduct interest you  Deduct home mortgage interest that was not
pay on a qualified student loan. For reported to you on Form 1098 on Schedule AItems You
details, see  Publication 970, Tax Ben- (Form 1040), line 11. If you paid home mortgage
TIP
efits for Education. interest to the person from whom you boughtCannot Deduct
your home, show that person's name, address,
and taxpayer identification number (TIN) on theSome interest payments are not deductible.
dotted lines next to line 11. The seller must giveCertain expenses similar to interest also are not you this number and you must give the sellerdeductible. Nondeductible expenses include the Allocation of Interest your TIN. A Form W-9, Request for Taxpayerfollowing items. Identification Number and Certification, can be
If you use the proceeds of a loan for more than• Personal interest (discussed later). used for this purpose. Failure to meet any of
one purpose (for example, personal and busi- these requirements may result in a $50 penalty• Service charges (however, see Other Ex- ness), you must allocate the interest on the loan for each failure. The TIN can be either a socialpenses in chapter 28). to each use. However, you do not have to allo- security number, an individual taxpayer identifi-
cate home mortgage interest if it is fully deducti- cation number (issued by the Internal Revenue• Annual fees for credit cards. 
ble, regardless of how the funds are used. Service), or an employer identification number.• Loan fees. See Social Security Number  in chapter 1 forYou allocate interest (other than fully deduct-
more information about TINs.• Credit investigation fees. ible home mortgage interest) on a loan in the
same way as the loan itself is allocated. You do If you can take a deduction for points that• Interest to purchase or carry tax-exempt this by tracing disbursements of the debt pro- were not reported to you on Form 1098, deductsecurities. ceeds to specific uses. For details on how to do those points on Schedule A (Form 1040), line
this, see chapter 4 of Publication 535. 12.
Penalties. You cannot deduct fines and pen- Deduct mortgage insurance premiums on
alties paid to a government for violations of law, Schedule A (Form 1040), line 13.
regardless of their nature.
More than one borrower. If you and at
How To Report least one other person (other than your spouse if
Personal Interest you file a joint return) were liable for and paid
You must file Form 1040 to deduct any home interest on a mortgage that was for your home,Personal interest is not deductible. Personal in- mortgage interest expense on your tax return. and the other person received a Form 1098
terest is any interest that is not home mortgage Where you deduct your interest expense gener- showing the interest that was paid during the
interest, investment interest, business interest, ally depends on how you use the loan proceeds. year, attach a statement to your return explain-
or other deductible interest. It includes the fol- See Table 23-1 for a summary of where to de- ing this. Show how much of the interest each of
duct your interest expense.lowing items. you paid, and give the name and address of the
person who received the form. Deduct your• Interest on car loans (unless you use the share of the interest on Schedule A (FormHome mortgage interest and points. Deductcar for business). 1040), line 11, and print ªSee attachedº next tothe home mortgage interest and points reported
• Interest on federal, state, or local income the line. Also, deduct your share of any qualifiedto you on Form 1098 on Schedule A (Form
mortgage insurance premiums on Schedule Atax. 1040), line 10. If you paid more deductible inter-
(Form 1040), line 13.est to the financial institution than the amount• Finance charges on credit cards, retail in- shown on Form 1098, show the larger deducti- Similarly, if you are the payer of record on astallment contracts, and revolving charge ble amount on line 10. Attach a statement ex- mortgage on which there are other borrowersaccounts incurred for personal expenses. plaining the difference and print ªSee attachedº entitled to a deduction for the interest shown on
next to line 10.• Late payment charges by a public utility. the Form 1098 you received, deduct only your
Page 162 Chapter 23 Interest Expense

Page 165 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
share of the interest on Schedule A (Form Types of Qualified1040), line 10. You should let each of the other
Introduction Organizationsborrowers know what his or her share is.
This chapter explains how to claim a deductionMortgage proceeds used for business or Generally, only the five following types of organi-for your charitable contributions. It discusses theinvestment. If your home mortgage interest zations can be qualified organizations.following topics.deduction is limited, but all or part of the mort-
gage proceeds were used for business, invest- 1. A community chest, corporation, trust,• Organizations that are qualified to receivement, or other deductible activities, see Table fund, or foundation organized or created indeductible charitable contributions.23-1. It shows where to deduct the part of your or under the laws of the United States, any
• The types of contributions you can deduct.excess interest that is for those activities. state, the District of Columbia, or any pos-
session of the United States (including• How much you can deduct.Investment interest. Deduct investment in- Puerto Rico). It must be organized and op-
• What records to keep.terest, subject to certain limits discussed in Pub- erated only for one or more of the following
lication 550, on Schedule A (Form 1040), line purposes.• How to report your charitable contribu-14. tions. a. Religious.
Amortization of bond premium. There are b. Charitable.A charitable contribution is a donation or giftvarious ways to treat the premium you pay to
to, or for the use of, a qualified organization. It isbuy taxable bonds. See Bond Premium Amorti- c. Educational.
voluntary and is made without getting, or expect-zation in Publication 550. d. Scientific.ing to get, anything of equal value.
Income-producing rental or royalty interest. e. Literary.
Deduct interest on a loan for income-producing Form 1040 required. To deduct a charitable f. The prevention of cruelty to children orrental or royalty property that is not used in your contribution, you must file Form 1040 and item- animals.business in Part I of Schedule E (Form 1040). ize deductions on Schedule A. The amount of Certain organizations that foster nationalyour deduction may be limited if certain rulesExample. You rent out part of your home or international amateur sports competitionand limits explained in this chapter apply to you.and borrow money to make repairs. You can also qualify.deduct only the interest payment for the rented
2. War veterans' organizations, includingpart in Part I of Schedule E (Form 1040). Deduct Useful Items
posts, auxiliaries, trusts, or foundations, or-the rest of the interest payment on Schedule A You may want to see: ganized in the United States or any of its(Form 1040) if it is deductible home mortgage
possessions.interest. Publication
3. Domestic fraternal societies, orders, and❏ 78 Cumulative List of Organizations associations operating under the lodge sys-
tem.❏ 526 Charitable Contributions
Note. Your contribution to this type of❏ 561 Determining the Value of Donated organization is deductible only if it is to beProperty used solely for charitable, religious, scien-
24. tific, literary, or educational purposes, or forForm (and Instructions) the prevention of cruelty to children or ani-
mals. ❏ Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized
Deductions 4. Certain nonprofit cemetery companies orContributions
❏ 8283 Noncash Charitable Contributions corporations.
 Note. Your contribution to this type of
organization is not deductible if it can be
What's New used for the care of a specific lot or mauso-
leum crypt. 
Expired provisions. The following provisions Organizations That 5. The United States or any state, the Districthave expired and will not apply for 2009. of Columbia, a U.S. possession (includingQualify To Receive• The higher standard mileage rate and ex- Puerto Rico), a political subdivision of a
clusion for mileage reimbursements if you state or U.S. possession, or an Indian tribalDeductibleused your car to provide relief related to government or any of its subdivisions that
Midwestern disaster areas. perform substantial government functions.
Contributions Note. To be deductible, your contribution• Temporary suspension of the 50% limit
to this type of organization must be madeand the overall limit on itemized deduc- You can deduct your contributions only if you solely for public purposes. tions for Midwestern disaster area contri- make them to a qualified organization. To be-butions. come a qualified organization, most organiza-
Examples.   The following list gives some ex-• Special rule for donations of food inven- tions other than churches and governments, as amples of qualified organizations.tory by farmers and ranchers. described below, must apply to the IRS. 
• Churches, a convention or association ofYou can ask any organization whether churches, temples, synagogues,it is a qualified organization, and most mosques, and other religious organiza-will be able to tell you. Or you can
TIP tions.check IRS Publication 78, which lists most quali-Reminders • Most nonprofit charitable organizationsfied organizations. You may find Publication 78
such as the Red Cross and the Unitedin your local library's reference section. Or youLimit on itemized deductions. If your ad- Way. can find it on the Internet at apps.irs.gov/app/justed gross income is more than $166,800
pub78 . You can also call the IRS at($83,400 if you are married filing separately), the • Most nonprofit educational organizations,
1-877-829-5500 to find out if an organization isoverall amount of your itemized deductions may including the Boy (and Girl) Scouts of
qualified. (For TTY/TDD help, callbe limited. See chapter 29 for more information America, colleges, museums, and daycare
1-800-829-4059).about this limit. centers if substantially all the child care
Chapter 24 Contributions Page 163

Page 166 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example 1. You pay $65 for a ticket to aTable 24-1. Examples of Charitable ContributionsÐA Quick Check
dinner-dance at a church. All of the proceeds of
the function go to the church. The ticket to theUse the following lists for a quick check of contributions you can or cannot deduct. See the
dinner-dance has a fair market value of $25.rest of this chapter for more information and additional rules and limits that may apply.
When you buy your ticket, you know that its
Deductible As Not Deductible value is less than your payment. To figure the
Charitable Contributions As Charitable Contributions amount of your charitable contribution, you sub-
tract the value of the benefit you receive ($25)Money or property you give to: Money or property you give to:
from your total payment ($65). You can deduct• Churches, synagogues, temples, • Civic leagues, social and sports clubs, $40 as a contribution to the church.mosques, and other religious labor unions, and chambers of
organizations commerce Example 2. At a fund-raising auction con-• Federal, state, and local governments, if • Foreign organizations (except certain ducted by a charity, you pay $600 for a week'syour contribution is solely for public Canadian, Israeli, and Mexican stay at a beach house. The amount you pay ispurposes (for example, a gift to reduce charities) no more than the fair rental value. You have notthe public debt) • Groups that are run for personal profit made a deductible charitable contribution.
• Nonprofit schools and hospitals • Groups whose purpose is to lobby for
• Public parks and recreation facilities law changes Athletic events. If you make a payment to, or
• Salvation Army, Red Cross, CARE, for the benefit of, a college or university and, as• Homeowners' associations
Goodwill Industries, United Way, Boy a result, you receive the right to buy tickets to an• Individuals
Scouts, Girl Scouts, Boys and Girls athletic event in the athletic stadium of the col-• Political groups or candidates forClubs of America, etc. lege or university, you can deduct 80% of thepublic office
payment as a charitable contribution.• War veterans groups • Cost of raffle, bingo, or lottery tickets
• Charitable organizations listed in If any part of your payment is for tickets• Dues, fees, or bills paid to countryPublication 78 (rather than the right to buy tickets), that part isclubs, lodges, fraternal orders, or
not deductible. In that case, subtract the price of• Expenses paid for a student living with similar groups
the tickets from your payment. 80% of the re-you, sponsored by a qualified • Tuition maining amount is a charitable contribution.organization • Value of your time or services• Out-of-pocket expenses when you serve • Value of blood given to a blood bank Example 1. You pay $300 a year for mem-a qualified organization as a volunteer
bership in an athletic scholarship program main-
tained by a university (a qualified organization).
The only benefit of membership is that you haveprovided is to enable individuals (the par- use of, a qualified organization. A gift or contri-
the right to buy one season ticket for a seat in aents) to be gainfully employed and the bution is ªfor the use ofº a qualified organization designated area of the stadium at the univer-services are available to the general pub- when it is held in a legally enforceable trust for sity's home football games. You can deductlic. However, if your contribution is a sub- the qualified organization or in a similar legal $240 (80% of $300) as a charitable contribution.stitute for tuition or other enrollment fee, it arrangement. The contributions must be made
is not deductible as a charitable contribu- to a qualified organization and not set aside for
tion, as explained later under Contribu- use by a specific person. Example 2. The facts are the same as intions You Cannot Deduct. Example 1 except that your $300 payment in-If you give property to a qualified organiza-
cluded the purchase of one season ticket for the• Nonprofit hospitals and medical research tion, you generally can deduct the fair market
stated ticket price of $120. You must subtractorganizations. value of the property at the time of the contribu-
the usual price of a ticket ($120) from your $300tion. See Contributions of Property, later in this• Utility company emergency energy pro- payment. The result is $180. Your deductiblechapter.grams, if the utility company is an agent charitable contribution is $144 (80% of $180).for a charitable organization that assists Your deduction for charitable contributions is
individuals with emergency energy needs. generally limited to 50% of your adjusted gross Charity benefit events. If you pay a qualifiedincome, but in some cases 20% and 30% limits organization more than fair market value for the• Nonprofit volunteer fire companies. may apply. See Limits on Deductions, later. right to attend a charity ball, banquet, show,• Public parks and recreation facilities. In addition, the total of your charitable contri- sporting event, or other benefit event, you can
butions deduction and certain other itemized deduct only the amount that is more than the• Civil defense organizations. 
value of the privileges or other benefits youdeductions may be limited. See chapter 29.
receive.Table 24-1 lists some examples of contribu-Certain foreign charitable organizations.  If there is an established charge for thetions you can deduct and some that you cannotUnder income tax treaties with Canada, Israel, event, that charge is the value of your benefit. Ifdeduct.and Mexico, you may be able to deduct contribu- there is no established charge, your contributiontions to certain Canadian, Israeli, or Mexican is that part of your payment that is more than thecharitable organizations. Generally, you must Contributions From reasonable value of the right to attend the event.have income from sources in that country. For Whether you use the tickets or other privilegesWhich You Benefitadditional information on the deduction of contri- has no effect on the amount you can deduct.butions to Canadian charities, see Publication However, if you return the ticket to the qualifiedIf you receive a benefit as a result of making a597, Information on the United States ±Canada organization for resale, you can deduct the en-contribution to a qualified organization, you canIncome Tax Treaty. If you need more informa- tire amount you paid for the ticket.deduct only the amount of your contribution thattion on how to figure your contribution to Mexi-
is more than the value of the benefit you receive.can and Israeli charities, see Publication 526. Even if the ticket or other evidence of
Also, see Contributions From Which You Benefit payment indicates that the payment is
under Contributions You Cannot Deduct, later. a ªcontribution,º this does not mean
CAUTION
!
you can deduct the entire amount. If the ticketIf you pay more than fair market value to a
shows the price of admission and the amount ofqualified organization for merchandise, goods,Contributions
the contribution, you can deduct the contributionor services, the amount you pay that is more
amount.than the value of the item can be a charitableYou Can Deduct
contribution. For the excess amount to qualify,
you must pay it with the intent to make a charita- Example. You pay $40 to see a specialGenerally, you can deduct your contributions of
showing of a movie for the benefit of a qualifiedmoney or property that you make to, or for the ble contribution.
Page 164 Chapter 24 Contributions

Page 167 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 24-2. Volunteers' Questions and Answers
If you do volunteer work for a qualified organization, the following questions and answers may apply to you. All of the rules explained in
this chapter also apply. See, in particular, Out-of-Pocket Expenses in Giving Services.
Question Answer
I do volunteer work 6 hours a week in the office of a qualified No, you cannot deduct the value of your time or services.
organization. The receptionist is paid $10 an hour to do the same
work I do. Can I deduct $60 a week for my time? 
The office is 30 miles from my home. Can I deduct any of my car Yes, you can deduct the costs of gas and oil that are directly related
expenses for these trips? to getting to and from the place where you are a volunteer. If you
don't want to figure your actual costs, you can deduct 14 cents for
each mile.
I volunteer as a Red Cross nurse's aide at a hospital. Can I deduct Yes, you can deduct the cost of buying and cleaning your uniforms
the cost of uniforms that I must wear? if the hospital is a qualified organization, the uniforms are not
suitable for everyday use, and you must wear them when
volunteering.
I pay a babysitter to watch my children while I do volunteer work for No, you cannot deduct payments for child care expenses as a
a qualified organization. Can I deduct these costs? charitable contribution, even if they are necessary so you can do
volunteer work for a qualified organization. (If you have child care
expenses so you can work for pay, see chapter 32.)
organization. Printed on the ticket is ªContribu- you received is not substantial and informs 1. Lives in your home under a written agree-
tionÐ$40.º If the regular price for the movie is you that you can deduct your payment in ment between you and a qualified organi-
$8, your contribution is $32 ($40 payment − $8 full. zation as part of a program of the
regular price). organization to provide educational oppor-
tunities for the student,Written statement. A qualified organizationMembership fees or dues. You may be able
must give you a written statement if you make a 2. Is not your relative or dependent, andto deduct membership fees or dues you pay to a
payment to it that is more than $75 and is partlyqualified organization. However, you can deduct 3. Is a full-time student in the twelfth or anya contribution and partly for goods or services.only the amount that is more than the value of lower grade at a school in the UnitedThe statement must tell you that you can deductthe benefits you receive. You cannot deduct States.only the amount of your payment that is moredues, fees, or assessments paid to country
than the value of the goods or services youclubs and other social organizations. They are You can deduct up to $50 a month forreceived. It must also give you a good faithnot qualified organizations. each full calendar month the studentestimate of the value of those goods or services. lives with you. Any month when condi-Certain membership benefits can be disre-
TIP The organization can give you the statement tions (1) through (3) above are met for 15 daysgarded. Both you and the organization can either when it solicits or when it receives the or more counts as a full month.disregard certain membership benefits you get payment from you.in return for an annual payment of $75 or less to For additional information, see Expenses
the qualified organization. The benefits that can Exception. An organization will not have to Paid for Student Living With You in Publication
be disregarded are: give you this statement if one of the following is 526.
true. Mutual exchange program. You cannot de-1. Any rights or privileges, other than those
duct the costs of a foreign student living in yourdiscussed under Athletic events, earlier, 1. The organization is:
home under a mutual exchange programthat you can use frequently while you are a
a. The type of organization described in through which your child will live with a family inmember, such as:
(5) under  Types of Qualified Organiza- a foreign country.
a. Free or discounted admission to the or- tions, earlier, or
ganization's facilities or events, b. Formed only for religious purposes, and Out-of-Pocket Expenses in
b. Free or discounted parking, the only benefit you receive is an intan- Giving Servicesgible religious benefit (such as admis-c. Preferred access to goods or services, sion to a religious ceremony) thatand Although you cannot deduct the value of yourgenerally is not sold in commercial services given to a qualified organization, youd. Discounts on the purchase of goods transactions outside the donative con- may be able to deduct some amounts you pay inand services. text. giving services to a qualified organization. The
amounts must be:2. Admission, while you are a member, to 2. You receive only items whose value is not
events that are open only to members of • Unreimbursed,substantial as described underToken
the organization, if the organization rea- items, earlier. • Directly connected with the services,sonably projects that the cost per person
3. You receive only membership benefits that(excluding any allocated overhead) is not • Expenses you had only because of the
can be disregarded, as described earlier.more than $9.50. services you gave, and
• Not personal, living, or family expenses.Token items. You can deduct your entire pay- Expenses Paid for Studentment to a qualified organization as a charitable Table 24-2 contains questions and answerscontribution if both of the following are true. Living With You that apply to some individuals who volunteer
their services.• You get a small item or other benefit of You may be able to deduct some expenses oftoken value. having a student live with you. You can deduct Conventions. If you are a chosen representa-
• The qualified organization correctly deter- qualifying expenses for a foreign or American tive attending a convention of a qualified organi-
mines that the value of the item or benefit student who: zation, you can deduct actual unreimbursed
Chapter 24 Contributions Page 165

Page 168 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
expenses for travel and transportation, including indirectly if you make a payment to the charita-
a reasonable amount for meals and lodging, ble organization and the organization pays for Contributionswhile away from home overnight in connection your travel expenses.
with the convention. However, see Travel, later. The deduction for travel expenses will not be You Cannot DeductYou cannot deduct personal expenses for denied simply because you enjoy providing
sightseeing, fishing parties, theater tickets, or services to the charitable organization. Even if There are some contributions you cannot de-nightclubs. You also cannot deduct transporta- you enjoy the trip, you can take a charitable duct, such as those made to specific individualstion, meals and lodging, and other expenses for contribution deduction for your travel expenses and those made to nonqualified organizations.your spouse or children. if you are on duty in a genuine and substantial (See Contributions to Individuals and Contribu- You cannot deduct your expenses in attend- sense throughout the trip. However, if you have tions to Nonqualified Organizations , next.)ing a church convention if you go only as a only nominal duties, or if for significant parts of There are others you can deduct only part of, asmember of your church rather than as a chosen the trip you do not have any duties, you cannot discussed later under Contributions From Whichrepresentative. You can deduct unreimbursed deduct your travel expenses. You Benefit.expenses that are directly connected with giving
Example 1. You are a troop leader for aservices for your church during the convention.
tax-exempt youth group and you help take the Contributions toUniforms. You can deduct the cost and up- group on a camping trip. You are responsible for Individualskeep of uniforms that are not suitable for every- overseeing the setup of the camp and for provid-
day use and that you must wear while ing adult supervision for other activities during You cannot deduct contributions to specific indi-performing donated services for a charitable or- the entire trip. You participate in the activities of viduals, including the following.ganization. the group and really enjoy your time with them.
• Contributions to fraternal societies madeYou oversee the breaking of camp and you helpFoster parents. You may be able to deduct as transport the group home. You can deduct your for the purpose of paying medical or buriala charitable contribution some of the costs of travel expenses. expenses of deceased members. being a foster parent (foster care provider) if you
• Contributions to individuals who are needyhave no profit motive in providing the foster care Example 2. You sail from one island to an- or worthy. This includes contributions to aand are not, in fact, making a profit. A qualified other and spend 8 hours a day counting whales qualified organization if you indicate thatorganization must designate the individuals you and other forms of marine life. The project is your contribution is for a specific person.take into your home for foster care. sponsored by a charitable organization. In most But you can deduct a contribution that youYou can deduct expenses that meet both of circumstances, you cannot deduct your ex- give to a qualified organization that in turnthe following requirements. penses. helps needy or worthy individuals if you do
1. They are unreimbursed out-of-pocket ex- not indicate that your contribution is for aExample 3. You work for several hourspenses to feed, clothe, and care for the specific person.each morning on an archaeological dig spon-foster child. Example. You can deduct contributionssored by a charitable organization. The rest of
for flood relief, hurricane relief, or other2. They must be mainly to benefit the quali- the day is free for recreation and sightseeing.
disaster relief to a qualified organization.fied organization. You cannot take a charitable contribution deduc-
However, you cannot deduct contributionstion even though you work very hard duringUnreimbursed expenses that you cannot de- earmarked for relief of a particular individ-those few hours.duct as charitable contributions may be consid- ual or family.ered support provided by you in determining Example 4. You spend the entire day at- • Payments to a member of the clergy thatwhether you can claim the foster child as a tending a charitable organization's regional can be spent as he or she wishes, such asdependent. For details, see chapter 3. meeting as a chosen representative. In the eve- for personal expenses. ning you go to the theater. You can claim yourExample.  You cared for a foster child be- • Expenses you paid for another person whotravel expenses as charitable contributions, butcause you wanted to adopt her, not to benefit the provided services to a qualified organiza-you cannot claim the cost of your evening at theagency that placed her in your home. Your un- tion.theater.reimbursed expenses are not deductible as
Example. Your son does missionary work.charitable contributions. Daily allowance (per diem). If you provide You pay his expenses. You cannot claim aservices for a charitable organization and re- deduction for your son's unreimbursed ex-Car expenses. You can deduct unreimbursed ceive a daily allowance to cover reasonable penses related to his contribution of serv-out-of-pocket expenses, such as the cost of gas travel expenses, including meals and lodging ices.and oil, that are directly related to the use of your while away from home overnight, you must in-car in giving services to a charitable organiza- clude in income the amount of the allowance • Payments to a hospital that are for a spe-tion. You cannot deduct general repair and that is more than your deductible travel ex- cific patient's care or for services for amaintenance expenses, depreciation, registra- penses. You can deduct your necessary travel specific patient. You cannot deduct thesetion fees, or the costs of tires or insurance. expenses that are more than the allowance. payments even if the hospital is operated  If you do not want to deduct your actual by a city, a state, or other qualified organi-Deductible travel expenses. These in-expenses, you can use a standard mileage rate zation. clude:of 14 cents a mile to figure your contribution.
You can deduct parking fees and tolls • Air, rail, and bus transportation,whether you use your actual expenses or the Contributions to• Out-of-pocket expenses for your car,standard mileage rate.
NonqualifiedYou must keep reliable written records of • Taxi fares or other costs of transportation
your car expenses. For more information, see between the airport or station and your OrganizationsCar expenses under Records To Keep, later. hotel,
You cannot deduct contributions to organiza-Travel. Generally, you can claim a charitable • Lodging costs, and tions that are not qualified to receivecontribution deduction for travel expenses nec- tax-deductible contributions, including the fol-• The cost of meals.essarily incurred while you are away from home lowing.performing services for a charitable organization Because these travel expenses are not busi-
only if there is no significant element of personal ness-related, they are not subject to the same 1. Certain state bar associations if:
pleasure, recreation, or vacation in the travel. limits as business-related expenses. For infor-
a. The state bar is not a political subdivi-This applies whether you pay the expenses di- mation on business travel expenses, see Travel
sion of a state,rectly or indirectly. You are paying the expenses Expenses in chapter 26.
Page 166 Chapter 24 Contributions

Page 169 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
b. The bar has private, as well as public, deduct any fixed amount you may be re- • Furniture and furnishings,
purposes, such as promoting the pro- quired to pay in addition to the tuition fee • Electronics,fessional interests of members, and to enroll in a private school, even if it is
• Appliances,designated as a ªdonation.º c. Your contribution is unrestricted and
• Linens, andcan be used for private purposes.
Value of Time or Services • Other similar items.2. Chambers of commerce and other busi-
ness leagues or organizations (but see You cannot deduct the value of your time or Household items do not include:chapter 28). services, including: • Food,
3. Civic leagues and associations. • Blood donations to the Red Cross or to • Paintings, antiques, and other objects ofblood banks, and4. Communist organizations. art,
• The value of income lost while you work • Jewelry and gems, and5. Country clubs and other social clubs. as an unpaid volunteer for a qualified or-
ganization. • Collections.6. Foreign organizations other than:
a. A U.S. organization that transfers funds Cars, boats, and airplanes. The followingPersonal Expensesto a charitable foreign organization if rules apply to any donation of a qualified vehicle.the U.S. organization controls the use A qualified vehicle is:You cannot deduct personal, living, or familyof the funds or if the foreign organiza- expenses, such as the following items. • A car or any motor vehicle manufacturedtion is only an administrative arm of the
mainly for use on public streets, roads,U.S. organization, or • The cost of meals you eat while you per-
and highways,form services for a qualified organizationb. Certain Canadian, Israeli, or Mexican unless it is necessary for you to be away • A boat, orcharitable organizations. See Certain from home overnight while performing theforeign charitable organizations under • An airplane.services.Organizations That Qualify To Receive
Deductible Contributions, earlier. • Adoption expenses, including fees paid to Deduction more than $500. If you donate a
an adoption agency and the costs of keep- qualified vehicle to a qualified organization and
ing a child in your home before adoption is7. Homeowners' associations. you claim a deduction of more than $500, you
final (but see Adoption Credit in chapter can deduct the smaller of:8. Labor unions (but see chapter 28). 37, and the instructions for Form 8839,
• The gross proceeds from the sale of theQualified Adoption Expenses). You also9. Political organizations and candidates. vehicle by the organization, ormay be able to claim an exemption for the
child. See Adopted child in chapter 3. • The vehicle's fair market value on the date
of the contribution. If the vehicle's fair mar-Contributions From ket value was more than your cost or other
Appraisal FeesWhich You Benefit basis, you may have to reduce the fair
market value to figure the deductibleFees that you pay to find the fair market value ofIf you receive or expect to receive a financial or amount, as described under Giving Prop-donated property are not deductible as contribu-economic benefit as a result of making a contri- erty That Has Increased in Value, later.tions (but see chapter 28).bution to a qualified organization, you cannot
deduct the part of the contribution that repre- Form 1098-C. You must attach to your re-
sents the value of the benefit you receive. See turn Copy B of the Form 1098-C, Contributions
Contributions From Which You Benefit  under of Motor Vehicles, Boats, and Airplanes, (or
Contributions You Can Deduct , earlier. These other statement containing the same informa-Contributionscontributions include the following. tion as Form 1098-C) you received from the
organization. The Form 1098-C (or other state-of Property• Contributions for lobbying. This includes
ment) will show the gross proceeds from theamounts that you earmark for use in, or in
sale of the vehicle.If you contribute property to a qualified organiza-connection with, influencing specific legis-
If you e-file your return, you must attachtion, the amount of your charitable contributionlation. 
Copy B of Form 1098-C to Form 8453 and mailis generally the fair market value of the property• Contributions to a retirement home that the forms to the IRS.at the time of the contribution. However, if theare clearly for room, board, maintenance, If you do not attach Form 1098-C (or otherproperty has increased in value, you may haveor admittance. Also, if the amount of your statement), you cannot deduct your contribu-to make some adjustments to the amount ofcontribution depends on the type or size of tion. You must get Form 1098-C (or other state-your deduction. See Giving Property That Hasapartment you will occupy, it is not a chari- ment) within 30 days of the sale of the vehicle.Increased in Value, later.table contribution. But if exception 1 or 2 (described next) applies,For information about the records you must
you must get Form 1098-C (or other statement)• Costs of raffles, bingo, lottery, etc. You keep and the information you must furnish with
within 30 days of your donation.cannot deduct as a charitable contribution your return if you donate property, see Records
amounts you pay to buy raffle or lottery To Keep and How To Report, later. Exceptions. There are two exceptions to thetickets or to play bingo or other games of rules just described for deductions of more thanchance. For information on how to report Clothing and household items. You cannot $500.gambling winnings and losses, see chap- take a deduction for clothing or household items
Exception 1Ðvehicle used or improved byters 12 and 28. you donate unless the clothing or household
organization. If the qualified organizationitems are in good used condition or better.• Dues to fraternal orders and similar makes a significant intervening use of or mate-groups. However, see Membership fees or Exception. You can take a deduction for a rial improvement to the vehicle before transfer-dues, earlier, under Contributions You contribution of an item of clothing or household ring it, and you claim a deduction of more thanCan Deduct. item that is not in good used condition or better if $500, you generally can deduct the vehicle's fairyou deduct more than $500 for it and include a• Tuition, or amounts you pay instead of tui- market value at the time of the contribution. Butqualified appraisal of it with your return.tion, even if you pay them for children to if the vehicle's fair market value was more than
attend parochial schools or qualifying non- Household items. Household items in- your cost or other basis, you may have to reduce
profit day-care centers. You also cannot clude: the fair market value to get the deductible
Chapter 24 Contributions Page 167

Page 170 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
amount, as described under Giving Property or been turned over to someone other than your- Giving Property Thatself, a related person, or a related organization.That Has Increased in Value , later. The Form
Has Decreased in Value1098-C (or other statement) will show whether Tangible personal property. This is anythis exception applies. property, other than land or buildings, that can If you contribute property with a fair market valuebe seen or touched. It includes furniture, books,Exception 2 Ðvehicle given or sold to that is less than your basis in it, your deduction isjewelry, paintings, and cars.needy individual. If the qualified organization limited to its fair market value. You cannot claimwill give the vehicle, or sell it for a price well a deduction for the difference between the prop-Future interest. This is any interest that isbelow fair market value, to a needy individual to erty's basis and its fair market value.to begin at some future time, regardless offurther the organization's charitable purpose, whether it is designated as a future interestand you claim a deduction of more than $500, under state law. Giving Property Thatyou generally can deduct the vehicle's fair mar-
ket value at the time of the contribution. But if the Has Increased in ValueDeterminingvehicle's fair market value was more than your
cost or other basis, you may have to reduce the If you contribute property with a fair market valueFair Market Value
fair market value to get the deductible amount, that is more than your basis in it, you may have
as described under Giving Property That Has to reduce the fair market value by the amount ofThis section discusses general guidelines for
Increased in Value, later. The Form 1098-C (or determining the fair market value of various appreciation (increase in value) when you figure
other statement) will show whether this excep- types of donated property. Publication 561 con- your deduction.
tion applies. tains a more complete discussion. Your basis in property is generally what you
Fair market value is the price at which prop-This exception does not apply if the organi- paid for it. See chapter 13  if you need more
erty would change hands between a willingzation sells the vehicle at auction. In that case, information about basis.
buyer and a willing seller, neither having to buyyou cannot deduct the vehicle's fair market Different rules apply to figuring your deduc-or sell, and both having reasonable knowledgevalue. tion, depending on whether the property is:of all the relevant facts.
• Ordinary income property, orExample. Anita donates a used car to a
Used clothing and household items. Gener-qualified organization. She bought it 3 years ago • Capital gain property.ally, the fair market value of used clothing andfor $9,000. A used car guide shows the fair
household goods is far less than its original cost.market value for this type of car is $6,000. How-
For used clothing, you should claim as the Ordinary income property. Property is ordi-ever, Anita gets a Form 1098-C from the organi-
value the price that buyers of used items actually nary income property if its sale at fair marketzation showing the car was sold for $2,900.
pay in used clothing stores, such as consign- value on the date it was contributed would haveNeither exception 1 nor exception 2 applies. If
ment or thrift shops. See Household Goods in resulted in ordinary income or in short-term capi-Anita itemizes her deductions, she can deduct
Publication 561 for information on the valuation tal gain. Examples of ordinary income property$2,900 for her donation. She must attach Form
of household goods, such as furniture, appli- are inventory, works of art created by the donor,1098-C and Form 8283 to her return.
ances, and linens. manuscripts prepared by the donor, and capitalDeduction $500 or less. If the qualified or- assets (defined in chapter 14 ) held 1 year organization sells the vehicle for $500 or less and Example. Dawn Greene donated a coat to a less.exceptions 1 and 2 do not apply, you can deduct thrift store operated by her church. She paid
the smaller of: Amount of deduction. The amount you$300 for the coat 3 years ago. Similar coats in
can deduct for a contribution of ordinary incomethe thrift store sell for $50. The fair market value• $500, or property is its fair market value minus theof the coat is reasonably determined to be $50.
• The vehicle's fair market value on the date amount that would be ordinary income orDawn's donation is limited to $50.
of the contribution. But if the vehicle's fair short-term capital gain if you sold the property
market value was more than your cost or Cars, boats, and airplanes. If you contribute for its fair market value. Generally, this rule limits
other basis, you may have to reduce the a car, boat, or airplane to a charitable organiza- the deduction to your basis in the property.
fair market value to get the deductible tion, you must determine its fair market value. 
amount, as described under Giving Prop- Certain commercial firms and trade organiza- Example. You donate stock that you held
erty That Has Increased in Value later. tions publish used car pricing guides, commonly for 5 months to your church. The fair market
called ªblue books,º containing complete dealer value of the stock on the day you donate it is
If the vehicle's fair market value is at least sale prices or dealer average prices for recent $1,000, but you paid only $800 (your basis).
$250 but not more than $500, you must have a model years. The guides may be published Because the $200 of appreciation would be
written statement from the qualified organization monthly or seasonally and for different regions short-term capital gain if you sold the stock, your
acknowledging your donation. The statement of the country. These guides also provide esti- deduction is limited to $800 (fair market value
must contain the information and meet the tests mates for adjusting for unusual equipment, unu- minus the appreciation).for an acknowledgment described under Deduc- sual mileage, and physical condition. The prices
tions of At Least $250 But Not More Than $500 are not ªofficialº and these publications are not Capital gain property. Property is capitalunder Records To Keep, later. considered an appraisal of any specific donated gain property if its sale at fair market value onproperty. But they do provide clues for making the date of the contribution would have resultedan appraisal and suggest relative prices forPartial interest in property. Generally, you in long-term capital gain. It includes capital as-comparison with current sales and offerings incannot deduct a charitable contribution of less sets held more than 1 year, as well as certainyour area.than your entire interest in property. real property and depreciable property used in
your trade or business and, generally, held moreRight to use property. A contribution of the Example. You donate a used car in poor than 1 year.right to use property is a contribution of less than condition to a local high school for use by stu-your entire interest in that property and is not dents studying car repair. A used car guide Amount of deduction Ð general rule.deductible. For exceptions and more informa- shows the dealer retail value for this type of car When figuring your deduction for a gift of capitaltion, see Partial Interest in Property Not in Trust in poor condition is $1,600. However, the guide gain property, you generally can use the fairin Publication 561. shows the price for a private party sale of the car market value of the gift.
is only $750. The fair market value of the car is Exceptions. In certain situations, you mustFuture interests in tangible personal prop- considered to be $750. reduce the fair market value by any amount thaterty. You may be able to deduct the value of a
would have been long-term capital gain if youcharitable contribution of a future interest in tan- Large quantities. If you contribute a large
had sold the property for its fair market value.gible personal property only after all intervening number of the same item, fair market value is the
interests in and rights to the actual possession Generally, this means reducing the fair marketprice at which comparable numbers of the item
or enjoyment of the property have either expired are being sold. value to the property's cost or other basis.
Page 168 Chapter 24 Contributions

Page 171 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Bargain sales. A bargain sale of property to a of your adjusted gross income, depending on does not apply when you choose to reduce the
qualified organization (a sale or exchange for the type of property you give and the type of fair market value of the property by the amount
less than the property's fair market value) is organization you give it to. A different limit ap- that would have been long-term capital gain if
partly a charitable contribution and partly a sale plies to certain qualified conservation contribu- you had sold the property. Instead, only the 50%
or exchange. A bargain sale may result in a tions. These limits are described here. limit applies.
taxable gain. If your contributions are more than any of the
Two separate 30% limits. This special 30%limits that apply, see Carryovers, later.
limit for capital gain property is separate from theMore information. For more information on
other 30% limit. Therefore, the deduction of adonated appreciated property, see Giving Prop- 50% Limit contribution subject to one 30% limit does noterty That Has Increased in Value in Publication
reduce the amount you can deduct for contribu-526. This limit applies to the total of all charitable tions subject to the other 30% limit. However,contributions you make during the year. This the total you deduct cannot be more than 50% ofmeans that your deduction for charitable contri- your adjusted gross income.butions cannot be more than 50% of your ad-
When To Deduct justed gross income for the year. Example. Your adjusted gross income isGenerally, the 50% limit is the only limit that $50,000. During the year, you gave capital gainYou can deduct your contributions only in the applies to gifts to organizations listed below property with a fair market value of $15,000 to ayear you actually make them in cash or other under 50% limit organizations. But there is one 50% limit organization. You do not choose toproperty (or in a later carryover year, as ex- exception. A special 30% limit also applies to reduce the property's fair market value by itsplained later under Carryovers). This applies these gifts if they are gifts of capital gain prop- appreciation in value. You also gave $10,000whether you use the cash or an accrual method erty for which you figure your deduction using cash to a qualified organization that is not a 50%of accounting. fair market value without reduction for apprecia- limit organization. The $15,000 gift of property istion. (See Special 30% Limit for Capital Gain subject to the special 30% limit. The $10,000Time of making contribution. Usually, you Property, later.) cash gift is subject to the other 30% limit. Bothmake a contribution at the time of its uncondi-
gifts are fully deductible because neither is more50% limit organizations. You can ask anytional delivery.
than the 30% limit that applies ($15,000 in eachorganization whether it is a 50% limit organiza-
Checks. A check that you mail to a charity is case) and together they are not more than thetion and most will be able to tell you. Or you may
considered delivered on the date you mail it. 50% limit ($25,000).check IRS Publication 78 or call the IRS at
1-877-829-5500 (TTY/TDD 1-800-829-4059). For more information, see the rules for elect-Credit card.  Contributions charged on your
The following is a partial list of the types of ing the 50% limit for capital gain property undercredit card are deductible in the year you make
organizations that are 50% limit organizations. How To Figure Your Deduction When Limitsthe charge.
Apply in Publication 526.• Churches and conventions or associationsPay-by-phone account.  If you use a
of churches. pay-by-phone account, the date you make a
20% Limitcontribution is the date the financial institution • Educational organizations with a regular
pays the amount. This date should be shown on faculty and curriculum that normally have This limit applies to all gifts of capital gain prop-the statement the financial institution sends to a regularly enrolled student body attending erty to or for the use of qualified organizationsyou. classes on site. (other than gifts of capital gain property to 50%
Stock certificate. A gift to a charity of a limit organizations).• Hospitals and certain medical research or-
properly endorsed stock certificate is completed ganizations associated with these hospi-
on the date of mailing or other delivery to the tals. Qualified Conservationcharity or to the charity's agent. However, if you
• Publicly supported charities.give a stock certificate to your agent or to the Contribution
issuing corporation for transfer to the name of
the charity, your gift is not completed until the The special 30% limit does not apply to qualified
30% Limitdate the stock is transferred on the books of the conservation contributions (QCCs). Instead, a
corporation. 50% limit applies. For qualified farmers andA 30% limit applies to the following gifts. ranchers, QCCs are deductible up to 100% ofPromissory note. If you issue and deliver a adjusted gross income. See Publication 526 for• Gifts to all qualified organizations otherpromissory note to a charitable organization as details.than 50% limit organizations. This includesa contribution, it is not a contribution until you gifts to veterans' organizations, fraternalmake the note payments. societies, nonprofit cemeteries, and cer- CarryoversOption.  If you grant an option to buy real tain private nonoperating foundations.
property at a bargain price to a charitable organi- You can carry over your contributions that you• Gifts for the use of any organization.zation, you cannot take a deduction until the are not able to deduct in the current year be-organization exercises the option. However, if these gifts are of capital gain prop- cause they exceed your adjusted-gross-income
erty, they are subject to the 20% limit, described limits. You can deduct the excess in each of theBorrowed funds. If you make a contribu- later, rather than the 30% limit. next 5 years until it is used up, but not beyondtion with borrowed funds, you can deduct the
that time. For more information, see Carryoverscontribution in the year you make it, regardless Student living with you. Amounts you spend in Publication 526.of when you repay the loan. on behalf of a student living with you are subject
to the 30% limit. These amounts are considered
a contribution for the use of a qualified organiza-
tion. See Expenses Paid for Student Living With
Limits on Deductions Records To KeepYou, earlier.
If your total contributions for the year are 20% or You must keep records to prove the amount ofSpecial 30% Limit forless of your adjusted gross income, you do not the contributions you make during the year. The
need to read the rest of this section. The limits kind of records you must keep depends on theCapital Gain Property
discussed in the rest of this section do not apply amount of your contributions and whether they
to you. A special 30% limit applies to gifts of capital gain are:
The amount of your deduction for charitable property to 50% limit organizations. (For gifts of • Cash contributions,contributions is limited to 50% of your adjusted capital gain property to other organizations, see
gross income and may be limited to 30% or 20% 20% Limit, later.) However, the special 30% limit • Noncash contributions, or
Chapter 24 Contributions Page 169

Page 172 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Out-of-pocket expenses when donating If contributions are made by payroll deduc- contribution, you must also have another docu-
your services. tion, the deduction from each paycheck is ment that does show the date of the contribution.
treated as a separate contribution. If the pay stub, Form W-2, pledge card, or other
document does show the date of the contribu-If you made a payment that is partly for
Note. An organization generally must give tion, you do not need any other records exceptgoods and services, as described earlier under
you a written statement if it receives a payment those just described in (1) and (2).Contributions From Which You Benefit , your
from you that is more than $75 and is partly a contribution is the amount of the payment that iscontribution and partly for goods or services. more than the value of the goods and services. Noncash Contributions(See Contributions From Which You Benefit
under Contributions You Can Deduct , earlier.) Acknowledgment. The acknowledgment For a contribution not made in cash, the recordsKeep the statement for your records. It may must meet these tests. you must keep depend on whether your deduc-satisfy all or part of the recordkeeping require- tion for the contribution is:ments explained in the following discussions. 1. It must be written.
1. Less than $250,2. It must include:
Cash Contributions 2. At least $250 but not more than $500,a. The amount of cash you contributed,
Cash contributions include those paid by cash, 3. Over $500 but not more than $5,000, orb. Whether the qualified organization gavecheck, electronic funds transfer, credit card, or 4. Over $5,000.you any goods or services as a result ofpayroll deduction.
your contribution (other than certain to-You cannot deduct a cash contribution, re-
ken items and membership benefits),gardless of the amount, unless you keep one of Amount of deduction. In figuring whether
the following. your deduction is $500 or more, combine yourc. A description and good faith estimate of
claimed deductions for all similar items of prop-the value of any goods or services de-1. A bank record that shows the name of the scribed in (b) (other than intangible re- erty donated to any charitable organization dur-qualified organization, the date of the con- ligious benefits), and ing the year.tribution, and the amount of the contribu-
If you received goods or services in return,tion. Bank records may include: d. A statement that the only benefit you
as described earlier in Contributions Fromreceived was an intangible religiousa. A canceled check, Which You Benefit, reduce your contribution bybenefit, if that was the case. The ac-
the value of those goods or services. If youknowledgment does not need to de-b. A bank or credit union statement, or figure your deduction by reducing the fair marketscribe or estimate the value of anc. A credit card statement. value of the donated property by its apprecia-intangible religious benefit. An intangi-
tion, as described earlier in Giving Property Thatble religious benefit is a benefit that2. A receipt (or a letter or other written com- Has Increased in Value, your contribution is thegenerally is not sold in commercialmunication) from the qualified organization reduced amount.transactions outside a donative (gift)showing the name of the organization, the context. An example is admission to adate of the contribution, and the amount of religious ceremony.the contribution. Deductions of Less Than $250
3. The payroll deduction records described 3. You must get it on or before the earlier of: If you make any noncash contribution, you mustnext. get and keep a receipt from the charitable organ-a. The date you file your return for the
ization showing:year you make the contribution, orPayroll deductions. If you make a contribu-
b. The due date, including extensions, fortion by payroll deduction, you must keep: 1. The name of the charitable organization,
filing the return. 2. The date and location of the charitable1. A pay stub, Form W-2, or other document
contribution, andfurnished by your employer that shows the If the acknowledgment does not show the
date and amount of the contribution, and date of the contribution, you must also have a 3. A reasonably detailed description of the
bank record or receipt, as described earlier, that property.2. A pledge card or other document prepared
does show the date of the contribution. If theby or for the qualified organization that
acknowledgment does show the date of the con- A letter or other written communicationshows the name of the organization.
tribution and meets the other tests just de- from the charitable organization ac-If your employer withheld $250 or more from a scribed, you do not need any other records. knowledging receipt of the contribution
TIPsingle paycheck, see Contributions of $250 or and containing the information in (1), (2), and (3)More, next. will serve as a receipt.Payroll deductions. If you make a contribu-
tion by payroll deduction and your employer You are not required to have a receipt where
withheld $250 or more from a single paycheck, it is impractical to get one (for example, if youContributions of $250 or More you must keep: leave property at a charity's unattended drop
site).You can claim a deduction for a contribution of 1. A pay stub, Form W-2, or other document$250 or more only if you have an acknowledg- furnished by your employer that shows thement of your contribution from the qualified or- Additional records. You must also keep reli-amount withheld as a contribution, andganization or certain payroll deduction records. able written records for each item of donated
2. A pledge card or other document preparedIf you made more than one contribution of property. Your written records must include the
$250 or more, you must have either a separate by or for the qualified organization that following information.
acknowledgment for each or one acknowledg- shows the name of the organization and • The name and address of the organizationment that lists each contribution and the date of states the organization does not provide to which you contributed.each contribution and shows your total contribu- goods or services in return for any contri-
tions. bution made to it by payroll deduction. • The date and location of the contribution.
A single pledge card may be kept for all contribu- • A description of the property in detail rea-Amount of contribution. In figuring whether
tions made by payroll deduction regardless of sonable under the circumstances. For ayour contribution is $250 or more, do not com-
amount as long as it contains all the required security, keep the name of the issuer, thebine separate contributions. For example, if you
information. type of security, and whether it is regularlygave your church $25 each week, your weekly
traded on a stock exchange or in anIf the pay stub, Form W-2, pledge card, orpayments do not have to be combined. Each
other document does not show the date of the over-the-counter market.payment is a separate contribution.
Page 170 Chapter 24 Contributions

Page 173 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• The fair market value of the property at the received was an intangible religious b. The due date, including extensions, for
time of the contribution and how you fig- benefit (such as admission to a relig- filing the return.
ured the fair market value. If it was deter- ious ceremony) that generally is not
mined by appraisal, keep a signed copy of sold in a commercial transaction
the appraisal. outside the donative context, the ac- Car expenses. If you claim expenses directlyknowledgment must say so and does• The cost or other basis of the property if related to use of your car in giving services to anot need to describe or estimate theyou must reduce its fair market value by qualified organization, you must keep reliablevalue of the benefit.appreciation. Your records should also in- written records of your expenses. Whether yourclude the amount of the reduction and how records are considered reliable depends on all3. You must get it on or before the earlier of:you figured it. If you choose the 50% limit the facts and circumstances. Generally, theyinstead of the special 30% limit on certain a. The date you file your return for the may be considered reliable if you made themcapital gain property, you must keep a re- year you make the contribution, or regularly and at or near the time you had thecord showing the years for which you
expenses.made the choice, contributions for the cur- b. The due date, including extensions, for
rent year to which the choice applies, and filing the return. Your records must show the name of the
carryovers from preceding years to which organization you were serving and the date
the choice applies. See How To Figure each time you used your car for a charitable
Your Deduction When Limits Apply in Pub- purpose. If you use the standard mileage rate oflication 526 for information on how to Deductions Over $500 14 cents a mile, your records must show themake the capital gain property election. miles you drove your car for the charitable pur-You are required to give additional information if• The amount you claim as a deduction for pose. If you deduct your actual expenses, youryou claim a deduction over $500 for noncashthe tax year as a result of the contribution, records must show the costs of operating the carcharitable contributions. See Records To Keepif you contribute less than your entire inter- that are directly related to a charitable purpose.in Publication 526 for more information.est in the property during the tax year. See Car expenses under Out-of-Pocket Ex-Your records must include the amount you penses in Giving Services , earlier, for the ex-claimed as a deduction in any earlier Qualified Conservation penses you can deduct.years for contributions of other interests in
Contributionthis property. They must also include the
name and address of each organization to If the gift was a qualified conservation contribu-which you contributed the other interests, tion, your records must also include the fairthe place where any such tangible prop- How To Reportmarket value of the underlying property beforeerty is located or kept, and the name of
and after the gift and the conservation purposeany person in possession of the property, Report your charitable contributions on Sched-furthered by the gift. See Qualified Conservationother than the organization to which you ule A (Form 1040).Contribution in Publication 526 for more infor-contributed.
If your total deduction for all noncash contri-mation.• The terms of any conditions attached to butions for the year is over $500, you must alsothe gift of property. file Form 8283. See How To Report  in Publica-Out-of-Pocket Expenses tion 526 for more information.
Deductions of At Least $250 If you render services to a qualified organization
and have unreimbursed out-of-pocket expensesBut Not More Than $500
related to those services, the following three
If you claim a deduction of at least $250 but not rules apply.
more than $500 for a noncash charitable contri-
1. You must have adequate records to provebution, you must get and keep an acknowledg-
ment of your contribution from the qualified the amount of the expenses. 25.
organization. If you made more than one contri- 2. You must get an acknowledgment from thebution of $250 or more, you must have either a qualified organization that contains:separate acknowledgment for each or one ac-
knowledgment that shows your total contribu- a. A description of the services you pro- Nonbusinesstions. vided,
The acknowledgment must contain the infor-
b. A statement of whether or not the or-mation in items (1) through (3) listed under De- Casualty andganization provided you any goods orductions of Less Than $250 , earlier, and your
services to reimburse you for the ex-written records must include the information
penses you incurred,listed in that discussion under Additional rec- Theft Losses
ords. c. A description and a good faith estimateThe acknowledgment must also meet these of the value of any goods or servicestests. (other than intangible religious benefits)
What's New for 2009provided to reimburse you, and1. It must be written.
d. A statement that the only benefit you2. It must include: Increase in personal casualty and theft lossreceived was an intangible religious limit. Generally, each personal casualty ora. A description (but not necessarily the benefit, if that was the case. The ac- theft loss is limited to the excess of the loss overvalue) of any property you contributed, knowledgment does not need to de-
$500. In addition, thescribe or estimate the value of anb. Whether the qualified organization gave 10%-of-adjusted-gross-income (AGI) limit con-intangible religious benefit (defined ear-you any goods or services as a result of tinues to apply to the net loss.lier under Acknowledgment).your contribution (other than certain to-
ken items and membership benefits), New Schedule L (Form 1040A or 1040). If3. You must get the acknowledgment on orand you claim a net disaster loss as part of yourbefore the earlier of: standard deduction, you must complete Sched-c. A description and good faith estimate of
ule L (Form 1040A or 1040) and attach it to Forma. The date you file your return for thethe value of any goods or services de-
1040.scribed in (b). If the only benefit you year you make the contribution, or
Chapter 25 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses Page 171

Page 174 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
❏ 584 Casualty, Disaster, and Theft • A car accident if your willful negligence or
willful act caused it. The same is true if the Loss Workbook (Personal-UseWhat's New for 2010 willful act or willful negligence of someone Property)
acting for you caused the accident. Decrease in personal casualty and theft loss Form (and Instructions) • Progressive deterioration (explained later).limit. Each personal casualty or theft loss is
❏ Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemizedlimited to the excess of the loss over $100 (in-
Family pet. Loss of property due to damageDeductionsstead of $500). In addition, the 10%-of-AGI limit
by a family pet is not deductible as a casualtycontinues to apply to the net loss. ❏ Schedule D (Form 1040) Capital Gains loss unless the requirements discussed earlier
and LossesDisaster losses. The special rules that were under Casualty are met.
in effect in 2008 and 2009 for losses of personal ❏ Schedule L (Form 1040A or 1040)
use property attributable to federally declared Example. Your antique oriental rug wasStandard Deduction for Certaindisasters do not apply to losses occurring in damaged by your new puppy before it wasFilers2010 and later years. Instead, these losses will housebroken. Because the damage was not un-
❏ 4684 Casualties and Theftsbe subject to the 10%-of-AGI limit and will be expected and unusual, the loss is not deductible
deductible only if you itemize your deductions. as a casualty loss.
These losses will continue to be subject to the Progressive deterioration. Loss of prop-$100-per-loss limit. erty due to progressive deterioration is not de-
ductible as a casualty loss. This is because theCasualty damage results from a steadily operating cause
or a normal process, rather than from a suddenA casualty is the damage, destruction, or loss ofIntroduction event. The following are examples of damageproperty resulting from an identifiable event that due to progressive deterioration.This chapter explains the tax treatment of per- is sudden, unexpected, or unusual.
sonal (not business related) casualty losses, • The steady weakening of a building due to• A sudden event is one that is swift, nottheft losses, and losses on deposits. normal wind and weather conditions.gradual or progressive.The chapter also explains the following • The deterioration and damage to a water topics. • An unexpected event is one that is ordi- heater that bursts. However, the rust andnarily unanticipated and unintended.• How to figure the amount of your loss. water damage to rugs and drapes caused
by the bursting of a water heater does• An unusual event is one that is not a• How to treat insurance and other reim- qualify as a casualty. day-to-day occurrence and that is not typi-bursements you receive. cal of the activity in which you were en- • Most losses of property caused by• The deduction limits. gaged. droughts. To be deductible, a
• When and how to report a casualty or drought-related loss generally must be in-
theft. curred in a trade or business or in a trans-Deductible losses. Deductible casualty
action entered into for profit. losses can result from a number of different
causes, including the following.Forms to file.   When you have a casualty or • Termite or moth damage. 
theft, you have to file Form 4684. You will also • Car accidents (but see Nondeductible • The damage or destruction of trees,have to file one or more of the following forms. losses, next, for exceptions). shrubs, or other plants by a fungus, dis-
• Schedule A (Form 1040), Itemized Deduc- ease, insects, worms, or similar pests.• Earthquakes.tions However, a sudden destruction due to an
• Fires (but see Nondeductible losses, next, unexpected or unusual infestation of beet-• Schedule D (Form 1040), Capital Gains for exceptions). les or other insects may result in a casu-and Losses alty loss. • Floods.• Schedule L (Form 1040A or 1040), Stan-
• Government-ordered demolition or reloca-dard Deduction for Certain Filers
tion of a home that is unsafe to use be-
cause of a disaster as discussed underCondemnations. For information on condem- Disaster Area Losses in Publication 547. Theftnations of property, see Involuntary Conver-
sions in chapter 1 of Publication 544. • Mine cave-ins. A theft is the taking and removing of money or
• Shipwrecks. property with the intent to deprive the owner of it.Workbook for casualties and thefts. Publi-
The taking of property must be illegal under thecation 584 is available to help you make a list of • Sonic booms. laws of the state where it occurred and it mustyour stolen or damaged personal-use property • Storms, including hurricanes and torna- have been done with criminal intent. You do notand figure your loss. It includes schedules to does. need to show a conviction for theft.help you figure the loss on your home, its con-
Theft includes the taking of money or prop-tents, and your motor vehicles. • Terrorist attacks.
erty by the following means.
• Vandalism.Other sources of information. For informa- • Blackmail.tion on a casualty or theft loss of business or • Volcanic eruptions.
• Burglary.income-producing property, see Publication
547. • Embezzlement.Nondeductible losses. A casualty loss is not
deductible if the damage or destruction is • Extortion.Useful Items caused by the following.You may want to see: • Kidnapping for ransom.
• Accidentally breaking articles such as • Larceny.glassware or china under normal condi-Publication
tions. • Robbery.❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions
• A family pet (explained below). of Assets The taking of money or property through fraud
• A fire if you willfully set it or pay someone❏ 547 Casualties, Disasters, and or misrepresentation is theft if it is illegal under
 Thefts else to set it. state or local law.
Page 172 Chapter 25 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses

Page 175 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Decline in market value of stock. You can- treat the loss as a casualty or ordinary loss, you • That your property was stolen.
not deduct as a theft loss the decline in market cannot treat the same amount of the loss as a • That you were the owner of the property.value of stock acquired on the open market for nonbusiness bad debt when it actually becomes
• Whether a claim for reimbursement existsinvestment if the decline is caused by disclosure worthless. However, you can take a nonbusi-
for which there is a reasonable expecta-of accounting fraud or other illegal misconduct ness bad debt deduction for any amount of loss
tion of recovery.by the officers or directors of the corporation that that is more than the estimated amount you
issued the stock. However, you can deduct as a deducted as a casualty or ordinary loss. Once
capital loss the loss you sustain when you sell or you make this choice, you cannot change it  It is important that you have recordsexchange the stock or the stock becomes com- without permission from the Internal Revenue that will prove your deduction. If you dopletely worthless. You report a capital loss on Service. not have the actual records to support
RECORDSSchedule D (Form 1040). For more information If you claim an ordinary loss, report it as a your deduction, you can use other satisfactoryabout stock sales, worthless stock, and capital miscellaneous itemized deduction on Schedule evidence to support it.losses, see chapter 4 of Publication 550. A (Form 1040), line 23. The maximum amount
you can claim is $20,000 ($10,000 if you areMislaid or lost property. The simple disap- married filing separately) reduced by any ex-pearance of money or property is not a theft. pected state insurance proceeds. Your loss isHowever, an accidental loss or disappearance subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income Figuring a Lossof property can qualify as a casualty if it results limit. You cannot choose to claim an ordinaryfrom an identifiable event that is sudden, unex- loss if any part of the deposit is federally insured. Figure the amount of your loss using the follow-pected, or unusual. Sudden, unexpected, and ing steps. Nonbusiness bad debt. If you do not chooseunusual events are defined earlier.
to deduct the loss as a casualty loss or as an 1. Determine your adjusted basis in the prop-
ordinary loss, you must wait until the year theExample. A car door is accidentally erty before the casualty or theft.
actual loss is determined and deduct the loss asslammed on your hand, breaking the setting of
2. Determine the decrease in fair marketa nonbusiness bad debt in that year.your diamond ring. The diamond falls from the
value of the property as a result of thering and is never found. The loss of the diamond How to report. The kind of deduction you casualty or theft.is a casualty. choose for your loss on deposits determines 3. From the smaller of the amounts you de-how you report your loss. If you choose:Losses from Ponzi-type investment termined in (1) and (2), subtract any insur-schemes. The IRS has issued the following • Casualty loss Ð report it on Form 4684 ance or other reimbursement you receivedguidance to assist taxpayers who are victims of first and then on Schedule A (Form 1040). or expect to receive.losses from Ponzi-type investment schemes:
• Ordinary loss Ð report it on Schedule A For personal-use property and property used in• Revenue Ruling 2009-9, 2009-14 I.R.B. (Form 1040) as a miscellaneous itemized performing services as an employee, apply the735 (available at www.irs.gov/irb/ deduction. deduction limits, discussed later, to determine2009-14_IRB/ar07.html). the amount of your deductible loss.• Nonbusiness bad debt Ð report it on• Revenue Procedure 2009-20, 2009-14 Schedule D (Form 1040). Leased property. If you are liable for casualtyI.R.B. 749 (available at www.irs.gov/irb/
damage to property you lease, your loss is the2009-14_IRB/ar11.html).
amount you must pay to repair the propertyMore information. For more information, seeThese losses are deductible as theft losses of minus any insurance or other reimbursementSpecial Treatment for Losses on Deposits inincome-producing property on your tax return for you receive or expect to receive.Insolvent or Bankrupt Financial Institutions inthe year the loss was discovered. You figure the the Instructions for Form 4684 or Deposit indeductible loss in Section B of Form 4684. If you Insolvent or Bankrupt Financial Institution  in Decrease inqualify to use Revenue Procedure 2009-20 and Publication 550.you choose to follow the procedures in Revenue Fair Market Value
Procedure 2009-20, you also must complete
Appendix A of that procedure and write ªReve- Fair market value (FMV) is the price for which
nue Procedure 2009-20º across the top of Form you could sell your property to a willing buyer
Proof of Loss4684. For more information, see the above reve- when neither of you has to sell or buy and both of
nue ruling and revenue procedure. you know all the relevant facts.
To deduct a casualty or theft loss, you must be The decrease in FMV used to figure the
able to prove that you had a casualty or theft. amount of a casualty or theft loss is the differ-
You must be able to support the amount you ence between the property's fair market value
claim for the loss as discussed next. immediately before and immediately after theLoss on Deposits
casualty or theft.Casualty loss proof. For a casualty loss, your
A loss on deposits can occur when a bank, credit records should show all the following. FMV of stolen property. The FMV of propertyunion, or other financial institution becomes in- immediately after a theft is considered to be• The type of casualty (car accident, fire,solvent or bankrupt. If you incurred this type of zero, since you no longer have the property.storm, etc.) and when it occurred.loss, you can choose one of the following ways
to deduct the loss. • That the loss was a direct result of the Example. Several years ago, you pur-casualty. chased silver dollars at face value for $150. This• As a casualty loss.
is your adjusted basis in the property. Your silver• That you were the owner of the property• As an ordinary loss. dollars were stolen this year. The FMV of theor, if you leased the property from some-
coins was $1,000 just before they were stolen,• As a nonbusiness bad debt. one else, that you were contractually liable
and insurance did not cover them. Your theftto the owner for the damage.
loss is $150.Casualty loss or ordinary loss. You can • Whether a claim for reimbursement exists
choose to deduct a loss on deposits as a casu- Recovered stolen property. Recovered sto-for which there is a reasonable expecta-
alty loss or as an ordinary loss for any year in len property is your property that was stolen andtion of recovery.
which you can reasonably estimate how much of later returned to you. If you recovered property
your deposits you have lost in an insolvent or after you had already taken a theft loss deduc-Theft loss proof. For a theft loss, your rec-bankrupt financial institution. The choice is gen- tion, you must refigure your loss using theords should show all the following.erally made on the return you file for that year smaller of the property's adjusted basis (ex-
and applies to all your losses on deposits for the • When you discovered that your property plained later) or the decrease in FMV from the
year in that particular financial institution. If you was missing. time just before it was stolen until the time it was
Chapter 25 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses Page 173

Page 176 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
recovered. Use this amount to refigure your total able to measure your loss by what you spend on Costs of photographs and appraisals. Pho-
the following.loss for the year in which the loss was deducted. tographs taken after a casualty will be helpful in
establishing the condition and value of the prop-If your refigured loss is less than the loss you • Removing destroyed or damaged trees erty after it was damaged. Photographs showingdeducted, you generally have to report the dif- and shrubs minus any salvage you re- the condition of the property after it was re-ference as income in the recovery year. But ceive.
report the difference only up to the amount of the paired, restored, or replaced may also be help-
• Pruning and other measures taken to pre-loss that reduced your tax. For more information ful.
serve damaged trees and shrubs.on the amount to report, see Recoveries in    Appraisals are used to figure the decrease
chapter 12. in FMV because of a casualty or theft. See• Replanting necessary to restore the prop-
erty to its approximate value before the Appraisal, earlier, under Figuring Decrease in
casualty. FMV Ð Items To Consider , for information
Figuring Decrease in FMVÐ about appraisals.
Items To Consider The costs of photographs and appraisalsCar value.  Books issued by various automo-
used as evidence of the value and condition ofbile organizations that list your car may be usefulTo figure the decrease in FMV because of a property damaged as a result of a casualty arein figuring the value of your car. You can use thecasualty or theft, you generally need a compe- not a part of the loss. You can claim these costsbook's retail values and modify them by suchtent appraisal. But other measures can also be as a miscellaneous itemized deduction subjectfactors as mileage and the condition of your carused to establish certain decreases.
to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit onto figure its value. The prices are not official, but
they may be useful in determining value and Schedule A (Form 1040). For information aboutAppraisal. An appraisal to determine the dif- suggesting relative prices for comparison with miscellaneous deductions, see chapter 28.ference between the FMV of the property imme- current sales and offerings in your area. If yourdiately before a casualty or theft and car is not listed in the books, determine its valueimmediately afterward should be made by a Adjusted Basisfrom other sources. A dealer's offer for your carcompetent appraiser. The appraiser must rec- as a trade-in on a new car is not usually a Adjusted basis is your basis in the property (usu-ognize the effects of any general market decline measure of its true value. ally cost) increased or decreased by variousthat may occur along with the casualty. This
events, such as improvements and casualtyinformation is needed to limit any deduction to
the actual loss resulting from damage to the losses. For more information, see chapter 13.Figuring Decrease in FMVÐproperty.
Items Not To ConsiderSeveral factors are important in evaluating Insurance and Other
the accuracy of an appraisal, including the fol- You generally should not consider the following Reimbursementslowing. items when attempting to establish the decrease
in FMV of your property.• The appraiser's familiarity with your prop- If you receive an insurance payment or other
erty before and after the casualty or theft. type of reimbursement, you must subtract theCost of protection. The cost of protecting
reimbursement when you figure your loss. You• The appraiser's knowledge of sales of your property against a casualty or theft is not
do not have a casualty or theft loss to the extentcomparable property in the area. part of a casualty or theft loss. The amount you
you are reimbursed.spend on insurance or to board up your house• The appraiser's knowledge of conditions in If you expect to be reimbursed for part or allagainst a storm is not part of your loss.the area of the casualty. If you make permanent improvements to of your loss, you must subtract the expected
• The appraiser's method of appraisal. your property to protect it against a casualty or reimbursement when you figure your loss. You
theft, add the cost of these improvements to must reduce your loss even if you do not receive
your basis in the property. An example would be payment until a later tax year. See Reimburse-You may be able to use an appraisal the cost of a dike to prevent flooding. ment Received After Deducting Loss, later.that you used to get a federal loan (or a
federal loan guarantee) as the result of Exception. You cannot increase your basis
TIP
Failure to file a claim for reimbursement. Ifa federally declared disaster to establish the in the property by, or deduct as a business
your property is covered by insurance, you mustamount of your disaster loss. For more informa- expense, any expenditures you made with re-
file a timely insurance claim for reimbursementtion on disasters, see Disaster Area Losses, in spect to qualified disaster mitigation payments.
of your loss. Otherwise, you cannot deduct thisPub. 547. See Disaster Area Losses in Publication 547.
loss as a casualty or theft loss. However, this
Related expenses. Any incidental expenses rule does not apply to the portion of the loss notCost of cleaning up or making repairs. The you have due to a casualty or theft, such as covered by insurance (for example, a deducti-cost of repairing damaged property is not part of expenses for the treatment of personal injuries, ble).a casualty loss. Neither is the cost of cleaning up for temporary housing, or for a rental car, are notafter a casualty. But you can use the cost of part of your casualty or theft loss. Example. You have a car insurance policycleaning up or making repairs after a casualty as
with a $1000 deductible. Because your insur-a measure of the decrease in FMV if you meet Replacement cost. The cost of replacing sto-
ance did not cover the first $1000 of an autoall the following conditions. len or destroyed property is not part of a casualty
collision, the $1000 would be deductible (subjector theft loss.• The repairs are actually made. to the deduction limits discussed later). This is
Sentimental value. Do not consider senti- true even if you do not file an insurance claim,• The repairs are necessary to bring the
mental value when determining your loss. If aproperty back to its condition before the because your insurance policy would never
family portrait, heirloom, or keepsake is dam-casualty. have reimbursed you for the deductible.
aged, destroyed, or stolen, you must base your
• The amount spent for repairs is not exces- loss on its FMV. Gain from reimbursement. If your reim-sive.
bursement is more than your adjusted basis inDecline in market value of property in or near• The repairs take care of the damage only. the property, you have a gain. This is true even ifcasualty area. A decrease in the value of your
the decrease in the FMV of the property is• The value of the property after the repairs property because it is in or near an area that
smaller than your adjusted basis. If you have ais not, due to the repairs, more than the suffered a casualty, or that might again suffer a
gain, you may have to pay tax on it, or you mayvalue of the property before the casualty. casualty, is not to be taken into consideration.
be able to postpone reporting the gain. SeeYou have a loss only for actual casualty damage
Publication 547 for more information on how toLandscaping. The cost of restoring land- to your property. However, if your home is in a
treat a gain from a reimbursement for a casualtyscaping to its original condition after a casualty federally declared disaster area, see Disaster
or theft.may indicate the decrease in FMV. You may be Area Losses in Publication 547.
Page 174 Chapter 25 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses

Page 177 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
normal living expenses for that period. Actual Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emer-Types of Reimbursements
living expenses are the reasonable and neces- gency Assistance Act or the National Flood In-
The most common type of reimbursement is an sary expenses incurred because of the loss of surance Act (as in effect on April 15, 2005) are
insurance payment for your stolen or damaged your main home. Generally, these expenses in- not includible in your income. See Disaster Area
property. Other types of reimbursements are clude the amounts you pay for the following. Losses in Publication 547.
discussed next. Also see the Instructions for • Rent for suitable housing.Form 4684.
• Transportation. Reimbursement Received AfterEmployer's emergency disaster fund. If you Deducting Loss• Food.receive money from your employer's emergency
disaster fund and you must use that money to • Utilities. If you figured your casualty or theft loss usingrehabilitate or replace property on which you are your expected reimbursement, you may have to• Miscellaneous services.claiming a casualty loss deduction, you must adjust your tax return for the tax year in whichtake that money into consideration in computing Normal living expenses consist of these same you receive your actual reimbursement. Thisthe casualty loss deduction. Take into consider- expenses that you would have incurred but did section explains the adjustment you may haveation only the amount you used to replace your not because of the casualty or the threat of one. to make.destroyed or damaged property.
Actual reimbursement less than expected.Example. As a result of a fire, you vacated
Example. Your home was extensively dam- If you later receive less reimbursement than youyour apartment for a month and moved to a
aged by a tornado. Your loss after reimburse- expected, include that difference as a loss withmotel. You normally pay $525 a month for rent.
ment from your insurance company was your other losses (if any) on your return for theNone was charged for the month the apartment
$10,000. Your employer set up a disaster relief year in which you can reasonably expect nowas vacated. Your motel rent for this month was
fund for its employees. Employees receiving more reimbursement.$1,200. You normally pay $200 a month for
money from the fund had to use it to rehabilitate food. Your food expenses for the month you
or replace their damaged or destroyed property. Example. Your personal car had an FMV oflived in the motel were $400. You received
You received $4,000 from the fund and spent $2,000 when it was destroyed in a collision with$1,100 from your insurance company to cover
the entire amount on repairs to your home. In another car in 2008. The accident was due to theyour living expenses. You determine the pay-
figuring your casualty loss, you must reduce negligence of the other driver. At the end ofment you must include in income as follows.
your unreimbursed loss ($10,000) by the $4,000 2008, there was a reasonable prospect that the
you received from your employer's fund. Your owner of the other car would reimburse you in1) Insurance payment for living
casualty loss before applying the deduction lim- full. You did not have a deductible loss in 2008.expenses ................. . $1,100
its discussed later is $6,000. 2) Actual expenses during the In January 2009, the court awarded you a
month you are unable to use judgment of $2,000. However, in July it becameCash gifts. If you receive excludable cash your home because of fire .. . 1,600 apparent that you will be unable to collect anygifts as a disaster victim and there are no limits 3) Normal living expenses .... . 725 amount from the other driver. You can deducton how you can use the money, you do not 4) Temporary increase in living the loss in 2009 subject to the limits discussedreduce your casualty loss by these excludable expenses: Subtract line 3 later.cash gifts. This applies even if you use the from line 2 ................. . 875
money to pay for repairs to property damaged in 5) Amount of payment includible Actual reimbursement more than expected.
the disaster. in income: Subtract line 4 If you later receive more reimbursement than
from line 1 ................. . $ 225 you expected after you claimed a deduction for
Example. Your home was damaged by a the loss, you may have to include the extra
hurricane. Relatives and neighbors made cash Tax year of inclusion. You include the tax- reimbursement in your income for the year you
gifts to you that were excludable from your in- able part of the insurance payment in income for receive it. However, if any part of the original
come. You used part of the cash gifts to pay for the year you regain the use of your main home deduction did not reduce your tax for the earlier
repairs to your home. There were no limits or or, if later, for the year you receive the taxable year, do not include that part of the reimburse-
restrictions on how you could use the cash gifts. part of the insurance payment. ment in your income. You do not refigure your
Because it was an excludable gift, the money tax for the year you claimed the deduction. For
Example. Your main home was destroyedyou received and used to pay for repairs to your more information, see Recoveries in chapter 12.
by a tornado in August 2007. You regained usehome does not reduce your casualty loss on the
If the total of all the reimbursementsof your home in November 2008. The insurancedamaged home.
you receive is more than your adjustedpayments you received in 2007 and 2008 were
basis in the destroyed or stolen prop-Insurance payments for living expenses.
CAUTION
! $1,500 more than the temporary increase in
erty, you will have a gain on the casualty or theft.You do not reduce your casualty loss by insur- your living expenses during those years. You
If you have already taken a deduction for a lossance payments you receive to cover living ex- include this amount in income on your 2008
and you receive the reimbursement in a laterpenses in either of the following situations. Form 1040. If, in 2009, you receive further pay-
year, you may have to include the gain in yourments to cover the living expenses you had in• You lose the use of your main home be- income for the later year. Include the gain as2007 and 2008, you must include those pay-cause of a casualty. ordinary income up to the amount of your deduc-ments in income on your 2009 Form 1040.
tion that reduced your tax for the earlier year.• Government authorities do not allow you
See Publication 547 for more information onaccess to your main home because of a Disaster relief. Food, medical supplies, and
how to treat a gain from the reimbursement of acasualty or threat of one. other forms of assistance you receive do not
casualty or theft.reduce your casualty loss unless they are
Inclusion in income. If these insurance replacements for lost or destroyed property.
payments are more than the temporary increase Actual reimbursement same as expected. If
Qualified disaster relief payments youin your living expenses, you must include the you receive exactly the reimbursement you ex-
receive for expenses you incurred as aexcess in your income. Report this amount on pected to receive, you do not have to include
result of a federally declared disaster
TIPForm 1040, line 21. However, if the casualty any of the reimbursement in your income and
are not taxable income to you. For more infor-occurs in a federally declared disaster area, you cannot deduct any additional loss.
mation, see Disaster Area Losses in Publicationnone of the insurance payments are taxable.
547.See Qualified disaster relief payments , under Example. In December 2009, you had a col-
Disaster unemployment assistance pay-Disaster Area Losses in Publication 547. lision while driving your personal car. Repairs to
ments are unemployment benefits that are tax-A temporary increase in your living expenses the car cost $950. You had $100 deductible
able.is the difference between the actual living ex- collision insurance. Your insurance company
penses you and your family incurred during the Generally, disaster relief grants and qualified agreed to reimburse you for the rest of the dam-
period you could not use your home and your disaster mitigation payments made under the age. Because you expected a reimbursement
Chapter 25 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses Page 175

Page 178 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 25-1. How To Apply the Deduction Limits for Personal-Use Property
$500 Rule 10% Rule*
General Application You must reduce each casualty or theft loss by You must reduce your total casualty or theft
$500 when figuring your deduction. Apply this loss by 10% of your adjusted gross income.
rule after you have figured the amount of your Apply this rule after you reduce each loss by
loss. $500 (the $500 rule).
Single Event Apply this rule only once, even if many pieces Apply this rule only once, even if many
of property are affected. pieces of property are affected.
More Than One Event Apply to the loss from each event. Apply to the total of all your losses from all
events.
More Than One PersonÐ Apply separately to each person. Apply separately to each person.
With Loss From the
Same Event
(other than a married couple filing jointly)
Filing Jointly Apply as if you were one person. Apply as if you were one person.Married CoupleÐ
With Loss From the Filing Separately Apply separately to each spouse. Apply separately to each spouse.Same Event
More Than One Owner Apply separately to each owner of jointly Apply separately to each owner of jointly
(other than a married owned property. owned property.
couple filing jointly)
*The 10% rule does not apply to a net disaster loss attributable to a federally declared disaster.
from the insurance company, you did not have a Real property. In figuring a casualty loss on personal use or your family's use, there are two
personal-use real property, treat the entire prop- limits on the amount you can deduct for yourcasualty loss deduction in 2009.
erty (including any improvements, such as build- casualty or theft loss. Due to the $500 rule (discussed later under
ings, trees, and shrubs) as one item. Figure theDeduction Limits), you cannot deduct the $500 1. You must reduce each casualty or theftloss using the smaller of the adjusted basis oryou paid as the deductible. When you receive loss by $500 ($500 rule).the decrease in FMV of the entire property.the $850 from the insurance company in 2010,
2. You must further reduce the total of alldo not report it as income. Example. You bought your home a few your casualty or theft losses by 10% of
years ago. You paid $160,000 ($20,000 for the your adjusted gross income (10% rule).Single Casualty on land and $140,000 for the house). You also
You make these reductions on Form 4684.spent $2,000 for landscaping. This year a fireMultiple Properties These rules are explained next and Tabledestroyed your home. The fire also damaged
25-1 summarizes how to apply the $500 rule andthe shrubbery and trees in your yard. The fire
the 10% rule in various situations. For morePersonal property. Personal property is any was your only casualty or theft loss this year.
detailed explanations and examples, see Publi-property that is not real property. If your personal Competent appraisers valued the property as a
cation 547.property is stolen or is damaged or destroyed by whole at $200,000 before the fire, but only
a casualty, you must figure your loss separately $30,000 after the fire. (The loss to your house- Property used partly for business and partlyfor each item of property. Then combine these hold furnishings is not shown in this example. It for personal purposes. When property isseparate losses to determine your total loss would be figured separately on each item, as used partly for personal purposes and partly forfrom that casualty or theft. explained earlier under Personal property. ) business or income-producing purposes, theShortly after the fire, the insurance company casualty or theft loss deduction must be figuredExample. A fire in your home destroyed an paid you $155,000 for the loss. You figure your separately for the personal-use part and for thecasualty loss as follows:upholstered chair, an oriental rug, and an an- business or income-producing part. You musttique table. You did not have fire insurance to figure each loss separately because the $5001) Adjusted basis of the entirecover your loss. (This was the only casualty or rule and the 10% rule apply only to the loss onproperty (land, building, andtheft you had during the year.) You paid $750 for the personal-use part of the property.landscaping) ........... . $162,000the chair and you established that it had an FMV
2) FMV of entire property beforeof $500 just before the fire. The rug cost $3,000
$500 Rulefire .................. . $200,000and had an FMV of $2,500 just before the fire.
3) FMV of entire property after fire 30,000You bought the table at an auction for $100 After you have figured your casualty or theft loss4) Decrease in FMV of entire before discovering it was an antique. It had been on personal-use property, you must reduce thatproperty .............. . $170,000appraised at $900 before the fire. You figure loss by $500. This reduction applies to each totalyour loss on each of these items as follows: 5) Loss (smaller of (1) or (4)) .. . $162,000 casualty or theft loss. It does not matter how6) Subtract insurance ....... . 155,000 many pieces of property are involved in anChair Rug Table 7) Amount of loss after event. Only a single $100 reduction applies.reimbursement ......... . $7,0001) Basis (cost) ..... . $750 $3,000 $100
Example. A hailstorm damages your home2) FMV before fire .. . $500 $2,500 $900 and your car. Determine the amount of loss, as3) FMV after fire .... . ±0± ±0± ±0± discussed earlier, for each of these items. Since4) Decrease in FMV . . $500 $2,500 $900 the losses are due to a single event, you com-5) Loss (smaller of (1) or Deduction Limits bine the losses and reduce the combined
amount by $500.(4)) ........... . $500 $2,500 $100 After you have figured your casualty or theft
loss, you must figure how much of the loss you Single event. Generally, events closely re-6) Total loss ...... . $3,100 can deduct. If the loss was to property for your lated in origin cause a single casualty. It is a
Page 176 Chapter 25 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses

Page 179 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
single casualty when the damage is from two or treated as capital gain and must be reported on Postponed tax deadlines. The IRS may
more closely related causes, such as wind and Schedule D (Form 1040). The 10% rule does not postpone for up to 1 year certain tax deadlines of
flood damage caused by the same storm. apply to your gains. taxpayers who are affected by a federally de-
clared disaster. The tax deadlines the IRS may
postpone include those for filing income and10% Rule
employment tax returns, paying income and em-
You must reduce the total of all your casualty or When To Report ployment taxes, and making contributions to a
theft losses on personal-use property by 10% of traditional IRA or Roth IRA.
your adjusted gross income. Apply this rule after Gains and Losses If any tax deadline is postponed, the IRS willyou reduce each loss by $500. If you have both publicize the postponement in your area by pub-gains and losses from casualties or thefts, see Gains. If you receive an insurance or other lishing a news release, revenue ruling, revenueGains and losses, later in this discussion. reimbursement that is more than your adjusted procedure, notice, announcement, or other gui-
basis in the destroyed or stolen property, you dance in the Internal Revenue Bulletin (IRB).Example 1. In June, you discovered that have a gain from the casualty or theft. You mustyour house had been burglarized. Your loss Who is eligible. If the IRS postpones a taxinclude this gain in your income in the year youafter insurance reimbursement was $2,000. deadline, the following taxpayers are eligible forreceive the reimbursement, unless you chooseYour adjusted gross income for the year you the postponement.to postpone reporting the gain as explained indiscovered the theft is $29,500. You first apply Publication 547. • Any individual whose main home is lo-the $500 rule and then the 10% rule. Figure your If you have a loss, see Table 25-2.theft loss deduction as follows. cated in a covered disaster area (defined
next).Losses. Generally, you can deduct a casualty1) Loss after insurance .......... . $2,000 • Any business entity or sole proprietorloss that is not reimbursable only in the tax year2) Subtract $500 .............. . 500
in which the casualty occurred. This is true even whose principal place of business is lo-3) Loss after $100 rule .......... . $1,500
if you do not repair or replace the damaged cated in a covered disaster area.4) Subtract 10% ×  $29,500 AGI .... . 2,950
property until a later year.5) Theft loss deduction ........ . ±0± • Any individual who is a relief worker affili-You can deduct theft losses that are notYou do not have a theft loss deduction be- ated with a recognized government or phil-reimbursable only in the year you discover yourcause your loss after you apply the $500 rule anthropic organization who is assisting inproperty was stolen.($1,500) is less than 10% of your adjusted gross
a covered disaster area.If you are not sure whether part of your casu-income ($2,950).
alty or theft loss will be reimbursed, do not de- • Any individual, business entity, or sole
duct that part until the tax year when youExample 2. In March, you had a car acci- proprietorship whose records are needed
become reasonably certain that it will not bedent that totally destroyed your car. You did not to meet a postponed tax deadline, pro-reimbursed.have collision insurance on your car, so you did vided those records are maintained in anot receive any insurance reimbursement. Your covered disaster area. The main home orloss on the car was $1,800. In November, a fire Loss on deposits. If your loss is a loss on principal place of business does not havedamaged your basement and totally destroyed deposits in an insolvent or bankrupt financial to be located in the covered disaster area.the furniture, washer, dryer, and other items institution, see Loss on Deposits, earlier.
stored there. Your loss on the basement items • Any estate or trust that has tax records
after reimbursement was $2,100. Your adjusted necessary to meet a postponed tax dead-Disaster Area Lossgross income for the year that the accident and line, provided those records are main-
fire occurred is $25,000. You figure your casu- tained in a covered disaster area.You generally must deduct a casualty loss in thealty loss deduction as follows. year it occurred. However, if you have a casualty • The spouse on a joint return with a tax-loss from a federally declared disaster that oc- payer who is eligible for postponements.Base- curred in an area warranting public or individualCar ment • Any individual, business entity, or soleassistance (or both), you can choose to deduct
1) Loss ............. . $1,800 $2,100 the loss on your tax return or amended return for proprietorship not located in a covered dis-
2) Subtract $500 per incident 500 500 either of the following years. aster area, but whose records necessary
3) Loss after $500 rule ... . $1,300 $1,600 to meet a postponed tax deadline are lo-• The year the disaster occurred.
cated in the covered disaster area.4) Total loss ............... . $2,900
• The year immediately preceding the year5) Subtract 10% ×  $25,000 AGI .. . 2,500 • Any individual visiting the covered disasterthe disaster occurred.6) Casualty loss deduction .... . $400 area who was killed or injured as a result
of the disaster.Gains.  Special rules apply if you choose toGains and losses. If you had both gains and • Any other person determined by the IRSpostpone reporting gain on property damaged orlosses from casualties or thefts to personal-use to be affected by a federally declared dis-destroyed in a federally declared disaster area.property, you must compare your total gains to aster.For those special rules, see Publication 547.your total losses. Do this after you have reduced
each loss by any reimbursements and by $500,
Table 25-2.  When To Deduct a Lossbut before you have reduced the losses by 10%
of your adjusted gross income. IF you have a loss...  THEN deduct it in the year...
Casualty or theft gains do not include
from a casualty, the loss occurred.gains you choose to postpone. See
Publication 547 for information on the
CAUTION
! in a federally declared disaster area, the disaster occurred or the year immediately before the
postponement of gain. disaster.
Losses more than gains. If your losses are from a theft,  the theft was discovered.
more than your recognized gains, subtract your on a deposit treated as a:gains from your losses and reduce the result by
10% of your adjusted gross income. The rest, if  • casualty,  • a reasonable estimate can be made.
any, is your deductible loss.
 • bad debt,  • deposits are totally worthless.
Gains more than losses. If your recog-
 • ordinary loss,  • a reasonable estimate can be made.nized gains are more than your losses, subtract
your losses from your gains. The difference is
Chapter 25 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses Page 177

Page 180 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Covered disaster area. This is an area of a • You fully accounted to your employer for
federally declared disaster in which the IRS has your work-related expenses.
decided to postpone tax deadlines for up to 1 • You received full reimbursement for your26.year. expenses.
Abatement of interest and penalties. The • Your employer required you to return anyIRS may abate the interest and penalties on excess reimbursement and you did so.underpaid income tax for the length of any post- Car Expenses
ponement of tax deadlines. • There is no amount shown with a code ªLº
in box 12 of your Form W-2, Wage andMore information. For more information, see and Other Tax Statement.Disaster Area Losses in Publication 547.
If you meet all of these conditions, there is noEmployee need to show the expenses or the reimburse-
ments on your return. See Reimbursements,
How To Report Business later, if you would like more information on reim-
bursements and accounting to your employer.
Gains and Losses Expenses If you meet these conditions and your
Use Form 4684 to report a gain or a deductible employer included reimbursements on
loss from a casualty or theft. If you have more your Form W-2 in error, ask your em-
TIP
than one casualty or theft, use a separate Form ployer for a corrected Form W-2.What's New4684 to determine your gain or loss for each
event. Combine the gains and losses on one Standard mileage rate. For 2009, the stan- Useful ItemsForm 4684. Follow the form instructions as to dard mileage rate for the cost of operating your You may want to see:which lines to fill out. In addition, you must use car for business use is 55 cents per mile.the appropriate schedule to report a gain or loss. Car expenses and use of the standard mile- PublicationThe schedule you use depends on whether you age rate are explained under Transportation Ex-have a gain or loss. ❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Carpenses, later.
ExpensesIf you have a: Report it on: Depreciation limits on cars, trucks, and ❏ 535 Business ExpensesGain ......... . Schedule D (Form vans. For 2009, the first-year limit on the total
1040) section 179 deduction, special depreciation al- ❏ 1542 Per Diem Rates
Loss ......... . Schedule A (Form lowance, and depreciation deduction for cars
1040) remains $10,960 ($2,960 if you elect not to claim Form (and Instructions)
the special depreciation allowance). For trucks ❏ Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemizedand vans the first-year limit has decreased toNote. Use Schedule L (Form 1040A or Deductions$11,060 ($3,060 if you elect not to claim the1040) instead of Schedule A (Form 1040) if you
special depreciation allowance). For more infor- ❏ Schedule C (Form 1040) Profit or Lossare deducting a net disaster loss as part of your
mation see Depreciation limits  in Publication From Businessstandard deduction.
463.
❏ Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040) Net ProfitAdjustments to basis. If you have a casualty
From Businessor theft loss, you must decrease your basis in
the property by any insurance or other reim- ❏ Schedule F (Form 1040) Profit or Lossbursement you receive, and by any deductible From FarmingIntroductionloss. Amounts you spend to restore your prop-
❏ Form 2106 Employee Businesserty after a casualty increase your adjusted ba- You may be able to deduct the ordinary and
sis. See Adjusted Basis in chapter 13 for more Expensesnecessary business-related expenses you have
information. for: ❏ Form 2106-EZ Unreimbursed Employee
Net operating loss (NOL). If your casualty or Business Expenses• Travel,
theft loss deduction is more than your income, • Entertainment,you may have an NOL. You can use an NOL to
lower your tax in an earlier year, allowing you to • Gifts, or
get a refund for tax you have already paid. Or, • Transportation.you can use it to lower your tax in a later year. Travel Expenses
You do not have to be in business to have an An ordinary expense is one that is common and
NOL from a casualty or theft loss. For more accepted in your trade or business. A necessary If you temporarily travel away from your tax
information, see Publication 536, Net Operating expense is one that is helpful and appropriate for home, you can use this section to determine if
Losses (NOLs) for Individuals, Estates, and your business. An expense does not have to be you have deductible travel expenses. This sec-Trusts. required to be considered necessary. tion discusses:
This chapter explains the following. • Traveling away from home,
• What expenses are deductible. • Tax home,
• How to report your expenses on your re- • Temporary assignment or job, and
turn.
• What travel expenses are deductible.
• What records you need to prove your ex-
It also discusses the standard meal allowance,penses.
rules for travel inside and outside the United• How to treat any expense reimbursements States, and deductible convention expenses.you may receive.
Travel expenses defined. For tax purposes,
travel expenses are the ordinary and necessaryWho does not need to use this chapter. If
expenses (defined earlier) of traveling awayyou are an employee, you will not need to read
this chapter if all of the following are true. from home for your business, profession, or job.
Page 178 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 181 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You will find examples of deductible travel regularly live. See No main place of business or You keep your apartment in Boston and return to
work, later. it frequently. You use your apartment to conductexpenses in Table 26-1.
 If you do not have a regular or a main place your personal business. You also keep up your
of business or post of duty and there is no place community contacts in Boston. When you com-Traveling Away From where you regularly live, you are considered an plete your training, you are transferred to Los
Home itinerant (a transient) and your tax home is wher- Angeles.
ever you work. As an itinerant, you cannot claim You do not satisfy factor (1) because you did
You are traveling away from home if: a travel expense deduction because you are not work in Boston. You satisfy factor (2) be-
never considered to be traveling away from cause you had duplicate living expenses. You• Your duties require you to be away from home. also satisfy factor (3) because you did not aban-the general area of your tax home (defined don your apartment in Boston as your mainlater) substantially longer than an ordinary Main place of business or work. If you have home, you kept your community contacts, andday's work, and more than one place of business or work, con- you frequently returned to live in your apartment.
sider the following when determining which one• You need to sleep or rest to meet the You have a tax home in Boston.
is your main place of business or work.demands of your work while away from
Tax home different from family home. If youhome. • The total time you ordinarily spend in each (and your family) do not live at your tax homeplace.This rest requirement is not satisfied by merely (defined earlier), you cannot deduct the cost of
napping in your car. You do not have to be away traveling between your tax home and your family• The level of your business activity in each
from your tax home for a whole day or from dusk home. You also cannot deduct the cost of mealsplace.
to dawn as long as your relief from duty is long and lodging while at your tax home. See Exam-• Whether your income from each place isenough to get necessary sleep or rest. ple 1 that follows.significant or insignificant. If you are working temporarily in the same
Example 1. You are a railroad conductor. city where you and your family live, you may be
You leave your home terminal on a regularly considered as traveling away from home. SeeExample. You live in Cincinnati where you
scheduled round-trip run between two cities and Example 2 below.have a seasonal job for 8 months each year and
return home 16 hours later. During the run, you earn $40,000. You work the other 4 months in
have 6 hours off at your turnaround point where Example 1. You are a truck driver and youMiami, also at a seasonal job, and earn $15,000.
you eat two meals and rent a hotel room to get and your family live in Tucson. You are em-Cincinnati is your main place of work because
necessary sleep before starting the return trip. ployed by a trucking firm that has its terminal inyou spend most of your time there and earn
You are considered to be away from home. Phoenix. At the end of your long runs, you returnmost of your income there.
to your home terminal in Phoenix and spend one
No main place of business or work. YouExample 2. You are a truck driver. You night there before returning home. You cannot
may have a tax home even if you do not have aleave your terminal and return to it later the deduct any expenses you have for meals and
regular or main place of business or work. Yoursame day. You get an hour off at your turn- lodging in Phoenix or the cost of traveling from
tax home may be the home where you regularlyaround point to eat. Because you are not off to Phoenix to Tucson. This is because Phoenix is
live.get necessary sleep and the brief time off is not your tax home.
an adequate rest period, you are not traveling Factors used to determine tax home. If
Example 2. Your family home is in Pitts-away from home. you do not have a regular or main place of
burgh, where you work 12 weeks a year. Thebusiness or work, use the following three factors
rest of the year you work for the same employerMembers of the Armed Forces. If you are a to determine where your tax home is. 
in Baltimore. In Baltimore, you eat in restaurantsmember of the U.S. Armed Forces on a perma-
1. You perform part of your business in the and sleep in a rooming house. Your salary is thenent duty assignment overseas, you are not
area of your main home and use that same whether you are in Pittsburgh or Balti-traveling away from home. You cannot deduct
home for lodging while doing business in more.your expenses for meals and lodging. You can-
the area. Because you spend most of your workingnot deduct these expenses even if you have to
time and earn most of your salary in Baltimore,maintain a home in the United States for your 2. You have living expenses at your main that city is your tax home. You cannot deductfamily members who are not allowed to accom- home that you duplicate because your any expenses you have for meals and lodgingpany you overseas. If you are transferred from business requires you to be away from that there. However, when you return to work inone permanent duty station to another, you may home. Pittsburgh, you are away from your tax homehave deductible moving expenses, which are
3. You have not abandoned the area in which even though you stay at your family home. Youexplained in Publication 521, Moving Expenses.
both your historical place of lodging and can deduct the cost of your round trip betweenA naval officer assigned to permanent duty your claimed main home are located; you Baltimore and Pittsburgh. You can also deductaboard a ship that has regular eating and living have a member or members of your family your part of your family's living expenses forfacilities has a tax home aboard ship for travel living at your main home; or you often use meals and lodging while you are living and work-expense purposes. that home for lodging. ing in Pittsburgh. 
If you satisfy all three factors, your tax homeTax Home is the home where you regularly live. If you Temporary Assignment
satisfy only two factors, you may have a taxTo determine whether you are traveling away  or Jobhome depending on all the facts and circum-from home, you must first determine the location stances. If you satisfy only one factor, you are an You may regularly work at your tax home andof your tax home. itinerant; your tax home is wherever you work also work at another location. It may not beGenerally, your tax home is your regular and you cannot deduct travel expenses. practical to return to your tax home from thisplace of business or post of duty, regardless of
other location at the end of each work day.where you maintain your family home. It in- Example. You are single and live in Bostoncludes the entire city or general area in which in an apartment you rent. You have worked for Temporary assignment vs. indefinite assign-your business or work is located. your employer in Boston for a number of years. ment. If your assignment or job away from
If you have more than one regular place of Your employer enrolls you in a 12-month execu- your main place of work is temporary, your tax
business, your tax home is your main place of tive training program. You do not expect to re- home does not change. You are considered to
business. See Main place of business or work , turn to work in Boston after you complete your be away from home for the whole period you are
later. training. away from your main place of work. You can
If you do not have a regular or a main place During your training, you do not do any work deduct your travel expenses if they otherwise
of business because of the nature of your work, in Boston. Instead, you receive classroom and qualify for deduction. Generally, a temporary
then your tax home may be the place where you on-the-job training throughout the United States. assignment in a single location is one that is
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 179

Page 182 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
location, all for short periods but that togetherTable 26-1. Travel Expenses You Can Deduct
cover a long period, may be considered an in- This chart summarizes expenses you can deduct when you 
definite assignment.travel away from home for business purposes.
Going home on days off. If you go back to
your tax home from a temporary assignment onIF you have your days off, you are not considered away fromexpenses for... THEN you can deduct the cost of... home while you are in your hometown. You
cannot deduct the cost of your meals and lodg-transportation travel by airplane, train, bus, or car between your home and
ing there. However, you can deduct your travelyour business destination. If you were provided with a ticket or
expenses, including meals and lodging, whileyou are riding free as a result of a frequent traveler or similar
traveling between your temporary place of workprogram, your cost is zero. If you travel by ship, see Luxury and your tax home. You can claim these ex-Water Travel and Cruise ships (under Conventions) in penses up to the amount it would have cost youPublication 463 for additional rules and limits. to stay at your temporary place of work.
If you keep your hotel room during your visittaxi, commuter fares for these and other types of transportation that take you
home, you can deduct the cost of your hotelbus, and airport between:
room. In addition, you can deduct your ex-limousine • The airport or station and your hotel, and penses of returning home up to the amount you
• The hotel and the work location of your customers or would have spent for meals had you stayed at
clients, your business meeting place, or your temporary your temporary place of work.
work location.
Probationary work period. If you take a job
baggage and sending baggage and sample or display material between your that requires you to move, with the understand-
shipping regular and temporary work locations. ing that you will keep the job if your work is
satisfactory during a probationary period, the jobcar operating and maintaining your car when traveling away from is indefinite. You cannot deduct any of yourhome on business. You can deduct actual expenses or the expenses for meals and lodging during the pro-standard mileage rate as well as business-related tolls and bationary period.parking. If you rent a car while away from home on business,
you can deduct only the business-use portion of the expenses.
What Travel Expenses Are
lodging and meals your lodging and meals if your business trip is overnight or long Deductible?enough that you need to stop for sleep or rest to properly
perform your duties. Meals include amounts spent for food, Once you have determined that you are travel-
beverages, taxes, and related tips. See Meals and Incidental ing away from your tax home, you can determine
Expenses for additional rules and limits. what travel expenses are deductible.
You can deduct ordinary and necessary ex-cleaning dry cleaning and laundry. penses you have when you travel away from
home on business. The type of expense you cantelephone business calls while on your business trip. This includes
deduct depends on the facts and your circum-business communication by fax machine or other
stances.communication devices.
Table 26-1 summarizes travel expenses you
tips tips you pay for any expenses in this chart. may be able to deduct. You may have other
deductible travel expenses that are not coveredother other similar ordinary and necessary expenses related to your there, depending on the facts and your circum-business travel. These expenses might include transportation stances.
to or from a business meal, public stenographer's fees,
When you travel away from home oncomputer rental fees, and operating and maintaining a house
business, you should keep records oftrailer.
all the expenses you have and any
RECORDS
advances you receive from your employer. You
can use a log, diary, notebook, or any otherrealistically expected to last (and does in fact travel expenses even if you are away from your written record to keep track of your expenses.last) for 1 year or less. tax home for more than 1 year, provided you The types of expenses you need to record,However, if your assignment or job is indefi- meet the other requirements for deductibility. along with supporting documentation, are de-nite, the location of the assignment or job be- For you to qualify, the Attorney General (or scribed in Table 26-2, later.comes your new tax home and you cannot his or her designee) must certify that you are
deduct your travel expenses while there. An traveling: Separating costs. If you have one expenseassignment or job in a single location is consid- that includes the costs of meals, entertainment,• For the federal government,ered indefinite if it is realistically expected to last and other services (such as lodging or transpor-for more than 1 year, whether or not it actually • In a temporary duty status, and tation), you must allocate that expense betweenlasts for more than 1 year. the cost of meals and entertainment and the cost• To investigate or prosecute, or provideIf your assignment is indefinite, you must of other services. You must have a reasonablesupport services for the investigation orinclude in your income any amounts you receive basis for making this allocation. For example,prosecution of a federal crime.from your employer for living expenses, even if you must allocate your expenses if a hotel in-they are called travel allowances and you ac- cludes one or more meals in its room charge.count to your employer for them. You may be Determining temporary or indefinite. Youable to deduct the cost of relocating to your new Travel expenses for another individual. If amust determine whether your assignment istax home as a moving expense. See Publication spouse, dependent, or other individual goes withtemporary or indefinite when you start work. If521 for more information. you (or your employee) on a business trip or to ayou expect an assignment or job to last for 1
business convention, you generally cannot de-year or less, it is temporary unless there areException for federal crime investigations or duct his or her travel expenses.facts and circumstances that indicate otherwise.prosecutions. If you are a federal employee
An assignment or job that is initially temporaryparticipating in a federal crime investigation or Employee. You can deduct the travel ex-
may become indefinite due to changed circum-prosecution, you are not subject to the 1-year penses of someone who goes with you if that
rule. This means you may be able to deduct stances. A series of assignments to the same person:
Page 180 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 183 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1. Is your employee, can deduct only 50% of the unreimbursed cost allowance. If you are reimbursed under an ac-
of your meals. countable plan and you are deducting amounts2. Has a bona fide business purpose for the that are more than your reimbursements, youtravel, and If you are reimbursed for the cost of your can deduct only 50% of the excess amount. Themeals, how you apply the 50% limit depends on3. Would otherwise be allowed to deduct the 50% limit is explained later under Entertainmentwhether your employer's reimbursement plantravel expenses. Expenses. Accountable and nonaccountablewas accountable or nonaccountable. If you are plans are discussed later under Reimburse-not reimbursed, the 50% limit applies whetherBusiness associate. If a business associ- ments.the unreimbursed meal expense is for businessate travels with you and meets the conditions in travel or business entertainment. The 50% limit There is no optional standard lodging(2) and (3) above, you can deduct the travel is explained later under Entertainment Ex- amount similar to the standard mealexpenses you have for that person. A business penses. Accountable and nonaccountable plans allowance. Your allowable lodging ex-
CAUTION
!associate is someone with whom you could rea- are discussed later under Reimbursements. pense deduction is your actual cost.sonably expect to actively conduct business. A
business associate can be a current or prospec- Actual cost. You can use the actual cost of Who can use the standard meal allowance.
tive (likely to become) customer, client, supplier, your meals to figure the amount of your expense You can use the standard meal allowance
employee, agent, partner, or professional advi- before reimbursement and application of the whether you are an employee or self-employed,
sor. 50% deduction limit. If you use this method, you and whether or not you are reimbursed for your
must keep records of your actual cost. traveling expenses.Bona fide business purpose. A bona fide
business purpose exists if you can prove a real Standard meal allowance. Generally, you Use of the standard meal allowance for otherbusiness purpose for the individual's presence. can use the ªstandard meal allowanceº method travel. You can use the standard meal allow-Incidental services, such as typing notes or as- as an alternative to the actual cost method. It ance to figure your meal expenses when yousisting in entertaining customers, are not allows you to use a set amount for your daily travel in connection with investment and otherenough to make the expenses deductible. meals and incidental expenses (M&IE), instead income-producing property. You can also use it
of keeping records of your actual costs. The set to figure your meal expenses when you travel forExample. Jerry drives to Chicago on busi- amount varies depending on where and when qualifying educational purposes. You cannotness and takes his wife, Linda, with him. Linda is you travel. In this chapter, ªstandard meal allow- use the standard meal allowance to figure thenot Jerry's employee. Linda occasionally types anceº refers to the federal rate for M&IE, dis- cost of your meals when you travel for medicalnotes, performs similar services, and accompa- cussed later under Amount of standard meal or charitable purposes.nies Jerry to luncheons and dinners. The per- allowance. If you use the standard meal allow-formance of these services does not establish Amount of standard meal allowance. Theance, you still must keep records to prove thethat her presence on the trip is necessary to the standard meal allowance is the federal M&IEtime, place, and business purpose of your travel.conduct of Jerry's business. Her expenses are rate. For travel in 2009, the rate for most smallSee Recordkeeping, later.not deductible. localities in the United States is $39 a day for theIncidental expenses. The term ªincidentalJerry pays $199 a day for a double room. A period from January 1 through September 30,expensesº means:single room costs $149 a day. He can deduct the 2009, and $46 a day for the period October 1
total cost of driving his car to and from Chicago, through December 31, 2009.• Fees and tips given to porters, baggage
but only $149 a day for his hotel room. If he uses Most major cities and many other localities incarriers, bellhops, hotel maids, stewards
public transportation, he can deduct only his the United States are designated as high-costor stewardesses and others on ships, and
fare. areas, qualifying for higher standard meal al-hotel servants in foreign countries,
lowances. Locations qualifying for these rates• Transportation between places of lodging are listed in Publication 1542 which is availableMeals and Incidental Expenses or business and places where meals are on the Internet at www.irs.gov.taken, if suitable meals can be obtained atYou can deduct the cost of meals in either of the You can also find this information (or-the temporary duty site, andfollowing situations. ganized by state) on the Internet at• Mailing costs associated with filing travel• It is necessary for you to stop for substan- www.gsa.gov . Click on ªPer Diem
vouchers and payment of em-tial sleep or rest to properly perform your Rates,º then select ª2009º for the period Januaryployer-sponsored charge card billings.duties while traveling away from home on 1, 2009 ± September 30, 2009, and select
business. ª2010º for the period October 1, 2009 ± Decem-Incidental expenses do not include expenses for
ber 31, 2009. However, you can apply the rateslaundry, cleaning and pressing of clothing, lodg-• The meal is business-related entertain- in effect before October 1, 2009, for expenses ofing taxes, or the costs of telegrams or telephonement. all travel within the United States for 2009 in-calls.
stead of the updated rates. You must consist-Business-related entertainment is discussed Incidental expenses only method. You ently use either the rates for the first 9 monthsunder Entertainment Expenses , later. The fol- can use an optional method (instead of actual for all of 2009 or the updated rates for the periodlowing discussion deals only with meals (and cost) for deducting incidental expenses only. of October 1, 2009, through December 31,incidental expenses) that are not busi- The amount of the deduction is $3 a day for the 2009.ness-related entertainment. period from January 1 through September 30,
If you travel to more than one location in one2009, and $5 a day for the period October 1
day, use the rate in effect for the area where youLavish or extravagant. You cannot deduct through December 31, 2009. You can use this
stop for sleep or rest. If you work in the transpor-expenses for meals that are lavish or extrava- method only if you did not pay or incur any meal
tation industry, however, see Special rate forgant. An expense is not considered lavish or expenses. You cannot use this method on any
transportation workers, later.extravagant if it is reasonable based on the facts day that you use the standard meal allowance.
and circumstances. Expenses will not be disal- Standard meal allowance for areas outsideFederal employees should refer to thelowed merely because they are more than a the continental United States.  The standardFederal Travel Regulations at fixed dollar amount or take place at deluxe res- meal allowance rates above do not apply towww.gsa.gov. Click on ªRegulations:
CAUTION
!taurants, hotels, nightclubs, or resorts. travel in Alaska, Hawaii, or any other locationFAR, FMR, FTRº for Federal Travel Regulation
outside the continental United States. The De-(FTR) for changes affecting claims for reim-50% limit on meals. You can figure your meal partment of Defense establishes per diem ratesbursement.expenses using either of the following methods. for Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, American Sa-
50% limit may apply. If you use the stan- moa, Guam, Midway, the Northern Mariana Is-• Actual cost.
dard meal allowance method for meal expenses lands, the U.S. Virgin Islands, Wake Island, and• The standard meal allowance. and you are not reimbursed or you are reim- other non-foreign areas outside the continental
Both of these methods are explained below. But, bursed under a nonaccountable plan, you can United States. The Department of State estab-
regardless of the method you use, you generally generally deduct only 50% of the standard meal lishes per diem rates for all other foreign areas.
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 181

Page 184 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You can access per diem rates for employee would have to use method 1 and be whether your trip was entirely within the United
non-foreign areas outside the conti- limited to only 21/2 days. States.
nental United States at:
Public transportation. If you travel by publichttp://perdiem.hqda.pentagon.mil/perdiem/ Travel in the transportation, any place in the United Statesperdiemrates.html. You can access all other for-
where that vehicle makes a scheduled stop is aUnited Stateseign per diem rates at:
point in the United States. Once the vehiclewww.state.gov/travel/. Click on ªTravelº then
The following discussion applies to travel in the leaves the last scheduled stop in the Unitedclick on ªForeign Per Diem Rates,º to obtain the
United States. For this purpose, the United States on its way to a point outside the Unitedlatest foreign per diem rates.
States includes the 50 states and the District of States, you apply the rules under Travel Outside
Special rate for transportation workers. Columbia. The treatment of your travel ex- the United States.
You can use a special standard meal allowance penses depends on how much of your trip was
if you work in the transportation industry. You business related and on how much of your trip Example. You fly from New York to Puerto
are in the transportation industry if your work: occurred within the United States. See Part of Rico with a scheduled stop in Miami. You return
Trip Outside the United States, later. to New York nonstop. The flight from New York• Directly involves moving people or goods to Miami is in the United States, so only the flightby airplane, barge, bus, ship, train, or from Miami to Puerto Rico is outside the Unitedtruck, and Trip Primarily for Business States. Because there are no scheduled stops
• Regularly requires you to travel away from between Puerto Rico and New York, all of the
You can deduct all your travel expenses if yourhome and, during any single trip, usually return trip is outside the United States.
trip was entirely business related. If your trip wasinvolves travel to areas eligible for differ-
primarily for business and, while at your busi-ent standard meal allowance rates. Private car. Travel by private car in the United
ness destination, you extended your stay for a States is travel between points in the UnitedIf this applies to you, you can claim a standard vacation, made a personal side trip, or had other States, even when you are on your way to ameal allowance of $52 a day ($58 for travel personal activities, you can deduct your busi- destination outside the United States.outside the continental United States) from Jan- ness-related travel expenses. These expensesuary 1 through September 30, 2009, and $59 a include the travel costs of getting to and from Example. You travel by car from Denver today ($65 for travel outside the continental United your business destination and any busi- Mexico City and return. Your travel from DenverStates) from October 1 through December 31, ness-related expenses at your business desti- to the border and from the border back to Den-2009. nation. ver is travel in the United States, and the rules in
Using the special rate for transportation work- this section apply. The rules under Travel
Example. You work in Atlanta and take aers eliminates the need for you to determine the Outside the United States apply to your trip from
business trip to New Orleans. On your waystandard meal allowance for every area where the border to Mexico City and back to the border.
home, you stop in Mobile to visit your parents.you stop for sleep or rest. If you choose to use
You spend $2,012 for the 9 days you are awaythe special rate for any trip, you must use the Travel Outsidefrom home for travel, meals, lodging, and otherspecial rate (and not use the regular standard
travel expenses. If you had not stopped in Mo-meal allowance rates) for all trips you take that the United States
bile, you would have been gone only 6 days, andyear.
If any part of your business travel is outside theyour total cost would have been $1,712. You can
United States, some of your deductions for thededuct $1,712 for your trip, including the cost ofTravel for days you depart and return. For cost of getting to and from your destination mayround-trip transportation to and from New Orle-both the day you depart for and the day you be limited. For this purpose, the United Statesans. The deduction for your meals is subject toreturn from a business trip, you must prorate the includes the 50 states and the District of Colum-the 50% limit on meals mentioned earlier.standard meal allowance (figure a reduced bia.amount for each day). You can do so by one of How much of your travel expenses you cantwo methods. deduct depends in part upon how much of yourTrip Primarily for
trip outside the United States was business re-• Method 1: You can claim 3/4 of the stan- Personal Reasons
lated.dard meal allowance.
See chapter 1 of Publication 463 for informa-If your trip was primarily for personal reasons,• Method 2: You can prorate using any tion on luxury water travel.such as a vacation, the entire cost of the trip is amethod that you consistently apply and nondeductible personal expense. However, youthat is in accordance with reasonable busi- can deduct any expenses you have while at yourness practice. destination that are directly related to your busi- Travel Entirely for Business
ness. or Considered Entirely
Example. Jen is employed in New Orleans for Business   A trip to a resort or on a cruise ship may beas a convention planner. In March, her employer a vacation even if the promoter advertises that itsent her on a 3-day trip to Washington, DC, to You can deduct all your travel expenses of get-is primarily for business. The scheduling of inci-attend a planning seminar. She left her home in ting to and from your business destination if yourdental business activities during a trip, such asNew Orleans at 10 a.m. on Wednesday and trip is entirely for business or considered entirelyviewing videotapes or attending lectures dealingarrived in Washington, DC, at 5:30 p.m. After for business.with general subjects, will not change what isspending two nights there, she flew back to New really a vacation into a business trip. Travel entirely for business. If you travelOrleans on Friday and arrived back home at
outside the United States and you spend the8:00 p.m. Jen's employer gave her a flat amount
entire time on business activities, you can de-to cover her expenses and included it with her Part of Trip Outside duct all of your travel expenses.wages. the United StatesUnder Method 1, Jen can claim 2 1/2 days of Travel considered entirely for business.the standard meal allowance for Washington, If part of your trip is outside the United States, Even if you did not spend your entire time onDC: 3/4 of the daily rate for Wednesday and use the rules described later under Travel business activities, your trip is considered en-Friday (the days she departed and returned), Outside the United States for that part of the trip. tirely for business if you meet at least one of theand the full daily rate for Thursday. For the part of your trip that is inside the United following four exceptions.Under Method 2, Jen could also use any States, use the rules for travel in the United
method that she applies consistently and that is States. Travel outside the United States does Exception 1 - No substantial control.
in accordance with reasonable business prac- not include travel from one point in the United Your trip is considered entirely for business if
tice. For example, she could claim 3 days of the States to another point in the United States. The you did not have substantial control over arrang-
standard meal allowance even though a federal following discussion can help you determine ing the trip. The fact that you control the timing of
Page 182 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 185 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
your trip does not, by itself, mean that you have only if your attendance is connected to your ownTravel Primarily for Personal
substantial control over arranging your trip. trade or business.ReasonsYou do not have substantial control over
Convention agenda. The convention agendayour trip if you: If you travel outside the United States primarily or program generally shows the purpose of thefor vacation or for investment purposes, the en-• Are an employee who was reimbursed or convention. You can show your attendance attire cost of the trip is a nondeductible personalpaid a travel expense allowance, the convention benefits your trade or businessexpense. If you spend some time attending brief by comparing the agenda with the official duties• Are not related to your employer, and professional seminars or a continuing education and responsibilities of your position. The agenda• Are not a managing executive. program, you can deduct your registration fees does not have to deal specifically with your offi-
and other expenses you have that are directly cial duties and responsibilities; it will be enoughªRelated to your employerº is defined later in if the agenda is so related to your position that itrelated to your business.this chapter under Per Diem and Car Al- shows your attendance was for business pur-lowances. poses.ConventionsA ªmanaging executiveº is an employee who
Conventions held outside the North Ameri-has the authority and responsibility, without be-
You can deduct your travel expenses when you can area. See chapter 1 of Publication 463 foring subject to the veto of another, to decide on
attend a convention if you can show that your information on conventions held outside thethe need for the business travel.
attendance benefits your trade or business. You North American area. A self-employed person generally has sub-
stantial control over arranging business trips. cannot deduct the travel expenses for your fam-
ily.Exception 2 - Outside United States no
more than a week. Your trip is considered  If the convention is for investment, political,
Entertainmententirely for business if you were outside the social, or other purposes unrelated to your trade
United States for a week or less, combining or business, you cannot deduct the expenses. Expensesbusiness and nonbusiness activities. One week
Your appointment or election as a dele-means 7 consecutive days. In counting the
gate does not, in itself, determine You may be able to deduct business-relateddays, do not count the day you leave the United
whether you can deduct travel ex- entertainment expenses you have for entertain-States, but do count the day you return to the
CAUTION
!
penses. You can deduct your travel expenses ing a client, customer, or employee.United States.
Exception 3 - Less than 25% of time on
personal activities. Your trip is considered
entirely for business if:
• You were outside the United States for
more than a week, and
• You spent less than 25% of the total time
you were outside the United States on
nonbusiness activities.
For this purpose, count both the day your trip
began and the day it ended.
Exception 4 - Vacation not a major consid-
eration. Your trip is considered entirely for
business if you can establish that a personal
vacation was not a major consideration, even if
you have substantial control over arranging the
trip.
Travel Primarily for Business
If you travel outside the United States primarily
for business but spend some of your time on
nonbusiness activities, you generally cannot de-
duct all of your travel expenses. You can only
deduct the business portion of your cost of get-
ting to and from your destination. You must
allocate the costs between your business and
nonbusiness activities to determine your de-
ductible amount. These travel allocation rules
are discussed in chapter 1 of Publication 463.
You do not have to allocate your travel
expense deduction if you meet one of
the four exceptions listed earlier under
TIP
Travel considered entirely for business. In those
cases, you can deduct the total cost of getting to
and from your destination.
Figure 26-A. Does the 50% Limit Apply to Your Expenses?
All employees and self-employed persons can use this chart. For more information, see
50% Limit.
Were your meal and entertainment expenses reimbursed?
(Count only reimbursements your employer did not include
in box 1 of your Form W-2. If self-employed, count only
reimbursements from clients or customers that are not
included on Form 1099-MISC, Miscellaneous Income.)
If an employee, did you adequately account
to your employer under an accountable plan?
If self-employed, did you provide the payer
with adequate records? (See How To Report. )
Did your expenses exceed the reimbursement?
For the amount reimbursed. . . For the excess amount. . .
Your meal and entertainment
expenses are NOT subject to
the 50% limit. However,
since the reimbursement was
not treated as wages or as
other taxable income, you
cannot deduct the expenses.
Your meal and
entertainment expenses
ARE subject to
the 50% limit.
Yes
No
/H17074
/H17074
/H17075
/H17075
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
Yes
No
Yes
No
There are exceptions to these rules. See Exceptions to the 50% Limit.
Start Here
/H17074/H17074
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 183

Page 186 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You can deduct entertainment expenses When to apply the 50% limit. You apply the What Entertainmentonly if they are both ordinary and necessary 50% limit after determining the amount that
Expenses Are Deductible?(defined earlier in the Introduction) and meet would otherwise qualify for a deduction. You first
one of the following tests. have to determine the amount of meal and en-
This section explains different types of entertain-tertainment expenses that would be deductible• Directly-related test. ment expenses that you my be able to deduct.under the other rules discussed in this chapter.
• Associated test.
Entertainment.  Entertainment includes anyExample 1. You spend $200 for a busi-Both of these tests are explained in chapter 2 of activity generally considered to provide enter-ness-related meal. If $110 of that amount is notPublication 463. tainment, amusement, or recreation. Examplesallowable because it is lavish and extravagant, include entertaining guests at nightclubs; at so-the remaining $90 is subject to the 50% limit.The amount you can deduct for enter- cial, athletic, and sporting clubs; at theaters; atYour deduction cannot be more than $45 (.50 ×tainment expenses may be limited. sporting events; on yachts; or on hunting, fish-$90).Generally, you can deduct only 50% of
CAUTION
! ing, vacation, and similar trips.your unreimbursed entertainment expenses.
Example 2. You purchase two tickets to a A meal as a form of entertainment. Enter-This limit is discussed next.
concert and give them to a client. You pur- tainment includes the cost of a meal you provide
to a customer or client, whether the meal is achased the tickets through a ticket agent. You
50% Limit part of other entertainment or by itself. A mealpaid $200 for the two tickets, which had a face
expense includes the cost of food, beverages,value of $80 each ($160 total). Your deductionIn general, you can deduct only 50% of your taxes, and tips for the meal. To deduct an enter-cannot be more than $80 (.50 ×  $160).business-related meal and entertainment ex- tainment-related meal, you or your employeepenses. (If you are subject to the Department of must be present when the food or beverages areTransportation's ªhours of serviceº limits, you provided.Exceptions to the 50% Limitcan deduct 80% of your business-related meal
You cannot claim the cost of your mealand entertainment expenses. See Individuals Generally, business-related meal and entertain- both as an entertainment expense andsubject to ªhours of serviceº limits, later.) ment expenses are subject to the 50% limit. as a travel expense.
CAUTION
!The 50% limit applies to employees or their Figure 26-A can help you determine if the 50%employers, and to self-employed persons (in- limit applies to you.cluding independent contractors) or their clients, Separating costs. If you have one expenseYour meal or entertainment expense is notdepending on whether the expenses are reim- that includes the costs of entertainment, andsubject to the 50% limit if the expense meetsbursed. other services (such as lodging or transporta-one of the following exceptions.Figure 26-A  summarizes the general rules tion), you must allocate that expense between
explained in this section. the cost of entertainment and the cost of otherEmployee's reimbursed expenses. If youThe 50% limit applies to business meals or services. You must have a reasonable basis forare an employee, you are not subject to the 50%entertainment expenses you have while: making this allocation. For example, you mustlimit on expenses for which your employer reim- allocate your expenses if a hotel includes enter-• Traveling away from home (whether eat- burses you under an accountable plan. Account- tainment in its lounge on the same bill with youring alone or with others) on business, able plans are discussed later under room charge.Reimbursements.• Entertaining customers at your place of
business, a restaurant, or other location, Taking turns paying for meals or entertain-Individuals subject to ªhours of serviceº lim-or ment. If a group of business acquaintancesits. You can deduct a higher percentage of take turns picking up each others' meal or enter-• Attending a business convention or recep- your meal expenses while traveling away from tainment checks without regard to whether anytion, business meeting, or business lunch- your tax home if the meals take place during or business purposes are served, no member ofeon at a club. incident to any period subject to the Department the group can deduct any part of the expense.
of Transportation's ªhours of serviceº limits. The
Included expenses. Expenses subject to the percentage is 80%. Lavish or extravagant expenses. You can-50% limit include: Individuals subject to the Department of not deduct expenses for entertainment that are
Transportation's ªhours of serviceº limits include lavish or extravagant. An expense is not consid-• Taxes and tips relating to a business meal
the following persons. ered lavish or extravagant if it is reasonableor entertainment activity,
considering the facts and circumstances. Ex-• Certain air transportation workers (such as• Cover charges for admission to a night- penses will not be disallowed just because theypilots, crew, dispatchers, mechanics, andclub, are more than a fixed dollar amount or takecontrol tower operators) who are under place at deluxe restaurants, hotels, nightclubs,• Rent paid for a room in which you hold a Federal Aviation Administration regula- or resorts.dinner or cocktail party, and tions.
• Amounts paid for parking at a sports Trade association meetings.  You can de-• Interstate truck operators and bus driversarena. duct entertainment expenses that are directlywho are under Department of Transporta-
However, the cost of transportation to and from related to, and necessary for, attending busi-tion regulations.
a business meal or a business-related entertain- ness meetings or conventions of certain exempt• Certain railroad employees (such as engi-ment activity is not subject to the 50% limit. organizations if the expenses of your attend-neers, conductors, train crews, dispatch- ance are related to your active trade or busi-
ers, and control operations personnel)Application of 50% limit. The 50% limit on ness. These organizations include business
who are under Federal Railroad Adminis-meal and entertainment expenses applies if the leagues, chambers of commerce, real estate
tration regulations.expense is otherwise deductible and is not cov- boards, trade associations, and professional as-
ered by one of the exceptions discussed later in sociations.• Certain merchant mariners who are under
this section. Coast Guard regulations.
The 50% limit also applies to certain meal Entertainment tickets. Generally, you cannot
and entertainment expenses that are not busi- deduct more than the face value of an entertain-Other exceptions. There are also exceptionsness-related. It applies to meal and entertain- ment ticket, even if you paid a higher price. For
for the self-employed, advertising expenses,ment expenses incurred for the production of example, you cannot deduct service fees you
selling meals or entertainment, and charitableincome, including rental or royalty income. It pay to ticket agencies or brokers or any amount
sports events. These are discussed in Publica-also applies to the cost of meals included in over the face value of the tickets you pay to
tion 463.deductible educational expenses. scalpers.
Page 184 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 187 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
$25 limit. You can deduct no more than $25What Entertainment for business gifts you give directly or indirectly to TransportationExpenses Are Not each person during your tax year. A gift to a
company that is intended for the eventual per-Deductible? Expensessonal use or benefit of a particular person or a
limited class of people will be considered anThis section explains different types of entertain- This section discusses expenses you can de-
indirect gift to that particular person or to thement expenses that you generally may not be duct for business transportation when you are
individuals within that class of people who re-able to deduct. not traveling away from home as defined earlier
ceive the gift. under Travel Expenses . These expenses in-Club dues and membership fees. You can- clude the cost of transportation by air, rail, bus,If you give a gift to a member of a customer'snot deduct dues (including initiation fees) for taxi, etc., and the cost of driving and maintainingfamily, the gift is generally considered to be anmembership in any club organized for: your car.indirect gift to the customer. This rule does not
Transportation expenses include the ordi-• Business, apply if you have a bona fide, independent busi-
nary and necessary costs of all of the following.ness connection with that family member and• Pleasure, the gift is not intended for the customer's even- • Getting from one workplace to another in• Recreation, or tual use. the course of your business or profession
If you and your spouse both give gifts, both of when you are traveling within the area of• Other social purpose.
you are treated as one taxpayer. It does not your tax home. (Tax home is defined ear-This rule applies to any membership organiza- matter whether you have separate businesses, lier under Travel Expenses.)tion if one of its principal purposes is either: are separately employed, or whether each of • Visiting clients or customers.• To conduct entertainment activities for you has an independent connection with the
• Going to a business meeting away frommembers or their guests, or recipient. If a partnership gives gifts, the partner-
your regular workplace.ship and the partners are treated as one tax-• To provide members or their guests with payer. • Getting from your home to a temporaryaccess to entertainment facilities.
workplace when you have one or more
regular places of work. These temporaryThe purposes and activities of a club, not its Incidental costs. Incidental costs, such as
workplaces can be either within the areaname, will determine whether or not you can engraving on jewelry, or packaging, insuring,
of your tax home or outside that area.deduct the dues. You cannot deduct dues paid and mailing, are generally not included in deter-
to: mining the cost of a gift for purposes of the $25 Transportation expenses do not include ex-
limit. penses you have while traveling away from• Country clubs,
home overnight. Those expenses are travel ex-A cost is incidental only if it does not add• Golf and athletic clubs, penses, which are discussed earlier. However, ifsubstantial value to the gift. For example, the
you use your car while traveling away from• Airline clubs, cost of gift wrapping is an incidental cost. How-
home overnight, use the rules in this section toever, the purchase of an ornamental basket for• Hotel clubs, and figure your car expense deduction. See Car Ex-packaging fruit is not an incidental cost if the
• Clubs operated to provide meals under cir- penses, later.value of the basket is substantial compared to
cumstances generally considered to be the value of the fruit.
conducive to business discussions. Illustration of transportation expenses.
Figure 26-B illustrates the rules for when you
Exceptions. The following items are not con- can deduct transportation expenses when youEntertainment facilities. Generally, you can- sidered gifts for purposes of the $25 limit. have a regular or main job away from yournot deduct any expense for the use of an enter- home. You may want to refer to it when decidingtainment facility. This includes expenses for 1. An item that costs $4 or less and: whether you can deduct your transportation ex-depreciation and operating costs such as rent, penses.a. Has your name clearly and permanentlyutilities, maintenance, and protection.
imprinted on the gift, andAn entertainment facility is any property you Temporary work location. If you have one orown, rent, or use for entertainment. Examples b. Is one of a number of identical items more regular work locations away from yourinclude a yacht, hunting lodge, fishing camp, you widely distribute. Examples include home and you commute to a temporary workswimming pool, tennis court, bowling alley, car, pens, desk sets, and plastic bags and location in the same trade or business, you canairplane, apartment, hotel suite, or home in a cases. deduct the expenses of the daily round-tripvacation resort. transportation between your home and the tem-
porary location, regardless of distance.Out-of-pocket expenses. You can deduct 2. Signs, display racks, or other promotional
If your employment at a work location isout-of-pocket expenses, such as for food and material to be used on the business prem-
realistically expected to last (and does in factbeverages, catering, gas, and fishing bait, that ises of the recipient.
last) for one year or less, the employment isyou provided during entertainment at a facility.
temporary unless there are facts and circum-These are not expenses for the use of an enter-
stances that would indicate otherwise.tainment facility. However, these expenses are Gift or entertainment. Any item that might be
subject to the directly-related and associated If your employment at a work location isconsidered either a gift or entertainment gener-
tests and to the 50% limit discussed earlier. realistically expected to last for more than 1 yearally will be considered entertainment. However,
or if there is no realistic expectation that theif you give a customer packaged food or bever-Additional information. For more information employment will last for 1 year or less, the em-ages that you intend the customer to use at aon entertainment expenses, including discus- ployment is not temporary, regardless oflater date, treat it as a gift.sions of the directly-related and associated whether it actually lasts for more than 1 year. If you give a customer tickets to a theatertests, see chapter 2 of Publication 463. If employment at a work location initially isperformance or sporting event and you do not go realistically expected to last for 1 year or less,with the customer to the performance or event, but at some later date the employment is realisti-you have a choice. You can treat the cost of the cally expected to last more than 1 year, thattickets as either a gift expense or an entertain- employment will be treated as temporary (un-Gift Expenses ment expense, whichever is to your advantage. less there are facts and circumstances that
If you go with the customer to the event, you would indicate otherwise) until your expectationIf you give gifts in the course of your trade or
must treat the cost of the tickets as an entertain- changes. It will not be treated as temporary afterbusiness, you can deduct all or part of the cost.
ment expense. You cannot choose, in this case, the date you determine it will last more than 1This section explains the limits and rules for
to treat the cost of the tickets as a gift expense. year.deducting the costs of gifts.
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 185

Page 188 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
meeting is temporary and you have one or more
regular places of work.
If you ordinarily work in a particular metropol-
itan area but not at any specific location and the
reserve meeting is held at a temporary location
outside that metropolitan area, you can deduct
your transportation expenses.
If you travel away from home overnight to
attend a guard or reserve meeting, you can
deduct your travel expenses. These expenses
are discussed earlier under Travel Expenses.
If you travel more than 100 miles away from
home in connection with your performance of
services as a member of the reserves, you may
be able to deduct some of your reserve-related
travel costs as an adjustment to income rather
than as an itemized deduction. See Armed
Forces reservists traveling more than 100 miles
from home under Special Rules, later.
Commuting expenses. You cannot deduct
the costs of taking a bus, trolley, subway, or taxi,
or of driving a car between your home and your
main or regular place of work. These costs are
personal commuting expenses. You cannot de-
duct commuting expenses no matter how far
your home is from your regular place of work.
You cannot deduct commuting expenses even if
you work during the commuting trip.
Example. You sometimes use your cell
phone to make business calls while commuting
to and from work. Sometimes business associ-
ates ride with you to and from work, and you
have a business discussion in the car. These
activities do not change the trip from personal to
business. You cannot deduct your commuting
expenses.
Parking fees. Fees you pay to park your car
at your place of business are nondeductible
commuting expenses. You can, however, de-
duct business-related parking fees when visiting
a customer or client.
Advertising display on car. Putting display
material that advertises your business on your
car does not change the use of your car from
personal use to business use. If you use this car
for commuting or other personal uses, you still
cannot deduct your expenses for those uses.
EPS File Name: 10311G43 Size: Width = 29.0 picas, Depth = 39.7 picas
Figure 26-B.
/H17074
/H17076 /H17075
/H17073
/H17074
/H17073
/H17073
/H17074/H17075
/H17073
/H17074
/H17073
Temporary
work location
Home Regular or
main job
Always
deductible
Always
deductible
Second job
Never deductible
Never deductible
Deductible if you have a
regular or main job
at another location Always deductib
le
Most employees and self-employed persons can use this chart.
(Do not use this chart if your home is your principal place of business.
See Office in the home.)
Home: The place where you reside. Transportation expenses between your home and
your main or regular place of work are personal commuting expenses.
Regular or main job: Your principal place of business. If you have more than one job,
you must determine which one is your regular or main job. Consider the time you
spend at each, the activity you have at each, and the income you earn at each.
Temporary work location: A place where your work assignment is realistically
expected to last (and does in fact last) one year or less. Unless you have a regular
place of business, you can only deduct your transportation expenses to a temporary
work location outside
 your metropolitan area.
Second job: If you regularly work at two or more places in one day, whether or not
for the same employer, you can deduct your transportation expenses of getting from
one workplace to another. If you do not go directly from your first job to your second
job, you can only deduct the transportation expenses of going directly from your first
job to your second job. You cannot deduct your transportation expenses between
your home and a second job on a day off from your main job.
When Are Transportation Expenses Deductible?
Car pools. You cannot deduct the cost of
using your car in a nonprofit car pool. Do notIf the temporary work location is beyond the some personal reason you do not go directly include payments you receive from the passen-general area of your regular place of work and from one location to the other, you cannot de- gers in your income. These payments are con-you stay overnight, you are traveling away from duct more than the amount it would have cost sidered reimbursements of your expenses.home. You may have deductible travel ex- you to go directly from the first location to the However, if you operate a car pool for a profit,penses as discussed earlier in this chapter. second. you must include payments from passengers in
Transportation expenses you have in going your income. You can then deduct your carNo regular place of work. If you have no between home and a part-time job on a day off expenses (using the rules in this chapter).regular place of work but ordinarily work in the from your main job are commuting expenses.metropolitan area where you live, you can de- Hauling tools or instruments. HaulingYou cannot deduct them.duct daily transportation costs between home tools or instruments in your car while commuting
and a temporary work site outside that metropol- Armed Forces reservists. A meeting of an to and from work does not make your car ex-
itan area. Armed Forces reserve unit is a second place of penses deductible. However, you can deduct
Generally, a metropolitan area includes the business if the meeting is held on a day on which any additional costs you have for hauling tools or
area within the city limits and the suburbs that instruments (such as for renting a trailer you towyou work at your regular job. You can deduct the
are considered part of that metropolitan area. with your car).expense of getting from one workplace to theYou cannot deduct daily transportation costs other as just discussed under Two places of Union members' trips from a union hall. Ifbetween your home and temporary work sites work. you get your work assignments at a union hallwithin your metropolitan area. These are nonde- You usually cannot deduct the expense if the and then go to your place of work, the costs ofductible commuting expenses. reserve meeting is held on a day on which you getting from the union hall to your place of work
do not work at your regular job. In this case, yourTwo places of work. If you work at two places are nondeductible commuting expenses. Al-
transportation generally is a nondeductible com-in one day, whether or not for the same em- though you need the union to get your work
muting expense. However, you can deduct yourployer, you can deduct the expense of getting assignments, you are employed where you
transportation expenses if the location of thefrom one workplace to the other. However, if for work, not where the union hall is located.
Page 186 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 189 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Office in the home. If you have an office in If your vehicle expenses are more than the • Use the car for hire (such as a taxi),
your home that qualifies as a principal place of amount of your reimbursement, you can deduct • Use five or more cars at the same time (asbusiness, you can deduct your daily transporta- the unreimbursed expenses as an itemized de- in fleet operations),tion costs between your home and another work duction on Schedule A (Form 1040). You must
• Claimed a depreciation deduction for thelocation in the same trade or business. (See complete Form 2106 and attach it to your Form
car using any method other than straightchapter 28 for information on determining if your 1040.
line depreciation,home office qualifies as a principal place of A ªqualified reimbursementº is the reim-
business.) bursement you receive that meets both of the • Claimed a section 179 deduction on thefollowing conditions. car,Examples of deductible transportation. The
• It is given as an equipment maintenancefollowing examples show when you can deduct • Claimed the special depreciation allow-allowance (EMA) to employees of the U.S.transportation expenses based on the location ance on the car,Postal Service.of your work and your home.
• Claimed actual car expenses after 1997• It is at the rate contained in the 1991 col- for a car you leased, orExample 1. You regularly work in an office lective bargaining agreement. Any laterin the city where you live. Your employer sends • Are a rural mail carrier who received aagreement cannot increase the qualifiedyou to a one-week training session at a different qualified reimbursement. (See Rural mailreimbursement amount by more than theoffice in the same city. You travel directly from carriers, earlier.)rate of inflation.your home to the training location and return
See your employer for information on your reim-each day. You can deduct the cost of your daily Five or more cars. If you own or lease fivebursement.round-trip transportation between your home or more cars that are used for business at theand the training location. same time, you cannot use the standard mile-If you are a rural mail carrier and re- age rate for the business use of any car. How-ceived a qualified reimbursement, youExample 2. Your principal place of business ever, you may be able to deduct your actualcannot use the standard mileage rate.is in your home. You can deduct the cost of
CAUTION
! expenses for operating each of the cars in yourround-trip transportation between your qualify- business. See Actual Car Expenses in chapter 4ing home office and your client's or customer's of Publication 463 for information on how toplace of business. figure your deduction.Standard Mileage Rate
You are not using five or more cars for busi-Example 3. You have no regular office, and You may be able to use the standard mileage ness at the same time if you alternate using (useyou do not have an office in your home. In this rate to figure the deductible costs of operating at different times) the cars for business.case, the location of your first business contact your car for business purposes. For 2009, the
is considered your office. Transportation ex- Parking fees and tolls. In addition to usingstandard mileage rate for each mile of business
penses between your home and this first contact the standard mileage rate, you can deduct anyuse is 55 cents per mile.
are nondeductible commuting expenses. Trans- business-related parking fees and tolls. (ParkingIf you use the standard mileage rate forportation expenses between your last business fees that you pay to park your car at your placea year, you cannot deduct your actualcontact and your home are also nondeductible of work are nondeductible commuting ex-car expenses for that year, but seecommuting expenses. Although you cannot de-
CAUTION
! penses.)Parking fees and tolls, later.duct the costs of these first and last trips, you
can deduct the costs of going from one client or You generally can use the standard mileage
customer to another. rate whether or not you are reimbursed and Actual Car Expenses
whether or not any reimbursement is more or
less than the amount figured using the standard If you do not use the standard mileage rate, youCar Expenses mileage rate. See Reimbursements under How may be able to deduct your actual car expenses.
To Report, later.If you use your car for business purposes, you If you qualify to use both methods, you
may be able to deduct car expenses. You gener- may want to figure your deduction bothChoosing the standard mileage rate. If youally can use one of the two following methods to ways to see which gives you a largerwant to use the standard mileage rate for a car
TIPfigure your deductible expenses. deduction.you own, you must choose to use it in the first
year the car is available for use in your business.• Standard mileage rate.
Then in later years, you can choose to use either Actual car expenses include:• Actual car expenses. the standard mileage rate or actual expenses.
Depreciation Lease RegistrationIf you want to use the standard mileage rateIf you use actual car expenses to figure your Garage rent payments feesfor a car you lease, you must use it for the entirededuction for a car you lease, there are rules Gas Licenses Repairslease period. For leases that began on or beforethat affect the amount of your lease payments Insurance Oil TiresDecember 31, 1997, the standard mileage ratethat you can deduct. See Leasing a car  under Parking fees Tollsmust be used for the entire portion of the leaseActual Car Expenses, later. period (including renewals) that is after 1997.In this chapter, ªcarº includes a van, pickup, You must make the choice to use the stan- Business and personal use. If you use youror panel truck. dard mileage rate by the due date (including car for both business and personal purposes,
You may be entitled to a tax credit for extensions) of your return. You cannot revoke you must divide your expenses between busi-
an alternative motor vehicle that you the choice. However, in a later year, you can ness and personal use. You can divide your
place in service during the year. The switch from the standard mileage rate to the expense based on the miles driven for each
TIP
vehicle must meet certain requirements, and actual expenses method. If you change to the purpose.
you do not have to use it in your business to actual expense method in a later year, but
Example. You are a contractor and drivequalify for the credit. For more information, see before your car is fully depreciated, you have to
your car 20,000 miles during the year: 12,000chapter 37. estimate the remaining useful life of the car and
miles for business use and 8,000 miles for per-use straight line depreciation.
Rural mail carriers. If you are a rural mail sonal use. You can claim only 60% (12,000 ÷For more information about depreciation in-
carrier, you may be able to treat the amount of 20,000) of the cost of operating your car as acluded in the standard mileage rate, see the
qualified reimbursement you received as the business expense.exception in Methods of depreciation under De-
amount of your allowable expense. Because the preciation Deduction in chapter 4 of Publication
qualified reimbursement is treated as paid under Interest on car loans. If you are an employee,463.
an accountable plan, your employer should not you cannot deduct any interest paid on a car
include the amount of reimbursement in your Standard mileage rate not allowed. You loan. This interest is treated as personal interest
income. cannot use the standard mileage rate if you: and is not deductible. However, if you are
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 187

Page 190 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
self-employed and use your car in that business, per diem allowances are discussed laterSale, Trade-In, or Other Disposition
see chapter 4 of Publication 535. under Reimbursements.)
If you sell, trade in, or otherwise dispose of yourIf you use a home equity loan to • Your expense, other than lodging, is lesscar, you may have a taxable gain or a deductiblepurchase your car, you may be able to than $75.loss. This is true whether you used the standarddeduct the interest. See chapter 23 for
TIP mileage rate or actual car expenses to deduct • You have a transportation expense formore information. the business use of your car. Publication 544 which a receipt is not readily available.
has information on sales of property used in a
trade or business, and details on how to report Adequate evidence. Documentary evi-Taxes paid on your car. If you are an em- the disposition. dence ordinarily will be considered adequate if itployee, you can deduct personal property taxes
shows the amount, date, place, and essentialpaid on your car if you itemize deductions. Enter
character of the expense.the amount paid on line 7 of Schedule A (Form
For example, a hotel receipt is enough to1040). (See chapter 22 for more information on
support expenses for business travel if it has alltaxes.) If you are not an employee, see your Recordkeeping of the following information.form instructions for information on how to de-
duct personal property taxes paid on your car. • The name and location of the hotel.If you deduct travel, entertainment, gift, or trans-
portation expenses, you must be able to proveSales taxes. Generally, sales taxes on your • The dates you stayed there.(substantiate) certain elements of the expense.car are part of your car's basis and are recov-
• Separate amounts for charges such asThis section discusses the records you need toered through depreciation, discussed later.
lodging, meals, and telephone calls.keep to prove these expenses.However, to the extent the car is not used in your
trade or business, you can choose to deduct the If you keep timely and accurate rec- A restaurant receipt is enough to prove annonbusiness part of the qualified vehicle state or ords, you will have support to show the expense for a business meal if it has all of thelocal sales or excise tax on Schedule A (Form IRS if your tax return is ever examined.
RECORDS following information.1040), line 7, or the amount included on Sched- You will also have proof of expenses that yourule L (Form 1040A or Form 1040), as an addition • The name and location of the restaurant.employer may require if you are reimbursedto your standard deduction if you do not itemize under an accountable plan. These plans are • The number of people served.your deductions. discussed later under Reimbursements.
• The date and amount of the expense.
Fines and collateral. You cannot deduct fines If a charge is made for items other than food andHow To Prove Expensesyou pay and forfeited collateral for traffic viola- beverages, the receipt must show that this is the
tions. case.Table 26-2 is a summary of records you need to
prove each expense discussed in this chapter. Canceled check. A canceled check, to-
You must be able to prove the elements listedDepreciation and section 179 deductions. gether with a bill from the payee, ordinarily es-
across the top portion of the chart. You proveGenerally, the cost of a car, plus sales tax and tablishes the cost. However, a canceled check
them by having the information and receiptsimprovements, is a capital expense. Because by itself does not prove a business expense
(where needed) for the expenses listed in thethe benefits last longer than 1 year, you gener- without other evidence to show that it was for a
first column.ally cannot deduct a capital expense. However, business purpose.
you can recover this cost through the section You cannot deduct amounts that you179 deduction (the deduction allowed by section approximate or estimate. Duplicate information. You do not have to179 of the Internal Revenue Code), special de- record information in your account book or other
CAUTION
!preciation allowance, and depreciation deduc- record that duplicates information shown on ations. Depreciation allows you to recover the receipt as long as your records and receiptsYou should keep adequate records to provecost over more than 1 year by deducting part of it complement each other in an orderly manner.your expenses or have sufficient evidence thateach year. The section 179 deduction, special You do not have to record amounts yourwill support your own statement. You must gen-depreciation allowance, and the depreciation employer pays directly for any ticket or othererally prepare a written record for it to be consid-deduction are discussed in more detail in chap- travel item. However, if you charge these itemsered adequate. This is because written evidenceter 4 of Publication 463. to your employer, through a credit card or other-is more reliable than oral evidence alone. How-Generally, there are limits on these deduc- wise, you must keep a record of the amountsever, if you prepare a record on a computer it istions. Special rules apply if you use your car you spend.considered an adequate record.50% or less in your work or business.
Timely-kept records. You should record the
elements of an expense or of a business use atWhat Are Adequate Records?Leasing a car. If you lease a car, truck, or van
or near the time of the expense or use andthat you use in your business, you can use the
You should keep the proof you need in an ac- support it with sufficient documentary evidence.standard mileage rate or actual expenses to
count book, diary, statement of expense, or sim- A timely-kept record has more value than afigure your deductible car expense.
ilar record. You should also keep documentary statement prepared later when generally there isDeductible payments. If you choose to use evidence that, together with your records, will a lack of accurate recall.actual expenses, you can deduct the part of support each element of an expense. You do not need to write down the elementseach lease payment that is for the use of the of every expense on the day of the expense. Ifvehicle in your business. You cannot deduct any you maintain a log on a weekly basis whichDocumentary evidence. You generally mustpart of a lease payment that is for personal use accounts for use during the week, the log ishave documentary evidence, such as receipts,of the vehicle, such as commuting. considered a timely-kept record.canceled checks, or bills, to support your ex-You must spread any advance payments If you give your employer, client, or customerpenses.over the entire lease period. You cannot deduct an expense account statement, it can also be
Exception. Documentary evidence is notany payments you make to buy a vehicle, even if considered a timely-kept record. This is true if
needed if any of the following conditions apply.the payments are called lease payments. you copy it from your account book, diary, state-
ment of expense, or similar record.If you lease a car, truck, or van for 30 days or • You have meals or lodging expenses
more, you may have to reduce your lease pay- while traveling away from home for which
ment deduction by an ªinclusion amount.º For you account to your employer under an Proving business purpose. You must gener-
information on reporting lease inclusion accountable plan and you use a per diem ally provide a written statement of the business
amounts, see Leasing a Car in chapter 4 of allowance method that includes meals purpose of an expense. However, the degree of
Publication 463. and/or lodging. (Accountable plans and proof varies according to the circumstances in
Page 188 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 191 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 26-2. How To Prove Certain Business Expenses
THEN you must keep records that show details of the following elements...
Place or Business Purpose and IF you have
Amount Time Description Business Relationshipexpenses for...
Travel Cost of each separate Dates you left Destination or area Purpose: Business purpose for the
expense for travel, lodging, and returned of your travel (name expense or the business benefit gained or
and meals. Incidental for each trip of city, town, or expected to be gained.
expenses may be totaled in and number of other designation).
reasonable categories such days spent on Relationship: N/A
as taxis, fees and tips, etc. business.
Entertainment Cost of each separate Date of Name and address Purpose: Business purpose for the
expense. Incidental entertainment. or location of place expense or the business benefit gained or
expenses such as taxis, (Also see of entertainment. expected to be gained. For entertainment,
telephones, etc., may be Business Type of the nature of the business discussion or
totaled on a daily basis. Purpose.) entertainment if not activity. If the entertainment was directly
otherwise apparent. before or after a business discussion: the
(Also see Business date, place, nature, and duration of the
Purpose.) business discussion, and the identities of
the persons who took part in both theGifts Cost of the gift. Date of the gift. Description of the business discussion and thegift. entertainment activity.
Relationship: Occupations or other
information (such as names, titles, or
other designations) about the recipients
that shows their business relationship to
you. For entertainment, you must also
prove that you or your employee was
present if the entertainment was a
business meal.
Transportation Cost of each separate Date of the Your business Purpose: Business purpose for the
expense. For car expenses, expense. For destination. expense.
the cost of the car and any car expenses,
improvements, the date you the date of the Relationship: N/A
started using it for business, use of the car.
the mileage for each
business use, and the total
miles for the year.
each case. If the business purpose of an ex- Destroyed records. If you cannot produce a should be in a separate category. You can in-
pense is clear from the surrounding circum- clude tips for meal-related services with thereceipt because of reasons beyond your control,
stances, then you do not need to give a written costs of the meals.you can prove a deduction by reconstructing
explanation. your records or expenses. Reasons beyond Expenses of a similar nature occurring dur-
your control include fire, flood, and other casu- ing the course of a single event are considered aConfidential information. You do not need to alty. single expense. For example, if during entertain-put confidential information relating to an ele-
ment at a cocktail lounge, you pay separately forment of a deductible expense (such as the
each serving of refreshments, the total expenseplace, business purpose, or business relation- Separating and Combining for the refreshments is treated as a single ex-ship) in your account book, diary, or other re-
pense.Expensescord. However, you do have to record the
information elsewhere at or near the time of the This section explains when expenses must be Allocating total cost. If you can prove theexpense and have it available to fully prove that kept separate and when expenses can be com- total cost of travel or entertainment but you can-element of the expense. bined. not prove how much it cost for each person who
participated in the event, you may have to allo-
Separating expenses. Each separate pay- cate the total cost among you and your guestsWhat if I Have Incomplete
ment is generally considered a separate ex- on a pro rata basis. An allocation would beRecords? pense. For example, if you entertain a customer needed, for example, if you did not have a busi-
or client at dinner and then go to the theater, the ness relationship with all of your guests.If you do not have complete records to prove an
dinner expense and the cost of the theater tick-element of an expense, then you must prove the
ets are two separate expenses. You must record If your return is examined. If your return iselement with:
them separately in your records. examined, you may have to provide additional• Your own written or oral statement, con- information to the IRS. This information could betaining specific information about the ele- Combining items. You can make one daily needed to clarify or to establish the accuracy orment, and entry in your record for reasonable categories of reliability of information contained in your rec-
expenses. Examples are taxi fares, telephone ords, statements, testimony, or documentary• Other supporting evidence that is sufficient
evidence before a deduction is allowed.calls, or other incidental travel costs. Mealsto establish the element.
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 189

Page 192 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
business expenses for your work as an em- No reimbursement. You are not reimbursedHow Long To Keep ployee on Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, as discussed or given an allowance for your expenses if you
Records and Receipts next. are paid a salary or commission with the under-
standing that you will pay your own expenses. In
Employees. If you are an employee, you gen-You must keep records as long as they may be this situation, you have no reimbursement or
erally must complete Form 2106 to deduct yourneeded for the administration of any provision of allowance arrangement, and you do not have to
travel, transportation, and entertainment ex-the Internal Revenue Code. Generally, this read this section on reimbursements. Instead,
penses. However, you can use the shorter Formmeans you must keep your records that support see Completing Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ, later,
2106-EZ instead of Form 2106 if you meet all ofyour deduction (or an item of income) for 3 years for information on completing your tax return.
the following conditions.from the date you file the income tax return on
which the deduction is claimed. A return filed Reimbursement, allowance, or advance. A• You are an employee deducting expensesearly is considered filed on the due date. For a reimbursement or other expense allowance ar-attributable to your job.more complete explanation, get Publication 583, rangement is a system or plan that an employer
• You were not reimbursed by your em-Starting a Business and Keeping Records. uses to pay, substantiate, and recover the ex-
ployer for your expenses (amounts in- penses, advances, reimbursements, and
cluded in box 1 of your Form W-2 are not amounts charged to the employer for employeeReimbursed for expenses. Employees who
considered reimbursements). business expenses. Arrangements include pergive their records and documentation to their
diem and car allowances.employers and are reimbursed for their ex- • If you claim car expenses, you use the
  A per diem allowance is a fixed amount ofpenses generally do not have to keep copies of standard mileage rate.
daily reimbursement your employer gives youthis information. However, you may have to
for your lodging, meal, and incidental expensesprove your expenses if any of the following con- For more information on how to report your
when you are away from home on business.ditions apply. expenses on Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ, see
(The term ªincidental expensesº is defined ear-Completing Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ, later.• You claim deductions for expenses that lier under Meals and Incidental Expenses.) A carare more than reimbursements. Gifts.  If you did not receive any reimburse- allowance is an amount your employer gives
ments (or the reimbursements were all included you for the business use of your car.• Your expenses are reimbursed under a in box 1 of your Form W-2), the only business Your employer should tell you what methodnonaccountable plan. expense you are claiming is for gifts, and the of reimbursement is used and what records you• Your employer does not use adequate ac- rules for certain individuals (such as performing must provide.counting procedures to verify expense ac- artists) discussed later under Special Rules do
counts. not apply to you, do not complete Form 2106 or
2106-EZ. Instead, claim the amount of your de- Accountable Plans• You are related to your employer, as de- ductible gifts directly on line 21 of Schedule Afined later under Related to employer. (Form 1040). To be an accountable plan, your employer's
reimbursement or allowance arrangement mustSee the next section, How To Report , for a Statutory employees.   If you received a include all of the following rules.discussion of reimbursements, adequate ac- Form W-2 and the ªStatutory employeeº box in
counting, and nonaccountable plans. box 13 was checked, report your income and 1. Your expenses must have a business con-
expenses related to that income on Schedule C nection Ð that is, you must have paid or
or C-EZ (Form 1040). Do not complete FormAdditional information. Chapter 5 of Publi- incurred deductible expenses while per-
2106 or 2106-EZ.cation 463 has more information on recordkeep- forming services as an employee of your
Statutory employees include full-time life in-ing, including examples. employer.
surance salespersons, certain agent or commis-
2. You must adequately account to your em-sion drivers, traveling salespersons, and certain
ployer for these expenses within a reason-homeworkers.
able period of time.
If you are entitled to a reimbursementHow To Report
3. You must return any excess reimburse-from your employer but you do not
ment or allowance within a reasonable pe-claim it, you cannot claim a deductionThis section explains where and how to report
CAUTION
!
riod of time.for the expenses to which that unclaimed reim-the expenses discussed in this chapter. It dis-
bursement applies.cusses reimbursements and how to treat them See Adequate Accounting  and Returning
under accountable and nonaccountable plans. It Excess Reimbursements, later.
Reimbursement for personal expenses. Ifalso explains rules for independent contractors An excess reimbursement or allowance isyour employer reimburses you for nondeduct-and clients, fee-basis officials, certain perform- any amount you are paid that is more than theible personal expenses, such as for vacationing artists, Armed Forces reservists, and certain business-related expenses that you adequatelytrips, your employer must report the reimburse-disabled employees. This section ends with an accounted for to your employer.ment as wage income in box 1 of your Formillustration of how to report travel, entertainment, The definition of a reasonable period of timeW-2. You cannot deduct personal expenses.gift, and car expenses on Form 2106-EZ. depends on the facts and circumstances of your
situation. However, regardless of the facts and
Self-employed. You must report your income circumstances of your situation, actions thatReimbursements
and expenses on Schedule C or C-EZ (Form take place within the times specified in the fol-
1040) if you are a sole proprietor, or on Sched- This section explains what to do when you re- lowing list will be treated as taking place within a
ule F (Form 1040) if you are a farmer. You do not ceive an advance or are reimbursed for any of reasonable period of time.
use Form 2106 or 2106-EZ. See your form in- the employee business expenses discussed in • You receive an advance within 30 days ofstructions for information on how to complete this chapter. the time you have an expense.your tax return. You can also find information in If you received an advance, allowance, or
Publication 535 if you are a sole proprietor, or in reimbursement for your expenses, how you re- • You adequately account for your ex-
Publication 225, Farmer's Tax Guide, if you are port this amount and your expenses depends on penses within 60 days after they were paid
a farmer. whether the reimbursement was paid to you or incurred.
under an accountable plan or a nonaccountable • You return any excess reimbursementBoth self-employed and an employee.   If plan. within 120 days after the expense wasyou are both self-employed and an employee, This section explains the two types of plans, paid or incurred.you must keep separate records for each busi- how per diem and car allowances simplify prov-
ness activity. Report your business expenses for • You are given a periodic statement (ating the amount of your expenses, and the tax
self-employment on Schedule C, C-EZ, or F least quarterly) that asks you to either re-treatment of your reimbursements and ex-
(Form 1040), as discussed earlier. Report your turn or adequately account for outstandingpenses.
Page 190 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 193 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
advances and you comply within 120 days You must account for all amounts you re- 1. For per diem amounts:
ceived from your employer during the year asof the statement.
a. The regular federal per diem rate.advances, reimbursements, or allowances. This
includes amounts you charged to your employer b. The standard meal allowance.Employee meets accountable plan rules. If by credit card or other method. You must giveyou meet the three rules for accountable plans, your employer the same type of records and c. The high-low rate.your employer should not include any reim- supporting information that you would have tobursements in your income in box 1 of your give to the IRS if the IRS questioned a deduction 2. For car expenses:Form W-2. If your expenses equal your reim- on your return. You must pay back the amount ofbursement, you do not complete Form 2106. any reimbursement or other expense allowance a. The standard mileage rate.You have no deduction since your expenses for which you do not adequately account or that b. A fixed and variable rate (FAVR).and reimbursement are equal. is more than the amount for which you ac-
counted.If your employer included reimburse-
For per diem amounts, use the rate inments in box 1 of your Form W-2 and
effect for the area where you stop foryou meet all the rules for accountable
TIP
sleep or rest.Per Diem and Car Allowancesplans, ask your employer for a corrected Form
TIP
W-2. If your employer reimburses you for your ex- Regular federal per diem rate. The regular
penses using a per diem or car allowance, you federal per diem rate is the highest amount thatAccountable plan rules not met. Even can generally use the allowance as proof of the the federal government will pay to its employeesthough you are reimbursed under an accounta- amount of your expenses. A per diem or car for lodging, meal, and incidental expenses (orble plan, some of your expenses may not meet allowance satisfies the adequate accounting re- meal and incidental expenses only) while theyall the rules. Those expenses that fail to meet all quirements for the amount of your expenses are traveling away from home in a particularthree rules for accountable plans are treated as only if all of the following conditions apply. area. The rates are different for different loca-having been reimbursed under a nonaccount- tions. Your employer should have these rates• Your employer reasonably limits paymentsable plan (discussed later). available. (Employers can get Publication 1542of your expenses to those that are ordi- on the Internet, which gives the rates in theReimbursement of nondeductible ex- nary and necessary in the conduct of the continental United States for the current year.)penses. You may be reimbursed under your trade or business.
employer's accountable plan for expenses re- The standard meal allowance. The stan-• The allowance is similar in form to and notlated to that employer's business, some of which dard meal allowance (discussed earlier) is themore than the federal rate (discussedare deductible as employee business expenses federal rate for meals and incidental expenseslater).and some of which are not deductible. The reim- (M&IE). The rate for most small localities in the
bursements you receive for the nondeductible • You prove the time (dates), place, and United States is $39 a day for the period from
expenses do not meet rule (1) for accountable business purpose of your expenses to January 1 through September 30, 2009, and
plans, and they are treated as paid under a your employer (as explained in Table $46 a day for the period October 1 through
nonaccountable plan. 26-2) within a reasonable period of time. December 31, 2009. Most major cities and many
other localities qualify for higher rates. The rates• You are not related to your employer (asExample. Your employer's plan reimburses for all localities within the continental Uniteddefined next). If you are related to youryou for travel expenses while away from home States are listed in Publication 1542. You canemployer, you must be able to prove youron business and also for meals when you work also find this information on the Internet at www.expenses to the IRS even if you have al-late at the office, even though you are not away gsa.gov.ready adequately accounted to your em-from home. The part of the arrangement that ployer and returned any excess You receive an allowance only for meals andreimburses you for the nondeductible meals reimbursement. incidental expenses when your employer doeswhen you work late at the office is treated as
one of the following.paid under a nonaccountable plan. If the IRS finds that an employer's travel allow-
ance practices are not based on reasonably • Provides you with lodging (furnishes it inThe employer makes the decision accurate estimates of travel costs (including rec- kind).whether to reimburse employees ognition of cost differences in different areas forunder an accountable plan or a nonac-
TIP • Reimburses you, based on your receipts,per diem amounts), you will not be considered tocountable plan. If you are an employee who for the actual cost of your lodging.have accounted to your employer. In this case,receives payments under a nonaccountable you must be able to prove your expenses to the • Pays the hotel, motel, etc., directly for yourplan, you cannot convert these amounts to pay- IRS. lodging.ments under an accountable plan by voluntarily
accounting to your employer for the expenses • Does not have a reasonable belief thatRelated to employer. You are related to yourand voluntarily returning excess reimburse- you had (or will have) lodging expenses,employer if: ments to the employer. such as when you stay with friends or rela-
tives or sleep in the cab of your truck.1. Your employer is your brother or sister,
half brother or half sister, spouse, ances- • Figures the allowance on a basis similar totor, or lineal descendant,Adequate Accounting that used in computing your compensa-
tion, such as number of hours worked or2. Your employer is a corporation in whichOne of the rules for an accountable plan is that miles traveled.you own, directly or indirectly, more thanyou must adequately account to your employer 10% in value of the outstanding stock, orfor your expenses. You adequately account by High-low rate. This is a simplified methodgiving your employer a statement of expense, 3. Certain relationships (such as grantor, fi- of computing the federal per diem rate for travelan account book, a diary, or a similar record in duciary, or beneficiary) exist between you, within the continental United States. It elimi-which you entered each expense at or near the a trust, and your employer. nates the need to keep a current list of the pertime you had it, along with documentary evi- diem rate for each city.You may be considered to indirectly own stock,dence (such as receipts) of your travel, mileage, for purposes of (2), if you have an interest in aand other employee business expenses. (See Under the high-low method, the per diemcorporation, partnership, estate, or trust thatTable 26-2, earlier, for details you need to enter amount for travel during January through Sep-owns the stock or if a member of your family orin your record and documents you need to prove tember of 2009 is $256 (including $58 for M&IE)your partner owns the stock.certain expenses.) A per diem or car allowance for certain high-cost locations. All other areas
satisfies the adequate accounting requirement have a per diem amount of $158 (including $45
under certain conditions. See Per Diem and Car The federal rate. The federal rate can be fig- for M&IE). (Employers can get Publication 1542
Allowances, later. ured using any one of the following methods. which gives the areas eligible for the $256 per
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 191

Page 194 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
diem amount under the high-low method for all amount of your allowance compares to the fed- Joe completes Form 2106 to figure his de-
or part of this period.) eral rate. ductible expenses. He enters the total of his
actual expenses for the year ($380) on FormEffective October 1, 2009, the per diem Allowance less than or equal to the federal 2106. He also enters the reimbursements thatrate for certain high-cost locations in- rate. If your allowance is less than or equal to were not included in his income ($256). His totalcreased to $258 (including $65 for the federal rate, the allowance will not be in-
CAUTION
! deductible expense, before the 50% limit, isM&IE). The rate for all other locations increased cluded in box 1 of your Form W-2. You do not $124. After he figures the 50% limit on his un-to $163 (including $52 for M&IE). However, an need to report the related expenses or the allow- reimbursed meals and entertainment, he willemployer can continue to use the rates de- ance on your return if your expenses are equal include the balance, $62, as an itemized deduc-scribed in the preceding paragraph for the re- to or less than the allowance. tion on Schedule A (Form 1040).mainder of 2009 if those rates and locations are  However, if your actual expenses are more
used consistently during October, November, than your allowance, you can complete Form
and December for all employees. Employers 2106 and deduct the excess amount on Sched- Returning Excesswho did not use the high-low method during the ule A (Form 1040). If you are using actual ex- Reimbursementsfirst 9 months of 2009 cannot begin to use it penses, you must be able to prove to the IRS the
before 2010. For more information see Revenue total amount of your expenses and reimburse- Under an accountable plan, you are required toProcedure 2009-47, which can be found on the ments for the entire year. If you are using the return any excess reimbursement or other ex-Internet at www.irs.gov/irb/2009-42_IRB/ar09. standard meal allowance or the standard mile- pense allowances for your business expenseshtml. Also see Publication 1542 on the Internet age rate, you do not have to prove that amount. to the person paying the reimbursement or al-at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-pdf/p1542.pdf. lowance. Excess reimbursement means any
Example. Nicole drives 10,000 miles in amount for which you did not adequately ac-Prorating the standard meal allowance on 2009 for business. Under her employer's ac- count within a reasonable period of time. Forpartial days of travel. The standard meal al- countable plan, she accounts for the time example, if you received a travel advance andlowance is for a full 24-hour day of travel. If you (dates), place, and business purpose of each you did not spend all the money on busi-travel for part of a day, such as on the days you trip. Her employer pays her a mileage allowance ness-related expenses, or you do not have proofdepart and return, you must prorate the full-day of 40 cents a mile. of all your expenses, you have an excess reim-M&IE rate. This rule also applies if your em- Since Nicole's $5,500 expense computed bursement.ployer uses the regular federal per diem rate or under the standard mileage rate (10,000 ×  55 ªAdequate accountingº and ªreasonable pe-the high-low rate. cents) is more than her $4,000 reimbursement riod of timeº were discussed earlier in this chap-You can use either of the following methods (10,000 miles ×  40 cents), she itemizes her ter.to figure the federal M&IE for that day. deductions to claim the excess expense. Nicole
completes Form 2106 (showing all of her ex-1. Method 1: Travel advance. You receive a travel ad-
penses and reimbursements) and enters $1,500 vance if your employer provides you with an
a. For the day you depart, add 3/4 of the ($5,500 − $4,000) as an itemized deduction. expense allowance before you actually have the
standard meal allowance amount for expense, and the allowance is reasonably ex-Allowance more than the federal rate. Ifthat day. pected to be no more than your expense. Underyour allowance is more than the federal rate, an accountable plan, you are required to ade-b. For the day you return, add 3/4 of the your employer must include the allowance quately account to your employer for this ad-standard meal allowance amount for amount up to the federal rate in box 12 of your vance and to return any excess within athe preceding day. Form W-2. This amount is not taxable. However, reasonable period of time.the excess allowance will be included in box 1 of
If you do not adequately account for or do not2. Method 2: Prorate the standard meal al- your Form W-2. You must report this part of your
return any excess advance within a reasonablelowance using any method that you con- allowance as if it were wage income.
period of time, the amount you do not accountsistently apply and that is in accordance If your actual expenses are less than or for or return will be treated as having been paidwith reasonable business practice. equal to the federal rate, you do not complete under a nonaccountable plan (discussed later).Form 2106 or claim any of your expenses onThe standard mileage rate. This is a set your return. Unproven amounts. If you do not proverate per mile that you can use to compute your that you actually traveled on each day for whichHowever, if your actual expenses are moredeductible car expenses. For 2009, the standard you received a per diem or car allowance (prov-than the federal rate, you can complete Formmileage rate for the cost of operating your car is ing the elements described in Table 26-2), you2106 and deduct those excess expenses. You55 cents per mile. must return this unproved amount of the travelmust report on Form 2106 your reimbursements
advance within a reasonable period of time. IfFixed and variable rate (FAVR). This is an up to the federal rate (as shown in box 12 of your
you do not do this, the unproved amount will beallowance your employer may use to reimburse Form W-2) and all your expenses. You should
considered paid under a nonaccountable planyour car expenses. Under this method, your be able to prove these amounts to the IRS.
(discussed later).employer pays an allowance that includes a
combination of payments covering fixed and va- Example. Joe lives and works in Austin. In Per diem allowance more than federal rate.riable costs, such as a cents-per-mile rate to May his employer sent him to San Diego for 4 If your employer's accountable plan pays you ancover your variable operating costs (such as days and paid the hotel directly for Joe's hotel allowance that is higher than the federal rate,gas, oil, etc.) plus a flat amount to cover your bill. The employer reimbursed Joe $75 a day for you do not have to return the difference betweenfixed costs (such as depreciation (or lease pay- his meals and incidental expenses. The federal the two rates for the period you can prove busi-ments), insurance, etc.). If your employer rate for San Diego is $64 a day. ness-related travel expenses. However, the dif-chooses to use this method, your employer will Joe can prove that his actual meal expenses ference will be reported as wages on your Formrequest the necessary records from you. totaled $380. His employer's accountable plan W-2. This excess amount is considered paid
will not pay more than $75 a day for travel to San under a nonaccountable plan (discussed later).Reporting your expenses with a per diem or Diego, so Joe does not give his employer the
car allowance. If your reimbursement is in the records that prove that he actually spent $380. Example. Your employer sends you on aform of an allowance received under an ac- However, he does account for the time, place, 5-day business trip to Phoenix in March 2009countable plan, the following facts affect your and business purpose of the trip. This is Joe's and gives you a $400 ($80 ×  5 days) advance toreporting. only business trip this year. cover your meals and incidental expenses. The
Joe was reimbursed $300 ($75 ×  4 days), federal per diem for meals and incidental ex-• The federal rate.
which is $44 more than the federal rate of $256 penses for Phoenix is $59. Your trip lasts only 3• Whether the allowance or your actual ex- ($64 ×  4 days). His employer includes the $44 as days. Under your employer's accountable plan,penses were more than the federal rate. income on Joe's Form W-2 in box 1. His em- you must return the $160 ($80 ×  2 days) ad-
The following discussions explain where to re- ployer also enters $256 in box 12 of Joe's Form vance for the 2 days you did not travel. For the 3
port your expenses depending upon how the W-2. days you did travel you do not have to return the
Page 192 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 195 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that appliesTable 26-3. Reporting Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car Expenses and
to most miscellaneous itemized deductions onReimbursements
Schedule A (Form 1040).
IF the type of reimbursement (or THEN the employer AND the employee Example. Kim's employer gives her $1,000other expense allowance) reports on Form reports on a month ($12,000 for the year) for her businessarrangement is under: W-2: Form 2106: * expenses. Kim does not have to provide any
proof of her expenses to her employer, and KimAn accountable plan with: can keep any funds that she does not spend.
Actual expense reimbursement: No amount. No amount. Kim is being reimbursed under a nonac-
Adequate accounting made and excess countable plan. Her employer will include the
returned. $12,000 on Kim's Form W-2 as if it were wages.
If Kim wants to deduct her business expenses,Actual expense reimbursement: The excess amount No amount. she must complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ andAdequate accounting and return of as wages in box 1. itemize her deductions.
excess both required but excess not
returned. Completing Forms
Per diem or mileage allowance up to the No amount. All expenses and 2106 and 2106-EZfederal rate: reimbursements only
Adequate accounting made and excess if excess expenses This section briefly describes how employees
returned. are claimed. complete Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ. Table 26-3
Otherwise, form is not explains what the employer reports on Form
filed. W-2 and what the employee reports on Form
2106. The instructions for the forms have morePer diem or mileage allowance up to the The excess amount No amount. information on completing them.federal rate: as wages in box 1.
If you are self-employed, do not fileAdequate accounting and return of The amount up to
Form 2106 or 2106-EZ. Report yourexcess both required but excess not the federal rate is
expenses on Schedule C, C-EZ, or F
CAUTION
!returned. reported only in box
(Form 1040). See the instructions for the form12Ðit is not that you must file.reported in box 1.
Per diem or mileage allowance exceeds The excess amount All expenses (and Form 2106-EZ. You may be able to use the
the federal rate: as wages in box 1. reimbursement shorter Form 2106-EZ to claim your employee
Adequate accounting up to the federal The amount up to reported on Form business expenses. You can use this form if you
rate only and excess not returned. the federal rate is W-2, box 12) only if meet all of the following conditions.
reported only in box expenses in excess of • You are an employee deducting expenses12Ðit is not the federal rate are attributable to your job.reported in box 1. claimed. Otherwise,
• You were not reimbursed by your em-form is not required.
ployer for your expenses (amounts in-
A nonaccountable plan with: cluded in box 1 of your Form W-2 are not
considered reimbursements).Either adequate accounting or return of The entire amount All expenses.
• If you are claiming car expenses, you useexcess, or both, not required by plan as wages in box 1.
the standard mileage rate.
No reimbursement plan: The entire amount All expenses.
as wages in box 1. Car expenses. If you used a car to perform
* You may be able to use Form 2106-EZ. See Completing Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ. your job as an employee, you may be able to
deduct certain car expenses. These are gener-
ally figured on Form 2106, Part II, and then
claimed on Form 2106, Part I, line 1, Column A.$63 difference between the allowance you re- business. See Reimbursement of nonde-
Car expenses using the standard mileage rateceived and the federal rate for Phoenix (($80 − ductible expenses earlier under Accounta-
can also be figured on Form 2106-EZ by com-$59) ×  3 days). However, the $63 will be re- ble Plans.
pleting Part II and Part I, line 1.ported on your Form W-2 as wages.
If you are not sure if the reimbursement or
Transportation expenses. Show your trans-expense allowance arrangement is an account-
portation expenses that did not involve overnightable or nonaccountable plan, ask your em-Nonaccountable Plans
travel on Form 2106, line 2, Column A, or onployer.
A nonaccountable plan is a reimbursement or Form 2106-EZ, Part I, line 2. Also include on this
expense allowance arrangement that does not line business expenses you have for parkingReporting your expenses under a nonac-
meet one or more of the three rules listed earlier fees and tolls. Do not include expenses of oper-countable plan. Your employer will combine
under Accountable Plans. ating your car or expenses of commuting be-the amount of any reimbursement or other ex-
In addition, even if your employer has an tween your home and work.pense allowance paid to you under a nonac-
accountable plan, the following payments will be countable plan with your wages, salary, or other
treated as being paid under a nonaccountable pay. Your employer will report the total in box 1 Employee business expenses other thanplan. of your Form W-2. meals and entertainment. Show your other
 You must complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ employee business expenses on Form 2106,• Excess reimbursements you fail to return
and itemize your deductions to deduct your ex- lines 3 and 4, Column A, or Form 2106-EZ, linesto your employer.
penses for travel, transportation, meals, or en- 3 and 4. Do not include expenses for meals and• Reimbursement of nondeductible ex- tertainment. Your meal and entertainment entertainment on those lines. Line 4 is for ex-penses related to your employer's expenses will be subject to the 50% limit dis- penses such as gifts, educational expenses (tui-
cussed earlier under Entertainment Expenses. tion and books), office-in-the-home expenses,
Also, your total expenses will be subject to the and trade and professional publications.
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 193

Page 196 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Reimbursement Allocation If line 4 expenses are the only ones you a reserve component of the Armed Forces of the
Worksheetare claiming, you received no reim- United States and you travel more than 100
(keep for your records)bursements (or the reimbursements miles away from home in connection with your
TIP
were all included in box 1 of your Form W-2), performance of services as a member of the
1. Enter the total amount of reserves, you can deduct your travel expensesand the Special Rules  discussed later do not reimbursements your employer gave as an adjustment to gross income rather than asapply to you, do not complete Form 2106 or you that were not reported to you in a miscellaneous itemized deduction. The2106-EZ. Claim these amounts directly on box 1 of Form W-2 ........... . $7,000 amount of expenses you can deduct as an ad-Schedule A (Form 1040), line 21. List the type 2. Enter the total amount of your justment to gross income is limited to the regularand amount of each expense on the dotted lines expenses for the periods covered by federal per diem rate (for lodging, meals, andthis reimbursement ........... . 8,500and include the total on line 21. incidental expenses) and the standard mileage3. Of the amount on line 2, enter your rate (for car expenses) plus any parking fees,total expense for meals and ferry fees, and tolls. The federal rate is explainedentertainment .............. . 4,500Meal and entertainment expenses. Show earlier under Per Diem and Car Allowances. Any4. Divide line 3 by line 2. Enter thethe full amount of your expenses for busi- expenses in excess of these amounts can beresult as a decimal (rounded to atness-related meals and entertainment on Form claimed only as a miscellaneous itemized de-least three places) ........... . .5292106, line 5, Column B. Include meals while duction subject to the 2% limit.5. Multiply line 1 by line 4. Enter theaway from your tax home overnight and other
Member of a reserve component. You areresult here and in Column B, line 7 3,703business meals and entertainment. Enter 50% a member of a reserve component of the Armed6. Subtract line 5 from line 1. Enter theof the line 8, Column B, meal and entertainment result here and in Column A, line 7 $3,297 Forces of the United States if you are in theexpenses on line 9, Column B. Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Air Force, or CoastOn line 7 of Form 2106, Rob enters $8,297If you file Form 2106-EZ, enter the full Guard Reserve, the Army National Guard of the($5,000 airfare and $3,297 of the $7,000) inamount of your meals and entertainment on the United States, the Air National Guard of theColumn A and $3,703 (of the $7,000) in Column United States, or the Reserve Corps of the Pub-line to the left of line 5 and multiply the total by B. lic Health Service.50%. Enter the result on line 5.
After you complete the form. After you have How to report. If you have reserve-relatedHours of service limits. If you are subject completed your Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, follow travel that takes you more than 100 miles fromto the Department of Transportation's ªhours of the directions on that form to deduct your ex- home, you should first complete Form 2106 orserviceº limits, use 80% instead of 50% for penses on the appropriate line of your tax return. Form 2106-EZ. Then include your expenses formeals while away from your tax home. For most taxpayers, this is line 21 of Schedule A reserve travel over 100 miles from home, up to
(Form 1040). However, if you are a government the federal rate, from Form 2106, line 10, or
official paid on a fee basis, a performing artist,Reimbursements. Enter on Form 2106, line Form 2106-EZ, line 6, in the total on Form 1040,
an Armed Forces reservist, or a disabled em- line 24. Subtract this amount from the total on7, the amounts your employer (or third party) ployee with impairment-related work expenses, Form 2106, line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, andreimbursed you that were not included in box 1 see Special Rules, later. deduct the balance as an itemized deduction onof your Form W-2. (You cannot use Form
Schedule A (Form 1040), line 21.2106-EZ.) This includes any reimbursement re- Limits on employee business expenses. You cannot deduct expenses of travel thatported under code L in box 12 of Form W-2. Your employee business expenses may be sub- does not take you more than 100 miles fromject to any of the three limits described next.Allocating your reimbursement. If you home as an adjustment to gross income. In-These limits are figured in the following order on stead, you must complete Form 2106 orwere reimbursed under an accountable plan and the specified form. 2106-EZ and deduct those expenses as anwant to deduct excess expenses that were not
1. Limit on meals and entertainment. Cer- itemized deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040),reimbursed, you may have to allocate your reim-
tain meal and entertainment expenses are sub- line 21.bursement. This is necessary if your employer ject to a 50% limit. If you are an employee, youpays your reimbursement in the following man- Officials paid on a fee basis. Certainfigure this limit on line 9 of Form 2106 or line 5 ofner: fee-basis officials can claim their employee busi-Form 2106-EZ. See 50% Limit under Entertain-
ness expenses whether or not they itemize theirment Expenses, earlier.• Pays you a single amount that covers
other deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040).meals and/or entertainment, as well as 2. Limit on miscellaneous itemized deduc- Fee-basis officials are persons who are em-other business expenses, and tions. If you are an employee, deduct em- ployed by a state or local government and who
ployee business expenses (as figured on Form• Does not clearly identify how much is for are paid in whole or in part on a fee basis. They
2106 or 2106-EZ) on line 21 of Schedule A can deduct their business expenses in perform-deductible meals and/or entertainment.
(Form 1040). Most miscellaneous itemized de- ing services in that job as an adjustment to grossYou must allocate that single payment so that ductions, including employee business ex- income rather than as a miscellaneous itemized
you know how much to enter on Form 2106, line penses, are subject to a 2% limit. This limit is deduction.
7, Column A and Column B. figured on line 26 of Schedule A (Form 1040). If you are a fee-basis official, include your
employee business expenses from Form 2106,3. Limit on total itemized deductions. IfExample. Rob's employer paid him an ex- line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, on Form 1040,your adjusted gross income (line 38 of Formpense allowance of $12,000 this year under an line 24.1040) is more than $166,800 ($83,400 if you areaccountable plan. The $12,000 payment con- married filing separately), the total of certain Expenses of certain performing artists. Ifsisted of $5,000 for airfare and $7,000 for enter- itemized deductions, including employee busi- you are a performing artist, you may qualify totainment and car expenses. Rob's employer did ness expenses, may be limited. See chapter 29 deduct your employee business expenses as annot clearly show how much of the $7,000 was for for more information on this limit. adjustment to gross income rather than as athe cost of deductible entertainment. Rob actu- miscellaneous itemized deduction. To qualify,
ally spent $14,000 during the year ($5,500 for you must meet all of the following requirements. Special Rules
airfare, $4,500 for entertainment, and $4,000 for
1. During the tax year, you perform servicescar expenses). This section discusses special rules that apply
in the performing arts as an employee forto Armed Forces reservists, government offi-Since the airfare allowance was clearly iden- at least two employers.cials who are paid on a fee basis, performingtified, Rob knows that $5,200 of the payment artists, and disabled employees with impair- 2. You receive at least $200 each from anygoes in Column A, line 7 of Form 2106. To ment-related work expenses. two of these employers.allocate the remaining $7,000, Rob uses the
worksheet from the instructions for Form 2106. Armed Forces reservists traveling more than 3. Your related performing-arts business ex-
His completed worksheet follows. 100 miles from home. If you are a member of penses are more than 10% of your gross
Page 194 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 197 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
income from the performance of those 2106-EZ, enter your impairment-related work business mileage, parking fees, and tolls for the
services. year. Bill records his expenses and other perti-expenses from Form 2106, line 10, or Form
nent information in a travel expense log (not2106-EZ, line 6, on Schedule A (Form 1040),4. Your adjusted gross income is not more shown). He obtains receipts for his expenses forline 28, and identify the type and amount of thisthan $16,000 before deducting these busi- lodging and for any other expenses of $75 orexpense on the dotted line next to line 28. Enterness expenses.
more.your employee business expenses that are un-
related to your disability from Form 2106, lineSpecial rules for married persons. If you During the year, Bill drove a total of 25,000
10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, on Schedule A, lineare married, you must file a joint return unless miles of which 20,000 miles were for business.
you lived apart from your spouse at all times 21. He answers all the questions in Part II of Form
during the tax year. 2106-EZ and figures his car expense to beImpairment-related work expenses are yourIf you file a joint return, you must figure re- $11,000 (20,000 x 55 cents per mile).allowable expenses for attendant care at yourquirements (1), (2), and (3) separately for both workplace and other expenses you have in con- His total employee business expenses areyou and your spouse. However, requirement (4) nection with your workplace that are necessary shown in the following table.applies to your and your spouse's combined for you to be able to work. For more information,adjusted gross income.  Type of Expense Amountsee chapter 21.
Where to report.  If you meet all of the Parking fees and tolls ... . $ 520above requirements, you should first complete Car expenses ......... . 11,000Illustrated ExampleForm 2106 or 2106-EZ. Then you include your Meals .............. . 3,861performing-arts-related expenses from line 10 of Lodging, laundry, dry  Bill Wilson is an employee of Fashion ClothingForm 2106 or line 6 of Form 2106-EZ in the total cleaning ............ . 18,318Co. in Manhattan, NY. In a typical travel week,on line 24 of Form 1040. Entertainment ........ . 3,250Bill leaves his home on Long Island on MondayIf you do not meet all of the above require- Gifts, education, etc. .... . 650morning and drives to Albany to exhibit thements, you do not qualify to deduct your ex- Total .............. . $37,599Fashion line for 3 days to prospective custom-penses as an adjustment to gross income.
ers. Then he drives to Troy to show Fashion'sInstead, you must complete Form 2106 or Bill received an allowance of $33,000new line of merchandise to Town Department2106-EZ and deduct your employee business ($2,750 per month) to help offset his expenses.Store, an old customer. While in Troy, he talksexpenses as an itemized deduction on Schedule Bill did not have to account to his employer forwith Tom Brown, purchasing agent for TownA (Form 1040), line 21. the reimbursement, and the $33,000 was in-Department Store, to discuss the new line. He cluded as income in box 1 of his Form W-2.Impairment-related work expenses of dis- later takes John Smith of Attire Co. out to dinnerabled employees. If you are an employee Because Bill's reimbursement was includedto discuss Attire Co.'s buying Fashion's new linewith a physical or mental disability, your impair- in his income and he is using the standard mile-of clothing.ment-related work expenses are not subject to age rate for his car expenses, he files FormBill purchased his car on January 3, 2006.the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that ap- 2106-EZ with his tax return. His filled-in form isHe uses the standard mileage rate for car ex-plies to most other employee business ex- shown on the next page.penses. After you complete Form 2106 or pense purposes. He records his total mileage,
Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses Page 195

Page 198 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
EPS File Name: 10311G60 Size: Width = 44.0 picas, Depth = page
Bill Wilson 555 00 5555Sales
520
18,318
34,044
13 2006
20,000 2,600 2,400
3,556
650
7,111
11,000
/H12011
/H12011
/H12011
/H12011
OMB No. 1545-0074
Unreimbursed Employee Business Expenses2106-EZForm
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service /H17075Attach to Form 1040 or Form 1040NR.
Attachment
Sequence No. 129A
Social security numberYour name Occupation in which you incurred expenses
Vehicle expense using the standard mileage rate. Complete Part II and multiply line 8a by 55¢
(.55)
1
2
Parking fees, tolls, and transportation, including train, bus, etc., that did not involve
overnight travel or commuting to and from work
2
Travel expense while away from home overnight, including lodging, airplane, car rental, etc.
Do not include meals and entertainment
3
3
Business expenses not included on lines 1 through 3. Do not include meals and
entertainment
4
4
5
Meals and entertainment expenses: $ × 50% (.50). (Employees subject to
Department of Transportation (DOT) hours of service limits: Multiply meal expenses
incurred while away from home on business by 80% (.80) instead of 50%. For details, see
instructions.)
5
Total expenses. Add lines 1 through 5. Enter here and on Schedule A (Form 1040), line
21 (or on Schedule A (Form 1040NR), line 9 ). (Armed Forces reservists, fee-basis state or
local government officials, qualified performing artists, and individuals with disabilities: See
the instructions for special rules on where to enter this amount.)
6
6
Cat. No. 20604Q Form 2106-EZ (2009)
Part I
Part II
Figure Your Expenses
You Can Use This Form Only if All of the Following Apply.
● You are an employee deducting ordinary and necessary expenses attributable to your job. An ordinary expense is one that is
common and accepted in your field of trade, business, or profession. A necessary expense is one that is helpful and appropriate
for your business. An expense does not have to be required to be considered necessary.
● If you are claiming vehicle expense, you are using the standard mileage rate for 2009.
● You do not get reimbursed by your employer for any expenses (amounts your employer included in box 1 of your Form W-2 are
not considered reimbursements for this purpose).
Information on Your Vehicle. Complete this part only if you are claiming vehicle expense on line 1.
7
8
a
9
10
11a
b
When did you place your vehicle in service for business use? (month, day, year) /H17075 / /
Of the total number of miles you drove your vehicle during 2009, enter the number of miles you used your vehicle for:
Do you (or your spouse) have another vehicle available for personal use?
Was your vehicle available for personal use during off-duty hours?
Do you have evidence to support your deduction?
If “Yes,” is the evidence written?
Business
Yes No
b Commuting (see instructions) c Other
Yes No
Yes No
Yes No
(99)
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see page 4.
Caution: You can use the standard mileage rate for 2009 only if: (a) you owned the vehicle and used the standard mileage rate for the first year
you placed the vehicle in service, or (b) you leased the vehicle and used the standard mileage rate for the portion of the lease period after 1997.
2009
1
Page 196 Chapter 26 Car Expenses and Other Employee Business Expenses

Page 199 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
and the American opportunity, Hope, and life- law may require you to get more education. This
additional education is qualifying work-relatedtime learning credits (see chapter 35). You may
education if all three of the following require-qualify for these other benefits even if you do not
27. ments are met.meet the requirements listed earlier.
Also, keep in mind that your work-related • It is required for you to keep your present
education expenses may qualify you to claim salary, status, or job,
more than one tax benefit. Generally, you mayTax Benefits for • The requirement serves a business pur-claim any number of benefits as long as you use
pose of your employer, anddifferent expenses to figure each one.
Work-Related • The education is not part of a program thatWhen you figure your taxes, you may
will qualify you for a new trade or busi-want to compare these tax benefits so
ness.you can choose the method(s) that
TIPEducation
give you the lowest tax liability.
When you get more education than your em-
ployer or the law requires, the additional educa-
Useful Items tion can be qualifying work-related educationWhat's New You may want to see: only if it maintains or improves skills required in
your present work. See Education To MaintainStandard mileage rate. Generally, if you Publication or Improve Skills, below.claim a business deduction for work-related ed-
❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Carucation and you drive your car to and from Example. You are a teacher who has satis-Expensesschool, the amount you can deduct for miles fied the minimum requirements for teaching.driven during 2009 is 55 cents per mile. This is ❏ 970 Tax Benefits for Education Your employer requires you to take an additionaldown from 58 1/2 cents per mile at the end of college course each year to keep your teaching2008. For more information, see Transportation Form (and Instructions) job. If the courses will not qualify you for a newExpenses under What Expenses Can Be De- trade or business, they are qualifying❏ 2106 Employee Business Expensesducted. work-related education even if you eventually
❏ 2106-EZ Unreimbursed Employee receive a master's degree and an increase in
Business Expenses salary because of this extra education.
❏ Schedule A (Form 1040) ItemizedReminder Education To MaintainDeductions
or Improve SkillsLimit on itemized deductions. If your ad-
justed gross income for 2009 is more than If your education is not required by your em-$166,800 ($83,400 if you are married filing sep- ployer or the law, it can be qualifying work-arately), your itemized deductions may be lim- Qualifying Work- related education only if it maintains or improvesited. See chapter 29 for more information about skills needed in your present work. This couldthis limit. Related Education include refresher courses, courses on current
developments, and academic or vocational
You can deduct the costs of qualifying work- courses.
related education as business expenses. This is
education that meets at least one of the follow- Example. You repair televisions, radios,Introduction
ing two tests. and stereo systems for XYZ Store. To keep upThis chapter discusses work-related education with the latest changes, you take special• The education is required by your em-expenses that you may be able to deduct as courses in radio and stereo service. Theseployer or the law to keep your presentbusiness expenses. courses maintain and improve skills required insalary, status, or job. The required educa-To claim such a deduction, you must: your work.tion must serve a bona fide business pur-
• Be working, pose of your employer. Maintaining skills vs. qualifying for new job.
• Itemize your deductions on Schedule A • The education maintains or improves skills Education to maintain or improve skills needed
(Form 1040) if you are an employee, needed in your present work. in your present work is not qualifying education if
it will also qualify you for a new trade or busi-• File Schedule C (Form 1040), Schedule However, even if the education meets one or ness.C-EZ (Form 1040), or Schedule F (Form
both of the above tests, it is not qualifying1040) if you are self-employed, and Education during temporary absence. Ifwork-related education if it: you stop working for a year or less in order to get• Have expenses for education that meet
• Is needed to meet the minimum educa- education to maintain or improve skills neededthe requirements discussed under Qualify-
tional requirements of your present trade in your present work and then return to the sameing Work-Related Education.
or business, or general type of work, your absence is consid-
ered temporary. Education that you get during aIf you are an employee and can itemize your • Is part of a program of study that will qual- temporary absence is qualifying work-relateddeductions, you may be able to claim a deduc- ify you for a new trade or business. education if it maintains or improves skillstion for the expenses you pay for your
needed in your present work.work-related education. Your deduction will be You can deduct the costs of qualifying
the amount by which your qualifying work-related education as a business expense Example. You quit your biology researchwork-related education expenses plus other job even if the education could lead to a degree. job to become a full-time biology graduate stu-and certain miscellaneous expenses is greater Use Figure 27-A, later, as a quick check to dent for one year. If you return to work in biologythan 2% of your adjusted gross income. See see if your education qualifies. research after completing the courses, the edu-chapter 28.
cation is related to your present work even if youIf you are self-employed, you deduct your do not go back to work with the same employer.Education Required byexpenses for qualifying work-related education
directly from your self-employment income. Education during indefinite absence. IfEmployer or by Law
Your work-related education expenses may you stop work for more than a year, your ab-
Once you have met the minimum educationalalso qualify you for other tax benefits, such as sence from your job is considered indefinite.
requirements for your job, your employer or thethe tuition and fees deduction (see chapter 19) Education during an indefinite absence, even if it
Chapter 27 Tax Benefits for Work-Related Education Page 197

Page 200 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
maintains or improves skills needed in the work • Your school makes contributions for you to can be qualifying work-related education. Al-
a retirement plan other than social securityfrom which you are absent, is considered to though you do not have all the required courses,
or a similar program.qualify you for a new trade or business. There- you have already met the minimum educational
fore, it is not qualifying work-related education. requirements.
Example 1. The law in your state requires Example 3. Assume the same facts as inbeginning secondary school teachers to have aEducation To Meet Example 1 except that you are hired with only 3bachelor's degree, including 10 professional ed-Minimum Requirements years of college. The courses you take that leaducation courses. In addition, to keep the job a
to a bachelor's degree (including those in edu-teacher must complete a fifth year of trainingEducation you need to meet the minimum edu- cation) are not qualifying work-related educa-within 10 years from the date of hire. If thecational requirements for your present trade or tion. They are needed to meet the minimumemploying school certifies to the state Depart-business is not qualifying work-related educa- educational requirements for employment as ament of Education that qualified teachers cannottion. The minimum educational requirements teacher.be found, the school can hire persons with only 3are determined by: years of college. However, to keep their jobs,
Example 4. You have a bachelor's degreethese teachers must get a bachelor's degree• Laws and regulations,
and you work as a temporary instructor at aand the required professional education courses• Standards of your profession, trade, or within 3 years. university. At the same time, you take graduate
business, and courses toward an advanced degree. The rulesUnder these facts, the bachelor's degree,
of the university state that you can become a• Your employer. whether or not it includes the 10 professional
faculty member only if you get a graduate de-education courses, is considered the minimum
gree. Also, you can keep your job as an instruc-Once you have met the minimum educational educational requirement for qualification as a
tor only as long as you show satisfactoryteacher in your state.requirements that were in effect when you were
progress toward getting this degree. You havehired, you do not have to meet any new mini- If you have all the required education except
not met the minimum educational requirementsmum educational requirements. This means the fifth year, you have met the minimum educa-
to qualify you as a faculty member. The gradu-that if the minimum requirements change after tional requirements. The fifth year of training is
ate courses are not qualifying work-related edu-you were hired, any education you need to meet qualifying work-related education unless it is
cation.part of a program of study that will qualify you forthe new requirements can be qualifying educa-
a new trade or business.tion.
Certification in a new state. Once you haveYou have not necessarily met the mini- met the minimum educational requirements forExample 2. Assume the same facts as inmum educational requirements of your teachers for your state, you are considered toExample 1 except that you have a bachelor'strade or business simply because you
CAUTION
! have met the minimum educational require-degree and only six professional educationare already doing the work. ments in all states. This is true even if you mustcourses. The additional four education courses
Example 1. You are a full-time engineering
student. Although you have not received your
degree or certification, you work part-time as an
engineer for a firm that will employ you as a
full-time engineer after you finish college. Al-
though your college engineering courses im-
prove your skills in your present job, they are
also needed to meet the minimum job require-
ments for a full-time engineer. The education is
not qualifying work-related education.
Example 2. You are an accountant and you
have met the minimum educational require-
ments of your employer. Your employer later
changes the minimum educational requirements
and requires you to take college courses to keep
your job. These additional courses can be quali-
fying work-related education because you have
already satisfied the minimum requirements that
were in effect when you were hired.
Requirements for Teachers
States or school districts usually set the mini-
mum educational requirements for teachers.
The requirement is the college degree or the
minimum number of college hours usually re-
quired of a person hired for that position.
If there are no requirements, you will have
met the minimum educational requirements
when you become a faculty member. You gen-
erally will be considered a faculty member when
one or more of the following occurs.
• You have tenure.
• Your years of service count toward ob-
taining tenure.
• You have a vote in faculty decisions.
Figure 27-A. Does Your Work-Related Education Qualify?
Start Here
Yes
Is the education required
by your employer or the
law to keep your present
salary, status, or job?
Does the requirement
serve a bona fide
business requirement of
your employer?
Is the education needed to meet
the minimum educational
requirements of your present
trade or business?
Is the education part of a
program of study that will
qualify you for a new
trade or business?
Does the education
maintain or improve skills
needed in your present
work?
Your education is not
qualifying work-related
education.
/H17074
No
/H17074
No
/H17074
/H17074
No
Yes
Yes
No
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
Your education is
qualifying work-related
education.
/H17074
/H17074
No
/H17074
Page 198 Chapter 27 Tax Benefits for Work-Related Education

Page 201 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
get additional education to be certified in an- duties in any of the following ways is not consid- at a later date your attendance is reasona-
other state. Any additional education you need ered a change to a new business. bly expected to last more than 1 year. Your
is qualifying work-related education. You have attendance is temporary up to the date you• Elementary school teacher to secondaryalready met the minimum requirements for determine it will last more than 1 year.school teacher.teaching. Teaching in another state is not a new
• Teacher of one subject, such as biology,trade or business. Note. If you are in either situation (1) or (2)to teacher of another subject, such as art. above, your attendance is not temporary if factsExample. You hold a permanent teaching • Classroom teacher to guidance counselor. and circumstances indicate otherwise.certificate in State A and are employed as a
• Classroom teacher to school administra-teacher in that state for several years. You move Attendance not on a temporary basis.
tor.to State B and are promptly hired as a teacher. You do not go to school on a temporary basis if
You are required, however, to complete certain either of the following situations apply to you.
prescribed courses to get a permanent teaching
1. Your attendance at school is realisticallycertificate in State B. These additional courses
expected to last more than 1 year. It doesare qualifying work-related education because
not matter how long you actually attend.What Expenses Can Bethe teaching position in State B involves the
same general kind of work for which you were 2. Initially, your attendance at school is realis-Deductedqualified in State A. tically expected to last 1 year or less, but
at a later date your attendance is reasona-If your education meets the requirements de- bly expected to last more than 1 year. YourEducation That scribed earlier under Qualifying Work-Related attendance is not temporary after the dateEducation, you can generally deduct your edu-Qualifies You for a you determine it will last more than 1 year.cation expenses as business expenses. If youNew Trade or Business are not self-employed, you can deduct business
expenses only if you itemize your deductions.Education that is part of a program of study that You cannot deduct expenses related to Deductible Transportationwill qualify you for a new trade or business is not tax-exempt and excluded income. Expensesqualifying work-related education. This is true
even if you do not plan to enter that trade or Deductible expenses. The following educa- If you are regularly employed and go directlybusiness. tion expenses can be deducted. from home to school on a temporary basis, youIf you are an employee, a change of duties can deduct the round-trip costs of transportation• Tuition, books, supplies, lab fees, and sim-that involves the same general kind of work is between your home and school. This is trueilar items.not a new trade or business. regardless of the location of the school, the• Certain transportation and travel costs. distance traveled, or whether you attend schoolExample 1. You are an accountant. Your on nonwork days.• Other education expenses, such as costsemployer requires you to get a law degree at of research and typing when writing a pa- Transportation expenses include the actualyour own expense. You register at a law school per as part of an educational program. costs of bus, subway, cab, or other fares, as wellfor the regular curriculum that leads to a law
as the costs of using your car. Transportationdegree. Even if you do not intend to become a
expenses do not include amounts spent forlawyer, the education is not qualifying because Nondeductible expenses. You cannot de- travel, meals, or lodging while you are awaythe law degree will qualify you for a new trade or duct personal or capital expenses. For example, from home overnight.business. you cannot deduct the dollar value of vacation
time or annual leave you take to attend classes. Example 1. You regularly work in a nearbyExample 2. You are a general practitioner This amount is a personal expense. town, and go directly from work to home. Youof medicine. You take a 2-week course to review Unclaimed reimbursement. If you do not also attend school every work night for 3 monthsdevelopments in several specialized fields of claim reimbursement that you are entitled to to take a course that improves your job skills.medicine. The course does not qualify you for a receive from your employer, you cannot deduct Since you are attending school on a temporarynew profession. It is qualifying work-related edu- the expenses that apply to the reimbursement. basis, you can deduct your daily round-tripcation because it maintains or improves skills
transportation expenses in going between homerequired in your present profession. Example. Your employer agrees to pay and school. This is true regardless of the dis-
your education expenses if you file a voucher tance traveled.Example 3. While working in the private showing your expenses. You do not file apractice of psychiatry, you enter a program to voucher, and you do not get reimbursed. Be- Example 2. Assume the same facts as instudy and train at an accredited psychoanalytic cause you did not file a voucher, you cannot Example 1 except that on certain nights you goinstitute. The program will lead to qualifying you deduct the expenses on your tax return. directly from work to school and then home. Youto practice psychoanalysis. The psychoanalytic
can deduct your transportation expenses fromtraining does not qualify you for a new profes-
your regular work site to school and then home.sion. It is qualifying work-related education be- Transportation Expenses
cause it maintains or improves skills required in Example 3. Assume the same facts as inIf your education qualifies, you can deduct localyour present profession. Example 1 except that you attend the school fortransportation costs of going directly from work
9 months on Saturdays, nonwork days. Sinceto school. If you are regularly employed and go
you are attending school on a temporary basis,to school on a temporary basis, you can alsoBar or CPA Review Course you can deduct your round-trip transportationdeduct the costs of returning from school to
expenses in going between home and school.Review courses to prepare for the bar examina- home.
tion or the certified public accountant (CPA) ex- Temporary basis. You go to school on a Example 4. Assume the same facts as inamination are not qualifying work-related temporary basis if either of the following situa- Example 1 except that you attend classes twiceeducation. They are part of a program of study tions applies to you. a week for 15 months. Since your attendance inthat can qualify you for a new profession.
school is not considered temporary, you cannot1. Your attendance at school is realistically deduct your transportation expenses in goingexpected to last 1 year or less and does between home and school. If you go directlyTeaching and Related Duties indeed last for 1 year or less. from work to school, you can deduct the
All teaching and related duties are considered 2. Initially, your attendance at school is realis- one-way transportation expenses of going from
the same general kind of work. A change in tically expected to last 1 year or less, but work to school. If you go from work to home to
Chapter 27 Tax Benefits for Work-Related Education Page 199

Page 202 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
school and return home, your transportation ex- round-trip train ticket to Michigan. She can de- • Deduct work-related education expenses
penses cannot be more than if you had gone duct one-fourth of the meals (subject to the 50% paid with tax-free scholarship, grant, or
directly from work to school. limit) and lodging costs for the time she attended employer-provided educational assis-
the university. tance. See Adjustments to QualifyingUsing your car. If you use your car (whether Work-Related Education Expenses, be-you own or lease it) for transportation to school, Example 3. Dave works in Nashville and low.you can deduct your actual expenses or use the recently traveled to California to take a 2-weekstandard mileage rate to figure the amount you seminar. The seminar is qualifying work-relatedcan deduct. The standard mileage rate for miles Adjustments to Qualifyingeducation.driven during 2009 is 55 cents a mile. Whichever Work-Related Education ExpensesWhile there, he spent an extra 8 weeks onmethod you use, you can also deduct parking personal activities. The facts, including the extrafees and tolls. See chapter 26 for information on If you pay qualifying work-related education ex-8-week stay, show that his main purpose was todeducting your actual expenses of using a car. penses with certain tax-free funds, you cannottake a vacation.
claim a deduction for those amounts. You mustDave cannot deduct his round-trip airfare or
reduce the qualifying expenses by the amount ofTravel Expenses his meals and lodging for the 8 weeks. He can
any tax-free educational assistance you re-deduct only his expenses for meals (subject to
ceived.You can deduct expenses for travel, meals (see the 50% limit) and lodging for the 2 weeks he
50% limit on meals , later), and lodging if you Tax-free educational assistance includes:attended the seminar.
travel overnight mainly to obtain qualifying • The tax-free part of scholarships and fel-Cruises and conventions. Certain cruiseswork-related education. lowships (see chapter 1 of Publicationand conventions offer seminars or courses asTravel expenses for qualifying work-related 970),part of their itinerary. Even if the seminars oreducation are treated the same as travel ex-
courses are work-related, your deduction forpenses for other employee business purposes. • Pell grants (see chapter 1 of Publication
travel may be limited. This applies to:For more information, see chapter 26. 970),
• Travel by ocean liner, cruise ship, or otherYou cannot deduct expenses for per- • Employer-provided educational assistance
form of luxury water transportation, andsonal activities, such as sightseeing, (see chapter 12 of Publication 970),
visiting, or entertaining.
CAUTION
! • Conventions outside the North American • Veterans' educational assistance (see
area. chapter 1 of Publication 970), andMainly personal travel. If your travel away
from home is mainly personal, you cannot de- • Any other nontaxable (tax-free) paymentsFor a discussion of the limits on travel ex-duct all of your expenses for travel, meals, and (other than gifts or inheritances) receivedpense deductions that apply to cruises and con-lodging. You can deduct only your expenses for for education assistance.ventions, see Luxury Water Travel andlodging and 50% of your expenses for meals Conventions in chapter 1 of Publication 463.during the time you attend the qualified educa- Amounts that do not reduce qualifyingtional activities. 50% limit on meals. You can deduct only work-related education expenses. Do notWhether a trip's purpose is mainly personal 50% of the cost of your meals while traveling reduce the qualifying work-related education ex-or educational depends upon the facts and cir- away from home to obtain qualifying penses by amounts paid with funds the studentcumstances. An important factor is the compari- work-related education. You cannot have been receives as:son of time spent on personal activities with time reimbursed for the meals.spent on educational activities. If you spend • Payment for services, such as wages,Employees must use Form 2106 or Formmore time on personal activities, the trip is con- 2106-EZ to apply the 50% limit. • A loan,sidered mainly educational only if you can show
a substantial nonpersonal reason for traveling to • A gift,
a particular location. Travel as Education • An inheritance, or
Example 1. John works in Newark, New • A withdrawal from the student's personalYou cannot deduct the cost of travel as a form of
Jersey. He traveled to Chicago to take a deducti- savings.education even if it is directly related to your
ble 1-week course at the request of his em- duties in your work or business.
ployer. His main reason for going to Chicago Also, do not reduce the qualifying
was to take the course. work-related education expenses by any schol-Example. You are a French language
While there, he took a sightseeing trip, enter- arship or fellowship reported as income on theteacher. While on sabbatical leave granted for
tained some friends, and took a side trip to student's return or any scholarship which, by itstravel, you traveled through France to improve
Pleasantville for a day. terms, cannot be applied to qualifyingyour knowledge of the French language. You
Since the trip was mainly for business, John work-related education expenses. chose your itinerary and most of your activities
can deduct his round-trip airfare to Chicago. He to improve your French language skills. You
cannot deduct his transportation expenses of cannot deduct your travel expenses as educa-
going to Pleasantville. He can deduct only the tion expenses. This is true even if you spent
meals (subject to the 50% limit) and lodging most of your time learning French by visiting Reimbursementsconnected with his educational activities. French schools and families, attending movies
or plays, and engaging in similar activities. How you treat reimbursements depends on theExample 2. Sue works in Boston. She went arrangement you have with your employer.to a university in Michigan to take a course for No Double Benefit Allowed There are two basic types of reimbursementwork. The course is qualifying work-related edu-
arrangementsÐaccountable plans and nonac-cation. You cannot do either of the following. countable plans. You can tell the type of planShe took one course, which is one-fourth of a
you are reimbursed under by the way the reim-full course load of study. She spent the rest of • Deduct work-related education expenses
bursement is reported on your Form W-2.the time on personal activities. Her reasons for as business expenses if you benefit from
For information about how to treat reim-taking the course in Michigan were all personal. these expenses under any other provision
bursements under both accountable and nonac-Sue's trip is mainly personal because of the law, for example, as a tuition and
countable plans, see Reimbursements  inthree-fourths of her time is considered personal fees deduction (see chapter 19) or an edu-
chapter 26.time. She cannot deduct the cost of her cation credit (see chapter 35). 
Page 200 Chapter 27 Tax Benefits for Work-Related Education

Page 203 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
and for impairment-related work expenses are
explained below.)Deducting Business
Using Form 2106-EZ. This form is shorter 28.and easier to use than Form 2106. Generally,Expenses
you can use this form if:
Self-employed persons and employees report • All reimbursements, if any, are included inbusiness expenses differently. Miscellaneousbox 1 of your Form W-2, and
The following information explains what
• You are using the standard mileage rate ifforms you must use to deduct the cost of your
Deductionsyou are claiming vehicle expenses.qualifying work-related education as a business
expense.
If you do not meet both of these requirements,
use Form 2106.
Self-Employed Persons What's New
Performing Artists andIf you are self-employed, you must report the Credit or debit card convenience fees paid.cost of your qualifying work-related education on Fee-Basis Officials If you pay your income tax (including estimatedthe appropriate form used to report your busi- tax payments) by credit or debit card, you canness income and expenses (generally Schedule If you are a qualified performing artist, or a state deduct the convenience fee charged by the cardC, C-EZ, or F). If your educational expenses (or local) government official who is paid in processor. See the Instructions for Schedule Ainclude expenses for a car or truck, travel, or whole or in part on a fee basis, you can deduct (Form 1040), line 23.meals, report those expenses the same way you the cost of your qualifying work-related educa-
report other business expenses for those items. tion as an adjustment to gross income rather Limit on itemized deductions. The amount
See the instructions for the form you file for than as an itemized deduction. of adjusted gross income allowed without limit-
information on how to complete it. Include the cost of your qualifying ing your itemized deductions has increased. For
work-related education with any other employee 2009, if your adjusted gross income is more than
business expenses on Form 1040, line 24. You $166,800 ($83,400 if you are married filing sep-Employees do not have to itemize your deductions on arately), you may have to reduce the amount of
Schedule A (Form 1040), and, therefore, the certain itemized deductions, including most mis-If you are an employee, you can deduct the cost
deduction is not subject to the cellaneous deductions. For more informationof qualifying work-related education only if you:
2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit. You must and a worksheet, see the instructions for Sched-
complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ to figure your1. Did not receive any reimbursement from ule A (Form 1040), line 29, or chapter 29.
deduction, even if you meet the requirementsyour employer,
Losses from Ponzi-type investments. Spe-described earlier under Form not required.2. Were reimbursed under a nonaccountable cial rules apply to theft losses from Ponzi-typeFor more information on qualified performingplan (amount is included in box 1 of Form investment arrangements. See Form 4684 andartists, see chapter 6 of Publication 463.W-2), or Instructions for more information.
3. Received reimbursement under an ac- Impairment-Related Work Standard mileage rate. The 2009 rate forcountable plan, but the amount received business use of a vehicle is 55 cents per mile.Expenseswas less than your expenses.
If either (1) or (2) applies, you can deduct the If you are disabled and have impairment-related
total qualifying cost. If (3) applies, you can de- work expenses that are necessary for you to be
duct only the qualifying costs that were more able to get qualifying work-related education, Introductionthan your reimbursement. you can deduct these expenses on Schedule A
This chapter explains which expenses you canIn order to deduct the cost of your qualifying (Form 1040), line 28. They are not subject to the
claim as miscellaneous itemized deductions onwork-related education as a business expense, 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit. To deduct
Schedule A (Form 1040). You must reduce theinclude the amount with your deduction for any these expenses, you must complete Form 2106
total of most miscellaneous itemized deductionsother employee business expenses on Sched- or 2106-EZ even if you meet the requirements
by 2% of your adjusted gross income. This chap-ule A (Form 1040), line 21. (Special rules for described earlier under Form not required.
ter covers the following topics.For more information on impairment-relatedexpenses of certain performing artists and
work expenses, see chapter 6 of Publicationfee-basis officials and for impairment-related • Deductions subject to the 2% limit.
463.work expenses are explained later.)
• Deductions not subject to the 2% limit.This deduction is subject to the
2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that applies • Expenses you cannot deduct.
to most miscellaneous itemized deductions. See
chapter 28. Recordkeeping You must keep records to verify your
deductions. You should keep receipts,Form 2106 or 2106-EZ. To figure your deduc- canceled checks, substitute checks, fi-You must keep records as proof of any
RECORDStion for employee business expenses, including nancial account statements, and other docu-deduction claimed on your tax return.qualifying work-related education, you generally mentary evidence. For more information onGenerally, you should keep your rec-
RECORDSmust complete Form 2106 or Form 2106-EZ. recordkeeping, get Publication 552, Record-ords for 3 years from the date of filing the tax
keeping for Individuals. return and claiming the deduction.Form not required. Do not complete either
Form 2106 or Form 2106-EZ if: For specific information about keeping rec-
ords of business expenses, see Recordkeeping Useful Items• All reimbursements, if any, are included in
in chapter 26.box 1 of your Form W-2, and You may want to see:
• You are not claiming travel, transportation, Publicationmeal, or entertainment expenses.
❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
If you meet both of these requirements, enter Expenses
the expenses directly on Schedule A (Form ❏ 529 Miscellaneous Deductions1040), line 21. (Special rules for expenses of
certain performing artists and fee-basis officials ❏ 535 Business Expenses
Chapter 28 Miscellaneous Deductions Page 201

Page 204 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
❏ 587 Business Use of Your Home • Licenses and regulatory fees. Educator Expenses over Limit
(Including Use by Daycare • Malpractice insurance premiums. If you were an eligible educator in 2009, and youProviders)
had qualified educator expenses that you can-• Medical examinations required by an em-❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property not take as an adjustment to gross income, youployer.
can deduct the rest of those expenses that areForm (and Instructions) • Occupational taxes. ordinary and necessary as an itemized deduc-
❏ Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized tion subject to the 2% limit. For information on• Passport for a business trip.
Deductions educator expenses that you can take as an• Subscriptions to professional journals and adjustment to gross income, see chapter 26.❏ 2106 Employee Business Expenses trade magazines related to your work.
❏ 2106-EZ Unreimbursed Employee • Travel, transportation, entertainment, and
Business Expenses Home Officegifts related to your work. (See chapter
26.) If you use a part of your home regularly and
exclusively for business purposes, you may be
able to deduct a part of the operating expensesBusiness Liability Insurance
Deductions Subject and depreciation of your home.
You can deduct insurance premiums you paid You can claim this deduction for the busi-
for protection against personal liability forto the 2% Limit ness use of a part of your home only if you use
wrongful acts on the job. that part of your home regularly and exclusively:
You can deduct certain expenses as miscellane-
• As your principal place of business for anyous itemized deductions on Schedule A
trade or business,(Form 1040). You can claim the amount of ex- Damages for Breach of
penses that is more than 2% of your adjusted • As a place to meet or deal with your pa-Employment Contractgross income. You figure your deduction on tients, clients, or customers in the normal
Schedule A by subtracting 2% of your adjusted If you break an employment contract, you can course of your trade or business, or
gross income from the total amount of these deduct damages you pay your former employer • In the case of a separate structure notexpenses. Your adjusted gross income is the that are attributable to the pay you received from attached to your home, in connection withamount on Form 1040, line 38. that employer. your trade or business.Generally, you apply the 2% limit after you
apply any other deduction limit. For example,
The regular and exclusive business use mustyou apply the 50% (or 80%) limit on busi- Depreciation on Computers or Cell be for the convenience of your employer and notness-related meals and entertainment (dis-
Phones just appropriate and helpful in your job. Getcussed in chapter 26) before you apply the 2%
Publication 587 for more detailed informationlimit. You can claim a depreciation deduction for a and a worksheet.Deductions subject to the 2% limit are dis- computer or cell phone that you use in your workcussed in the three categories in which you as an employee if its use is:report them on Schedule A (Form 1040).
Job Search Expenses• For the convenience of your employer,• Unreimbursed employee expenses (line and21). You can deduct certain expenses you have in
looking for a new job in your present occupation,• Required as a condition of your employ-• Tax preparation fees (line 22). even if you do not get a new job. You cannotment.
• Other expenses (line 23). deduct these expenses if:
For more information about the rules and ex- • You are looking for a job in a new occupa-
ceptions to the rules affecting the allowable de- tion,Unreimbursed Employee ductions for a home computer or cell phone, see
• There was a substantial break betweenExpenses (Line 21) Publication 529. the ending of your last job and your look-
ing for a new one, orGenerally, the following expenses are deducti-
ble on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 21. Dues to Chambers of Commerce • You are looking for a job for the first time.
You can deduct only unreimbursed em- and Professional Societiesployee expenses that are:
Employment and outplacement agency fees.You may be able to deduct dues paid to profes-• Paid or incurred during your tax year, You can deduct employment and outplacementsional organizations (such as bar associations agency fees you pay in looking for a new job in• For carrying on your trade or business of and medical associations) and to chambers of your present occupation.being an employee, and commerce and similar organizations, if member-
Employer pays you back. If, in a later year,• Ordinary and necessary. ship helps you carry out the duties of your job.
your employer pays you back for employmentSimilar organizations include: agency fees, you must include the amount you An expense is ordinary if it is common and
• Boards of trade, receive in your gross income up to the amount ofaccepted in your trade, business, or profession.
your tax benefit in the earlier year. (See Recov-An expense is necessary if it is appropriate and • Business leagues, eries in chapter 12.)helpful to your business. An expense does not
• Civic or public service organizations,have to be required to be considered necessary. Employer pays the employment agency.
Examples of unreimbursed employee ex- • Real estate boards, and If your employer pays the fees directly to the
penses are listed next. The list is followed by employment agency and you are not responsi-• Trade associations.discussions of additional unreimbursed em- ble for them, you do not include them in your
ployee expenses. gross income.
Lobbying and political activities. You may• Business bad debt of an employee.
not be able to deduct that part of your dues that RÂesumÂe. You can deduct amounts you spend• Education that is work related. (See chap- is for certain lobbying and political activities. See for preparing and mailing copies of a r ÂesumÂe toter 27.) Dues used for lobbying  under Lobbying Ex- prospective employers if you are looking for a
new job in your present occupation.• Legal fees related to your job. penses, later.
Page 202 Chapter 28 Miscellaneous Deductions

Page 205 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Travel and transportation expenses. If you If local military rules do not allow you to wearUnion Dues and Expenses
fatigue uniforms when you are off duty, you cantravel to an area and, while there, you look for a
You can deduct dues and initiation fees you pay deduct the amount by which the cost of buyingnew job in your present occupation, you may be
for union membership. and keeping up these uniforms is more than theable to deduct travel expenses to and from the
You can also deduct assessments for benefit uniform allowance you receive.area. You can deduct the travel expenses if the
payments to unemployed union members. How-trip is primarily to look for a new job. The amount You can deduct the cost of your uniforms ifever, you cannot deduct the part of the assess-of time you spend on personal activity compared you are a civilian faculty or staff member of aments or contributions that provides funds forto the amount of time you spend in looking for military school.the payment of sick, accident, or death benefits.work is important in determining whether the trip Also, you cannot deduct contributions to a pen-is primarily personal or is primarily to look for a sion fund, even if the union requires you to make Tax Preparation Fees new job. the contributions. (Line 22)Even if you cannot deduct the travel ex- You may not be able to deduct amounts you
penses to and from an area, you can deduct the pay to the union that are related to certain lobby- You can usually deduct tax preparation fees ining and political activities. See Lobbying Ex-expenses of looking for a new job in your pres- the year you pay them. Thus, on your 2009penses under Nondeductible Expenses, later.ent occupation while in the area. return, you can deduct fees paid in 2009 for
You can choose to use the standard mileage preparing your 2008 return. These fees include
rate to figure your car expenses. The 2009 rate the cost of tax preparation software programsWork Clothes and Uniforms and tax publications. They also include any feefor business use of a vehicle is 55 cents per
you paid for electronic filing of your return.mile. See chapter 26 for more information. You can deduct the cost and upkeep of work
clothes if the following two requirements are
met. Other Expenses (Line 23)Licenses and Regulatory Fees • You must wear them as a condition of You can deduct certain other expenses as mis-your employment.You can deduct the amount you pay each year cellaneous itemized deductions subject to theto state or local governments for licenses and 2% limit. On Schedule A (Form 1040), line 23,• The clothes are not suitable for everydayregulatory fees for your trade, business, or pro- you can deduct expenses that you pay:wear.
fession.
1. To produce or collect income that must be
It is not enough that you wear distinc- included in your gross income,
tive clothing. The clothing must be spe-Occupational Taxes 2. To manage, conserve, or maintain prop-cifically required by your employer. Nor
CAUTION
!
erty held for producing such income, oris it enough that you do not, in fact, wear yourYou can deduct an occupational tax charged at
work clothes away from work. The clothing musta flat rate by a locality for the privilege of working 3. To determine, contest, pay, or claim a re-
not be suitable for taking the place of your regu-or conducting a business in the locality. If you fund of any tax.
lar clothing.are an employee, you can claim occupational You can deduct expenses you pay for the pur-taxes only as a miscellaneous deduction subject Examples of workers who may be able to poses in (1) and (2) above only if they are rea-to the 2% limit; you cannot claim them as a deduct the cost and upkeep of work clothes are: sonably and closely related to these purposes.delivery workers, firefighters, health care work-deduction for taxes elsewhere on your return. Some of these other expenses are explained iners, law enforcement officers, letter carriers, the following discussions.professional athletes, and transportation work-
ers (air, rail, bus, etc.). If the expenses you pay produce income thatRepayment of Income Aid Payment
Musicians and entertainers can deduct the is only partially taxable, see Tax-Exempt Income
An ªincome aid paymentº is one that is received cost of theatrical clothing and accessories that Expenses , later, under Nondeductible Ex-
under an employer's plan to aid employees who are not suitable for everyday wear. penses.
lose their jobs because of lack of work. If you However, work clothing consisting of white
repay a lump-sum income aid payment that you cap, white shirt or white jacket, white bib over-
alls, and standard work shoes, which a painter isreceived and included in income in an earlier Appraisal Fees
required by his union to wear on the job, is notyear, you can deduct the repayment.
You can deduct appraisal fees if you pay them todistinctive in character or in the nature of a
figure a casualty loss or the fair market value ofuniform. Similarly, the costs of buying and main-
donated property.taining blue work clothes worn by a welder at theResearch Expenses of a College
request of a foreman are not deductible.Professor
Certain Casualty and Theft LossesIf you are a college professor, you can deduct Protective clothing. You can deduct the cost
research expenses, including travel expenses, of protective clothing required in your work, such You can deduct a casualty or theft loss as afor teaching, lecturing, or writing and publishing as safety shoes or boots, safety glasses, hard miscellaneous itemized deduction subject to theon subjects that relate directly to your teaching hats, and work gloves. 2% limit if you used the damaged or stolenduties. You must have undertaken the research Examples of workers who may be required to property in performing services as an employee.wear safety items are: carpenters, cement work-as a means of carrying out the duties expected First report the loss in Section B of Form 4684,ers, chemical workers, electricians, fishing boatof a professor and without expectation of profit Casualties and Thefts. You may also have tocrew members, machinists, oil field workers,apart from salary. However, you cannot deduct include the loss on Form 4797, Sales of Busi-pipe fitters, steamfitters, and truck drivers.the cost of travel as a form of education. ness Property, if you are otherwise required to
file that form. To figure your deduction, add all
Military uniforms. You generally cannot de- casualty or theft losses from this type of property
Tools Used in Your Work duct the cost of your uniforms if you are on included on Form 4684, lines 36 and 42b, or
full-time active duty in the armed forces. How- Form 4797, line 18a. For other casualty and theftGenerally, you can deduct amounts you spend ever, if you are an armed forces reservist, you losses, see chapter 25.for tools used in your work if the tools wear out can deduct the unreimbursed cost of your uni-
and are thrown away within 1 year from the date form if military regulations restrict you from
of purchase. You can depreciate the cost of wearing it except while on duty as a reservist. In Clerical Help and Office Renttools that have a useful life substantially beyond figuring the deduction, you must reduce the cost
the tax year. For more information about depre- by any nontaxable allowance you receive for You can deduct office expenses, such as rent
ciation, see Publication 946. these expenses. and clerical help, that you have in connection
Chapter 28 Miscellaneous Deductions Page 203

Page 206 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
with your investments and collecting the taxable You can also deduct legal expenses that are:Indirect Deductions of
income on them. Pass-Through Entities • Related to either doing or keeping your
job, such as those you paid to defendPass-through entities include partnerships, S yourself against criminal charges arisingCredit or Debit Card Convenience corporations, and mutual funds that are not pub- out of your trade or business,licly offered. Deductions of pass-through entitiesFees
are passed through to the partners or sharehold- • For tax advice related to a divorce, if the
You can deduct the convenience fee charged by ers. The partners or shareholders can deduct bill specifies how much is for tax advice
the card processor for paying your income tax their share of passed-through deductions for and it is determined in a reasonable way,
(including estimated tax payments) by credit or investment expenses as miscellaneous item- or
debit card. The fees are deductible in the year ized deductions subject to the 2% limit.
• To collect taxable alimony.paid.
Example. You are a member of an invest-
You can deduct expenses of resolving taxment club that is formed solely to invest in secur-
issues relating to profit or loss from businessDepreciation on Home Computer ities. The club is treated as a partnership. The
(Schedule C or C-EZ), rentals or royaltiespartnership's income is solely from taxable divi-
You can deduct depreciation on your home (Schedule E), or farm income and expensesdends, interest, and gains from sales of securi-
computer if you use it to produce income (for (Schedule F) on the appropriate schedule. Youties. In this case, you can deduct your share of
example, to manage your investments that pro- deduct expenses of resolving nonbusiness taxthe partnership's operating expenses as miscel-
duce taxable income). You generally must de- issues on Schedule A (Form 1040). See Taxlaneous itemized deductions subject to the 2%
preciate the computer using the straight line limit. However, if the investment club partner- Preparation Fees, earlier.
method over the Alternative Depreciation Sys- ship has investments that also produce nontax-
tem (ADS) recovery period. But if you work as an able income, you cannot deduct your share of
employee and also use the computer in that the partnership's expenses that produce the Loss on Deposits
work, see Publication 946. nontaxable income.
For information on whether, and if so, how, you
may deduct a loss on your deposit in a qualifiedPublicly offered mutual funds. Publicly of-
Excess Deductions of an Estate financial institution, see Loss on Deposits  infered mutual funds do not pass deductions for
investment expenses through to shareholders. chapter 25.If an estate's total deductions in its last tax year A mutual fund is ªpublicly offeredº if it is:are more than its gross income for that year, the
• Continuously offered pursuant to a publicbeneficiaries succeeding to the estate's prop- Repayments of Incomeoffering,erty can deduct the excess. Do not include de-
ductions for the estate's personal exemption If you had to repay an amount that you included• Regularly traded on an established securi-and charitable contributions when figuring the in income in an earlier year, you may be able toties market, orestate's total deductions. The beneficiaries can deduct the amount you repaid. If the amount you• Held by or for at least 500 persons at allclaim the deduction only for the tax year in had to repay was ordinary income of $3,000 ortimes during the tax year. which, or with which, the estate terminates, less, the deduction is subject to the 2% limit. If itwhether the year of termination is a normal year was more than $3,000, see Repayments UnderA publicly offered mutual fund will send you aor a short tax year. For more information, see Claim of Right under Deductions Not Subject toForm 1099-DIV, Dividends and Distributions, orTermination of Estate in Publication 559, Survi- the 2% Limit, later.a substitute form, showing the net amount ofvors, Executors, and Administrators.
dividend income (gross dividends minus invest-
ment expenses). This net figure is the amount
Repayments of Social Securityyou report on your return as income. You cannotFees to Collect Interest and Benefitsdeduct investment expenses.Dividends
For information on how to deduct your repay-Information returns. You should receive in-You can deduct fees you pay to a broker, bank, ments of certain social security benefits, seeformation returns from pass-through entities.trustee, or similar agent to collect your taxable Repayments More Than Gross Benefits in chap-bond interest or dividends on shares of stock. Partnerships and S corporations. These ter 11.But you cannot deduct a fee you pay to a broker entities issue Schedule K-1, which lists the items
to buy investment property, such as stocks or and amounts you must report and identifies the
bonds. You must add the fee to the cost of the tax return schedules and lines to use. Safe Deposit Box Rentproperty.
Nonpublicly offered mutual funds. TheseYou cannot deduct the fee you pay to a You can deduct safe deposit box rent if you usefunds will send you a Form 1099-DIV, or a sub-broker to sell securities. You can use the fee the box to store taxable income-producingstitute form, showing your share of gross incomeonly to figure gain or loss from the sale. See the stocks, bonds, or investment-related papers andand investment expenses. You can claim theinstructions for Schedule D (Form 1040), col- documents. You cannot deduct the rent if youexpenses only as a miscellaneous itemized de-umns (d) and (e), for information on how to
use the box only for jewelry, other personalduction subject to the 2% limit.report the fee.
items, or tax-exempt securities.
Investment Fees and ExpensesHobby Expenses Service Charges on Dividend
You can deduct investment fees, custodial fees,You can generally deduct hobby expenses, but Reinvestment Planstrust administration fees, and other expensesonly up to the amount of hobby income. A hobby
you paid for managing your investments that You can deduct service charges you pay as ais not a business because it is not carried on to
produce taxable income. subscriber in a dividend reinvestment plan.make a profit. See Activity not for profit in chap-
ter 12 under Other Income. These service charges include payments for:
• Holding shares acquired through a plan,Legal Expenses
• Collecting and reinvesting cash dividends,You can usually deduct legal expenses that you andincur in attempting to produce or collect taxable
• Keeping individual records and providingincome or that you pay in connection with the
determination, collection, or refund of any tax. detailed statements of accounts. 
Page 204 Chapter 28 Miscellaneous Deductions

Page 207 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
gold, silver, vacant lots, and works of art). First, of work that are necessary for you to be able toTrustee's Administrative Fees for
report the loss in Form 4684, Section B. You work.IRA
may also have to include the loss on Form 4797 Self-employed. If you are self-employed,if you are otherwise required to file that form. ToTrustee's administrative fees that are billed sep- enter your impairment-related work expensesfigure your deduction, add all casualty or theftarately and paid by you in connection with your on the appropriate form (Schedule C, C-EZ, E,individual retirement arrangement (IRA) are de- losses from this type of property included on or F) used to report your business income andductible (if they are ordinary and necessary) as a Form 4684, lines 36 and 42b, or Form 4797, line expenses.miscellaneous itemized deduction subject to the 18a. For more information on casualty and theft
2% limit. For more information about IRAs, see losses, see chapter 25.
chapter 17. Loss From Other Activities From
Schedule K-1 (Form 1065-B), Box 2Federal Estate Tax on Income in
Respect of a Decedent If the amount reported in Schedule K-1 (Form
Deductions Not 1065-B), box 2, is a loss, report it on Schedule AYou can deduct the federal estate tax attributa- (Form 1040), line 28. It is not subject to theble to income in respect of a decedent that youSubject to the 2% Limit passive activity limitations.as a beneficiary include in your gross income.
Income in respect of the decedent is gross in-You can deduct the items listed below as miscel- come that the decedent would have receivedlaneous itemized deductions. They are not sub- Repayments Under Claim of Righthad death not occurred and that was not prop-ject to the 2% limit. Report these items on erly includible in the decedent's final income tax If you had to repay more than $3,000 that youSchedule A (Form 1040), line 28. return. See Publication 559 for more informa- included in your income in an earlier year be-tion. cause at the time you thought you had an un-List of Deductions restricted right to it, you may be able to deduct
the amount you repaid or take a credit againstEach of the following items is discussed in detail Gambling Losses Up to the your tax. See Repayments in chapter 12 forafter the list. Amount of Gambling Winnings more information.
• Amortizable premium on taxable bonds.
You must report the full amount of your gambling
• Casualty and theft losses from income- winnings for the year on Form 1040, line 21. You Unrecovered Investment inproducing property. deduct your gambling losses for the year on
AnnuitySchedule A (Form 1040), line 28. You cannot• Federal estate tax on income in respect of
deduct gambling losses that are more than youra decedent. A retiree who contributed to the cost of an annu-winnings. ity can exclude from income a part of each• Gambling losses up to the amount of gam-
You cannot reduce your gambling win- payment received as a tax-free return of thebling winnings.
nings by your gambling losses and re- retiree's investment. If the retiree dies before the• Impairment-related work expenses of per- port the difference. You must report the entire investment is recovered tax free, any un-
CAUTION
!sons with disabilities. full amount of your winnings as income and recovered investment can be deducted on the
claim your losses (up to the amount of winnings)• Loss from other activities from Schedule retiree's final income tax return. See chapter 10
as an itemized deduction. Therefore, your rec-K-1 (Form 1065-B), box 2. for more information about the tax treatment of
ords should show your winnings separately from pensions and annuities.• Losses from Ponzi-type investment your losses.schemes.
Diary of winnings and losses. You• Repayments of more than $3,000 under a must keep an accurate diary or similarclaim of right. record of your losses and winnings. Nondeductible
RECORDS
• Unrecovered investment in an annuity. Your diary should contain at least the following
information. Expenses
• The date and type of your specific wagerAmortizable Premium on Taxable Examples of nondeductible expenses are listedor wagering activity.Bonds next. The list is followed by discussions of addi-
• The name and address or location of the tional nondeductible expenses.In general, if the amount you pay for a bond is gambling establishment.greater than its stated principal amount, the ex-
cess is bond premium. You can elect to amortize • The names of other persons present with List of Nondeductible
the premium on taxable bonds. The amortization you at the gambling establishment. Expensesof the premium is generally an offset to interest • The amount(s) you won or lost.income on the bond rather than a separate de-
• Broker's commissions that you paid induction item. See Publication 529 for more information. connection with your IRA or other invest-Part of the premium on some bonds may be
ment property.a miscellaneous deduction not subject to the 2%
limit. For more information, see Amortizable • Burial or funeral expenses, including theImpairment-Related WorkPremium on Taxable Bonds in Publication 529, cost of a cemetery lot.  Expensesand Bond Premium Amortization in chapter 3 of
• Capital expenses.Publication 550, Investment Income and Ex- If you have a physical or mental disability thatpenses. • Fees and licenses, such as car licenses,limits your being employed, or substantially lim-
marriage licenses, and dog tags. its one or more of your major life activities, such
as performing manual tasks, walking, speaking, • Hobby losses, but see Hobby Expenses,Certain Casualty and Theft Losses breathing, learning, and working, you can de- earlier.
duct your impairment-related work expenses.You can deduct a casualty or theft loss as a • Home repairs, insurance, and rent.Impairment-related work expenses are ordi-miscellaneous itemized deduction not subject to
• Illegal bribes and kickbacksÐSee Bribesnary and necessary business expenses for at-the 2% limit if the damaged or stolen property
and kickbacks in chapter 11 of Publicationtendant care services at your place of work andwas income-producing property (property held
for investment, such as stocks, notes, bonds, for other expenses in connection with your place 535. 
Chapter 28 Miscellaneous Deductions Page 205

Page 208 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Losses from the sale of your home, furni- parking tickets, tax penalties, and penalties de- an accidental loss or disappearance of property
ducted from teachers' paychecks after an illegalture, personal car, etc. can qualify as a casualty if it results from an
strike. identifiable event that is sudden, unexpected, or• Personal disability insurance premiums. unusual. See chapter 25.
• Personal, living, or family expenses.
Health Spa Expenses Example. A car door is accidentally• The value of wages never received or lost
slammed on your hand, breaking the setting ofvacation time. You cannot deduct health spa expenses, even if your diamond ring. The diamond falls from thethere is a job requirement to stay in excellent ring and is never found. The loss of the diamondphysical condition, such as might be required ofAdoption Expenses is a casualty.a law enforcement officer.
You cannot deduct the expenses of adopting a
child, but you may be able to take a credit for Lunches with Co-workersHome Security Systemthose expenses. See chapter 37.
You cannot deduct the expenses of lunches withYou cannot deduct the cost of a home security co-workers, except while traveling away fromsystem as a miscellaneous deduction. However,Campaign Expenses home on business. See chapter 26 for informa-you may be able to claim a deduction for a home
tion on deductible expenses while travelingsecurity system as a business expense if youYou cannot deduct campaign expenses of a away from home.have a home office. See Home Office  undercandidate for any office, even if the candidate is
Unreimbursed Employee Expenses, earlier, andrunning for reelection to the office. These in- Security System under Deducting Expenses  include qualification and registration fees for pri- Meals While Working LatePublication 587.mary elections.
You cannot deduct the cost of meals while work-Legal fees. You cannot deduct legal fees
ing late. However, you may be able to claim apaid to defend charges that arise from partici- Investment-Related Seminars
deduction if the cost of meals is a deductiblepation in a political campaign.
You cannot deduct any expenses for attending a entertainment expense, or if you are traveling
convention, seminar, or similar meeting for in- away from home. See chapter 26 for information
vestment purposes. on deductible entertainment expenses and ex-Check-Writing Fees on Personal
penses while traveling away from home.Account
Life Insurance PremiumsIf you have a personal checking account, you
cannot deduct fees charged by the bank for the Personal Legal ExpensesYou cannot deduct premiums you pay on yourprivilege of writing checks, even if the account life insurance. You may be able to deduct, as You cannot deduct personal legal expensespays interest. alimony, premiums you pay on life insurance such as those for the following.
policies assigned to your former spouse. See
• Custody of children.chapter 18 for information on alimony.Club Dues • Breach of promise to marry suit.
Generally, you cannot deduct the cost of mem- • Civil or criminal charges resulting from aLobbying Expensesbership in any club organized for business, plea- personal relationship.sure, recreation, or other social purpose. This You generally cannot deduct amounts paid or • Damages for personal injury, except forincludes business, social, athletic, luncheon, incurred for lobbying expenses. These include certain unlawful discrimination andsporting, airline, hotel, golf, and country clubs. expenses to: whistleblower claims.You cannot deduct dues paid to an organiza-
• Influence legislation,tion if one of its main purposes is to: • Preparation of a title (or defense or perfec-
• Participate or intervene in any political tion of a title).• Conduct entertainment activities for mem-
campaign for, or against, any candidatebers or their guests, or • Preparation of a will.for public office,
• Provide members or their guests with ac- • Property claims or property settlement in a• Attempt to influence the general public, orcess to entertainment facilities. divorce.segments of the public, about elections,
legislative matters, or referendums, or Dues paid to airline, hotel, and luncheon You cannot deduct these expenses even if aclubs are not deductible. • Communicate directly with covered execu- result of the legal proceeding is the loss of in-
tive branch officials in any attempt to influ- come-producing property.
ence the official actions or positions of
Commuting Expenses those officials.
Political ContributionsLobbying expenses also include any amountsYou cannot deduct commuting expenses (the
paid or incurred for research, preparation, plan-cost of transportation between your home and You cannot deduct contributions made to a polit-ning, or coordination of any of these activities.your main or regular place of work). If you haul ical candidate, a campaign committee, or atools, instruments, or other items, in your car to Dues used for lobbying. If a tax-exempt newsletter fund. Advertisements in conventionand from work, you can deduct only the addi- organization notifies you that part of the dues or bulletins and admissions to dinners or programstional cost of hauling the items such as the rent other amounts you pay to the organization are that benefit a political party or political candidateon a trailer to carry the items. used to pay nondeductible lobbying expenses, are not deductible.you cannot deduct that part. See Lobbying Ex-
penses in Publication 529 for information on
Fines or Penalties exceptions. Professional Accreditation Fees
You cannot deduct fines or penalties you pay to You cannot deduct professional accreditationa governmental unit for violating a law. This Lost or Mislaid Cash or Property fees such as the following.includes an amount paid in settlement of your
• Accounting certificate fees paid for the ini-actual or potential liability for a fine or penalty You cannot deduct a loss based on the mere
(civil or criminal). Fines or penalties include disappearance of money or property. However, tial right to practice accounting.
Page 206 Chapter 28 Miscellaneous Deductions

Page 209 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Bar exam fees and incidental expenses in Voluntary Unemployment
securing initial admission to the bar. Benefit Fund Contributions Which Itemized
• Medical and dental license fees paid to get You cannot deduct voluntary unemployment Deductions initial licensing. benefit fund contributions you make to a union
fund or a private fund. However, you can deduct Are Limited?
contributions as taxes if state law requires you toProfessional Reputation
make them to a state unemployment fund that The following Schedule A (Form 1040) deduc-You cannot deduct expenses of radio and TV covers you for the loss of wages from unemploy- tions are subject to the overall limit on itemized
appearances to increase your personal prestige ment caused by business conditions. deductions.
or establish your professional reputation.
• Taxes paidÐline 9.
Wristwatches • Interest paidÐlines 10, 11, 12, and 13.
Relief Fund Contributions • Gifts to charityÐline 19.You cannot deduct the cost of a wristwatch,
even if there is a job requirement that you knowYou cannot deduct contributions paid to a pri- • Job expenses and certain miscellaneousthe correct time to properly perform your duties.vate plan that pays benefits to any covered em- deductionsÐline 27.ployee who cannot work because of any injury or
• Other miscellaneous deductionsÐline 28,illness not related to the job.
excluding gambling and casualty or theft
losses.
Residential Telephone Service
You cannot deduct any charge (including taxes) 29.
for basic local telephone service for the first
Which Itemizedtelephone line to your residence, even if it is
used in a trade or business. Limit on Deductions
Are Not Limited?Stockholders' Meetings Itemized
The following Schedule A (Form 1040) deduc-You cannot deduct transportation and other ex-
tions are not subject to the overall limit on item-penses you pay to attend stockholders' meet- Deductions
ized deductions. However, they are still subjectings of companies in which you own stock but
to other applicable limits.have no other interest. You cannot deduct these
expenses even if you are attending the meeting • Medical and dental expensesÐline 4.Introductionto get information that would be useful in making • Investment interest expenseÐline 14.This chapter discusses the overall limit on item-further investments.
ized deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). • Casualty and theft losses of personal use
The following topics are included. propertyÐline 20.
Tax-Exempt Income Expenses • Who is subject to the limit. • Casualty and theft losses of in-
come-producing propertyÐline 28.You cannot deduct expenses to produce • Which itemized deductions are limited.
tax-exempt income. You cannot deduct interest • Gambling lossesÐline 28.• How to figure the limit.on a debt incurred or continued to buy or carry 
tax-exempt securities.
If you have expenses to produce both tax- Useful Items
able and tax-exempt income, but you cannot You may want to see:
How Do You Figure identify the expenses that produce each type of
income, you must divide the expenses based on Form (and Instructions)
the Limit?the amount of each type of income to determine
❏ Schedule A (Form 1040), Itemizedthe amount that you can deduct. If your itemized deductions are subject to theDeductions
limit, the total of all your itemized deductions isExample. During the year, you received reduced by the smaller of the following reducedtaxable interest of $4,800 and tax-exempt inter- by two-thirds:est of $1,200. In earning this income, you had
total expenses of $500 during the year. You • 80% of your itemized deductions that areAre You Subject affected by the limit. See Which Itemizedcannot identify the amount of each expense item
Deductions Are Limited, earlier, orthat is for each income item. Therefore, 80% to the Limit?
($4,800/$6,000) of the expense is for the taxable • 3% of the amount by which your AGI ex-interest and 20% ($1,200/$6,000) is for the You are subject to the limit on certain itemized ceeds $166,800 ($83,400 if married filing
tax-exempt interest. You can deduct, subject to deductions if your adjusted gross income (AGI) separately).
the 2% limit, expenses of $400 (80% of $500). is more than $166,800 ($83,400 if you are mar-
ried filing separately). Your AGI is the amount on Before you figure the overall limit on itemized
Form 1040, line 38. deductions, you first must complete Schedule A
Travel Expenses for Another (Form 1040), lines 1 through 28, including any
related forms (such as Form 2106, Form 4684,Individual
etc.).
You generally cannot deduct travel expenses The overall limit on itemized deductions is
you pay or incur for a spouse, dependent, or figured after you have applied any other limit on
other individual who accompanies you (or your the allowance of any itemized deduction. These
employee) on business or personal travel. See other limits include charitable contribution limits
chapter 26 for more information on deductible (chapter 24), the limit on certain meal and enter-
travel expenses. tainment expenses (chapter 26), and the 2%-of-
Chapter 29 Limit on Itemized Deductions Page 207

Page 210 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
adjusted-gross-income limit on certain miscella- gross income on line 38 is $259,600. Their The Willows' investment interest expense
neous deductions (chapter 28). Schedule A itemized deductions are as follows: deduction ($41,000 from Schedule A (Form
1040), line 14) is not subject to the overall limitItemized Deductions Worksheet. After you on itemized deductions.Taxes paidÐline 9 ......... . $ 17,900have completed Schedule A (Form 1040) The Willows use the Itemized Deductionsthrough line 28, you can use the Itemized De- Worksheet in the Schedule A (Form 1040) in-Interest paidÐlines 10, 11, 12,ductions Worksheet in the Instructions for structions to figure their overall limit. Their com-and 13 .................. . 45,000Schedule A (Form 1040) to figure your limit. pleted worksheet is shown as Table 29-1.Enter the result on Schedule A (Form 1040), line Of their $142,140 total itemized deductions,Investment interest expense29. Keep the worksheet for your records. the Willows can deduct only $141,212Ðline 14 ................ . 41,000
You should compare the amount of ($142,140 − $928). They enter $141,212 on
your standard deduction to the amount Gifts to charityÐline 19 ...... . 21,000 Schedule A (Form 1040), line 29.
of your itemized deductions after ap-
TIP
Job expensesÐline 27 ....... . 17,240plying the limit. Use the greater amount when
completing Form 1040, line 40. See chapter 20
Total ................. . $142,140for information on how to figure your standard
deduction.
Example
For tax year 2009, Bill and Terry Willow are filing
a joint return on Form 1040. Their adjusted
Table 29-1. Itemized Deductions WorksheetÐLine 29 Keep for Your Records
1. Enter the total of the amounts from Schedule A, lines 4, 9, 15, 19, 20, 27, and 28. ................ . 1. 142,140
2. Enter the total of the amounts from Schedule A, lines 4, 14, and 20, plus any gambling and casualty or
theft losses included on line 28 .................................................... . 2. 41,000
Be sure your total gambling and casualty or theft losses are clearly identified on the dotted
lines next to line 28.
CAUTION
!
3. Is the amount on line 2 less than the amount on line 1?
 No. Your deduction is not limited. Enter the amount from line 1 above on Schedule A, line 29.
STOP
/H12011
 Yes. Subtract line 2 from line 1 ................................................ . 3. 101,140
4. Multiply line 3 by 80% (.80) ........................................ . 4. 80,912
5. Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 38 ............................. . 5. 259,600
6. Enter: $166,800 ($83,400 if married filing separately) ..................... . 6. 166,800
7. Is the amount on line 6 less than the amount on line 5?
 No. Your deduction is not limited. Enter the amount from line 1 above on
STOP
Schedule A, line 29.
/H12011
 Yes. Subtract line 6 from line 5 ................................. . 7. 92,800
8. Multiply line 7 by 3% (.03) ......................................... . 8. 2,784
9. Enter the smaller of line 4 or line 8 ................................................. . 9. 2,784
10. Divide line 9 by 1.5 ............................................................. . 10. 1,856
11. Subtract line 10 from line 9 ....................................................... . 11. 928
12. Total itemized deductions. Subtract line 11 from line 1. Enter the result here and on Schedule A,
line 29 ...................................................................... . 12. 141,212
Page 208 Chapter 29 Limit on Itemized Deductions

Page 211 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Part Six.
The eight chapters in this part explain how to figure your tax and how to figureFiguring Your the tax of certain children who have more than $1,900 of investment income.
They also discuss tax credits that, unlike deductions, are subtracted directlyTaxes and from your tax and reduce your tax, dollar for dollar. Chapter 36 discusses the
earned income credit and how you may be able to get part of the credit paid to
Credits you in advance throughout the year.
• Foreign earned income exclusion or the placed in service after August 8, 2005.
housing exclusion. (See Form 2555, For- See Form 8835, Part II.
eign Earned Income, or Form 2555-EZ, • Work opportunity credit. See Form 5884.30. Foreign Earned Income Exclusion, and the
• Credit for employer social security andForeign Earned Income Tax Worksheet in
Medicare taxes paid on certain employeethe Form 1040 instructions.)
tips. See Form 8846.How To Figure
Credits. After you figure your income tax and
Other taxes. After you subtract your tax cred-any alternative minimum tax (discussed later),Your Tax its, determine whether there are any other taxesdetermine your tax credits. This chapter does
you must pay. This chapter does not explainnot explain whether you are eligible for these
these other taxes. You can find that informationcredits. You can find that information in chapters
in other chapters of this publication and your32 through 37 and your form instructions. SeeIntroduction
form instructions. See the following table forthe following table for credits you may be able toAfter you have figured your income and deduc- other taxes you may need to add to your incomesubtract from your income tax.tions as explained in Parts One  through Five, tax.your next step is to figure your tax. This chapter
CREDITSdiscusses: See OTHER TAXES
• The general steps you take to figure your For information on: chapter: See
tax, For information on: chapter:Adoption ................. . 37
• An additional tax you may have to pay Alternative motor vehicle ...... . 37 Additional taxes on qualified retirement
Alternative fuel vehicle refueling plans and IRAs ............. . 10, 17called the alternative minimum tax, and
property ................ . 37 Advance earned income credit• The conditions you must meet if you want Child and dependent care ..... . 32 payments ................ . 36the IRS to figure your tax. Child tax credit ............. . 34 Household employment taxes .... . 32
Credit to holders of tax credit bonds 37 Recapture of an education credit .. . 35
Education ................ . 35 Social security and Medicare tax onFiguring Your Tax Elderly or disabled .......... . 33 wages ................... . 5
Electric vehicle credits ........ . 37 Social security and Medicare tax on
Your income tax is based on your taxable in- Foreign tax ............... . 37 tips ..................... . 6
come. After you figure your income tax and any Mortgage interest ........... . 37 Uncollected social security and
alternative minimum tax, subtract your tax cred- Prior year minimum tax ....... . 37 Medicare tax on tips ......... . 6
its and add any other taxes you may owe. The Residential energy .......... . 37
Another tax you may have to pay, the alter-Retirement savings result is your total tax. Compare your total tax
native minimum tax, is discussed later in thiscontributions ............. . 37with your total payments to determine whether
chapter.you are entitled to a refund or owe additional tax. Some credits (such as the earned income There are other taxes that are not discussedThis section provides a general outline of credit) are not listed above because they are in this publication. These include the followinghow to figure your tax. You can find step-by-step treated as payments. See Payments, later. items.directions in the instructions for Forms 1040EZ, There are other credits that are not dis-1040A, and 1040. If you are unsure of which tax cussed in this publication. These include the 1. Self-employment tax. You must figure thisform you should file, see Which Form Should I following credits. tax if either of the following applies to youUse? in chapter 1. (or your spouse if you file a joint return).• General business credit, which is made up
of several separate business-related cred-Tax. Most taxpayers use either the Tax Table a. Your net earnings fromits. These generally are reported on Formor the Tax Computation Worksheet to figure self-employment from other than church3800, General Business Credit, and aretheir income tax. However, there are special employee income were $400 or more.discussed in chapter 4 of Publication 334,methods if your income includes any of the fol- The term ªnet earnings fromTax Guide for Small Business.lowing items. self-employmentº may include certain
• Empowerment zone and renewal commu- nonemployee compensation and other• A net capital gain. (See chapter 16.)
nity employment credit. See Publication amounts reported to you on Form• Qualified dividends taxed at the same 954, Tax Incentives for Distressed Com- 1099-MISC, Miscellaneous Income. Ifrates as a net capital gain. (See chapters munities. Also see Form 8844. you received a Form 1099-MISC, see8 and 16.) the Instructions for Recipients on the• District of Columbia first-time homebuyer• Lump-sum distributions. (See chapter 10.) back. Also see the instructions forcredit. See Form 8859. Schedule SE (Form 1040),• Farming or fishing income. (See Schedule • Credit for alcohol used as fuel. See Form Self-Employment Tax; and PublicationJ (Form 1040), Income Averaging for 6478. 334, Tax Guide for Small Business.Farmers and Fishermen.)
• Renewable electricity, refined coal, and In- b. You had church employee income of• Investment income over $1,900 for certain dian coal production credit for electricity $108.28 or more.children. (See chapter 31.) and refined coal produced at facilities
• Parents' election to report child's interest placed in service after October 22, 2004, 2. Recapture taxes. You may have to pay
and dividends. (See chapter 31.) and Indian coal produced at facilities these taxes if you previously claimed an
Chapter 30 How To Figure Your Tax Page 209

Page 212 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
investment credit, first-time homebuyer group in which you were an officer, direc- and credits for some kinds of expenses. Taxpay-
tor, or more-than-10% owner. For more in- ers who benefit from the law in these ways maycredit, a low-income housing credit, a
formation, see the instructions for Form have to pay at least a minimum amount of taxmortgage interest credit, a new markets
1040, line 60. through an additional tax. This additional tax iscredit, a qualified electric vehicle credit, a
called the alternative minimum tax (AMT).credit for employer-provided child care fa- 11. Additional tax on income you received
cilities, an Indian employment credit, or You may have to pay the alternative mini-from a nonqualified deferred compensation
mum tax if your taxable income for regular taxother credits listed in the instructions for plan that fails to meet certain require-
purposes, combined with certain adjustmentsForm 1040, line 60. For more information, ments. This income should be shown in
and tax preference items, is more than:Form W-2, box 12, with code Z, or in Formsee the instructions for Form 1040, line 60.
1099-MISC, box 15b. For more informa- • $70,950 if your filing status is married filing3. Section 72(m)(5) excess benefits tax. If tion, see the instructions for Form 1040, a joint return (or qualifying widow(er) withyou are (or were) a 5% owner of a busi- line 60. dependent child),ness and you received a distribution that
12. Interest on the tax due on installment in-exceeds the benefits provided for you • $46,700 if your filing status is single orcome from the sale of certain residentialunder the qualified pension or annuity plan head of household, orlots and timeshares. For more information,formula, you may have to pay this addi- • $35,475 if your filing status is married filingsee the instructions for Form 1040, line 60.tional tax. See Tax on Excess Benefits in a separate return.chapter 4 of Publication 560, Retirement 13. Interest on the deferred tax on gain from
certain installment sales with a sales pricePlans for Small Business (SEP, SIMPLE,
Adjustments and tax preference items. Theover $150,000. For more information, seeand Qualified Plans).
more common adjustments and tax preferencethe instructions for Form 1040, line 60.4. Uncollected social security and Medicare items include:
tax on group-term life insurance. If your • Addition of personal exemptions,former employer provides you with more Payments. After you determine your total tax,
figure the total payments you have alreadythan $50,000 of group-term life insurance • Addition of the standard deduction (if
made for the year. Include credits that are claimed),coverage, you must pay the employee part
treated as payments. This chapter does not ex-of social security and Medicare taxes on • Addition of itemized deductions claimedplain these payments and credits. You can findthose premiums. The amount should be for state and local taxes, certain interest,that information in other chapters of this publica-shown in box 12 of your Form W-2 with most miscellaneous deductions, and parttion and your form instructions. See the follow-codes M and N. of medical expenses,ing table for amounts you can include in your
5. Tax on golden parachute payments. This total payments. • Subtraction of any refund of state and lo-
tax applies if you received an ªexcess par- cal taxes included in gross income,PAYMENTSachute paymentº (EPP) due to a change in See • Changes to accelerated depreciation ofa corporation's ownership or control. See For information on: chapter: certain property,the instructions for Form 1040, line 60. Child tax credit (additional) ..... . 34 • Difference between gain or loss on the6. Tax on accumulation distribution of trusts. Earned income credit ........ . 36 sale of property reported for regular taxEstimated tax paid .......... . 4This applies if you are the beneficiary of a purposes and AMT purposes,Excess social security trust that accumulated its income instead
and RRTA tax withheld ...... . 37 • Addition of certain income from incentiveof distributing it currently. See the instruc-
Federal income tax withheld .... . 4 stock options,tions for Form 4970, Tax on Accumulation First-time homebuyer credit .... . 37Distribution of Trusts. • Change in certain passive activity loss de-Government retiree credit ...... . 37 ductions,Health coverage tax credit ..... . 377. Additional tax on HSAs or MSAs. If
Making work pay credit ....... . 37amounts contributed to, or distributed from, • Addition of certain depletion that is moreRegulated investment company your health savings account or medical than the adjusted basis of the property,credit .................. . 37savings account do not meet the rules for • Addition of part of the deduction for certainRefundable credit forthese accounts, you may have to pay addi- intangible drilling costs, andprior year minimum tax ...... .  37tional taxes. See Publication 969, Health Tax paid with extension ....... . 1 • Addition of tax-exempt interest on certainSavings Accounts and Other Tax-Favored
private activity bonds.Another credit that is treated as a payment isHealth Plans; Form 8853, Archer MSAs
the credit for federal excise tax paid on fuels.and Long-Term Care Insurance Contracts;
This credit is for persons who have a nontaxableForm 8889, Health Savings Accounts More information. For more informationuse of certain fuels, such as diesel fuel and(HSAs); and Form 5329, Additional Taxes about the alternative minimum tax, see the in-kerosene. It is claimed on Form 1040, line 70.on Qualified Plans (Including IRAs) and structions for Form 1040, line 45, and FormSee Form 4136, Credit for Federal Tax Paid on 6251, Alternative Minimum TaxÐIndividuals.Other Tax-Favored Accounts. Fuels.
8. Additional tax on Coverdell ESAs. This ap-
plies if amounts contributed to, or distrib- Refund or balance due. To determine
uted from, your Coverdell ESA do not meet whether you are entitled to a refund or owe
the rules for these accounts. See Publica- Tax Figured by IRSadditional tax, compare your total payments with
tion 970, Tax Benefits for Education, and your total tax. If you are entitled to a refund, see
If you file by April 15, 2010, you can have theForm 5329. your form instructions for information on having
IRS figure your tax for you on Form 1040EZ,it directly deposited into one or more of your9. Additional tax on qualified tuition pro- Form 1040A, or Form 1040.accounts instead of receiving a paper check.grams. This applies to amounts distributed
If the IRS figures your tax and you paid toofrom qualified tuition programs that do not much, you will receive a refund. If you did notmeet the rules for these accounts. See pay enough, you will receive a bill for the bal-Publication 970 and Form 5329. ance. To avoid interest or the penalty for lateAlternative
10. Tax on insider stock compensation from an payment, you must pay the bill within 30 days of
expatriated corporation. You may owe a the date of the bill or by the due date for yourMinimum Tax
return, whichever is later.15% excise tax on the value of nonstatu-
tory stock options and certain other This section briefly discusses an additional tax
stock-based compensation held by you or you may have to pay. When the IRS cannot figure your tax. The
a member of your family from an expatri- The tax law gives special treatment to some IRS cannot figure your tax for you if any of the
ated corporation or its expanded affiliated kinds of income and allows special deductions following apply.
Page 210 Chapter 30 How To Figure Your Tax

Page 213 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1. You want your refund directly deposited Attach a copy of each of your Forms W-2 to figure it for you. Enter ªEICº to the left of the entry
into your accounts. your return. Also attach any Form 1099-R you space for line 41a. Enter the nontaxable combat
received that has withholding tax in box 4. pay you elect to include in earned income on line2. You want any part of your refund applied Mail your return to the Internal Revenue 41b. If you have a qualifying child, you must fill into your 2010 estimated tax. Service Center for the area where you live. A list Schedule EIC, Earned Income Credit, and at-
3. You had income for the year from sources of Service Center addresses is shown near the tach it to your return.
other than wages, salaries, tips, interest, end of this publication. If your credit for any year after 1996 was
dividends, taxable social security benefits, reduced or disallowed by the IRS, you may also
unemployment compensation, IRA distri- have to file Form 8862, Information To Claim
butions, pensions, and annuities. Form 1040EZ Line Entries Earned Income Credit After Disallowance, with
your return. For details, see the Form 1040A4. Your taxable income is $100,000 or more. Read lines 1 through 9b and fill in the lines that instructions.
apply to you. Do not complete lines 10 through5. You itemize deductions.
13. If you are filing a joint return, use the space6. You file any of the following forms. to the left of line 6 to separately show your Form 1040 Line Entriestaxable income and your spouse's taxable in-a. Form 2555, Foreign Earned Income. come. Read lines 1 through 43 and fill in the lines that
b. Form 2555-EZ, Foreign Earned Income apply to you. Do not complete line 44.Payments. Enter any federal income tax with-Exclusion. If you are filing a joint return, use the spaceheld on line 7. Federal income tax withheld is under the words ªAdjusted Gross Incomeº onc. Form 4137, Social Security and Medi- shown on Form W-2, box 2. the front of your return to separately show yourcare Tax on Unreported Tip Income.
taxable income and your spouse's taxable in-Earned income credit. If you can take thisd. Form 4970, Tax on Accumulation Distri- come.credit, as discussed in chapter 36, the IRS canbution of Trusts. Read lines 45 through 70. Fill in the lines thatfigure it for you. Enter ªEICº in the space to the
apply to you, but do not fill in lines 54, 60, ande. Form 4972, Tax on Lump-Sum Distribu- left of line 9a. Enter the nontaxable combat pay
71. Also, do not complete line 55 and lines 72tions. you elect to include in earned income on line 9b.
through 76. Do not fill in lines 53, box ªcº, if youIf your credit for any year after 1996 wasf. Form 6198, At-Risk Limitations. are completing Schedule R, 63, and 64a if youreduced or disallowed by the IRS, you may also
want the IRS to figure the credits shown ong. Form 6251, Alternative Minimum TaxÐ have to file Form 8862, Information To Claim
those lines.Individuals. Earned Income Credit After Disallowance, with
Fill in any forms or schedules asked for onyour return. For details, see the Form 1040EZh. Form 8606, Nondeductible IRAs. the lines you completed, and attach them to yourinstructions.
i. Form 8615, Tax for Certain Children return.
Who Have Investment Income of More
Than $1,900. Form 1040A Line Entries Payments. Enter any federal income tax with-
held that is shown on Form W-2, box 2, or thej. Form 8814, Parents' Election To Report Read lines 1 through 27 and fill in the lines that appropriate box of Form 1099, on line 61. EnterChild's Interest and Dividends. apply to you. If you are filing a joint return, use any estimated tax payments you made on
the space to the left of the entry space for line 27k. Form 8839, Qualified Adoption Ex- line 62.
to separately show your taxable income andpenses.
your spouse's taxable income. Do not complete Credit for child and dependent care ex-l. Form 8853, Archer MSAs and line 28. Complete lines 29 through 33, 36, and penses. If you can take this credit, as dis-Long-Term Care Insurance Contracts. 38 through 43 if they apply to you. Do not fill in cussed in chapter 32, complete Form 2441,m. Form 8889, Health Savings Accounts lines 30, 41a, and 43 if you want the IRS to figure Child and Dependent Care Expenses, and at-(HSAs). the credits shown on those lines. Also, enter any tach it to your return. Enter the amount of thewrite-in information that applies to you in the credit on line 48. The IRS will not figure thisn. Form 8915, Qualified Hurricane Retire- space to the left of line 44. Do not complete lines credit.ment Plan Distributions and Repay- 34, 35, 37, and 45 through 49.ments.
Credit for the elderly or the disabled. If youPayments. Enter any federal income tax with-o. Form 8919, Uncollected Social Security can take this credit, as discussed in chapter 33,held that is shown on Form W-2, box 2, or theand Medicare Tax on Wages. attach Schedule R, Credit for the Elderly or theappropriate box of Form 1099, on line 38. Enter
p. Form 8930, Qualified Disaster Recov- Disabled, to your return, check box ªcº and enterany estimated tax payments you made on
ery Assistance Retirement Plan Distri- ªCFEº on the line next to line 53. The IRS willline 39.
butions and Repayments. figure the credit for you. On Schedule R check
Credit for child and dependent care ex- the box in Part I for your filing status and age.
penses. If you can take this credit, as dis- Complete Part II and Part III, lines 11 and 13, if
cussed in chapter 32, complete Form 2441, they apply.Filing the Return Child and Dependent Care Expenses, and at-
tach it to your return. Enter the amount of the Earned income credit. If you can take thisAfter you complete the line entries for the tax credit on line 29. The IRS will not figure this credit, as discussed in chapter 36, the IRS willform you are filing, as discussed next, attach the credit. figure it for you. Enter ªEICº on the dotted linepeel-off label. If you do not have a peel-off label,
next to Form 1040, line 64a. Enter the nontax-fill in your name and address. Enter your social Credit for the elderly or the disabled. If you able combat pay you elect to include in earnedsecurity number in the space provided. If you are can take this credit, as discussed in chapter 33, income on line 64b. If you have a qualifyingmarried, enter the social security numbers of attach Schedule R (Form 1040), Credit for the child, you must fill in Schedule EIC and attach ityou and your spouse even if you file separately. Elderly or the Disabled. Enter ªCFEº in the space to your return.Complete the ªThird Party Designeeº area of the to the left of line 30. The IRS will figure this creditreturn if you would like another person to dis- If your credit for any year after 1996 wasfor you. On Schedule R, check the box in Part Icuss your return with the IRS. Sign and date reduced or disallowed by the IRS, you may alsofor your filing status and age. Complete Part IIyour return and enter your occupation(s). If you have to file Form 8862, Information To Claimand Part III, lines 11 and 13, if they apply.are filing a joint return, both you and your spouse Earned Income Credit After Disallowance, with
must sign it. Enter your daytime phone number Earned income credit. If you can take this your return. For details, see the Form 1040 in-
in the space provided. credit, as discussed in chapter 36, the IRS will structions.
Chapter 30 How To Figure Your Tax Page 211

Page 214 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Your child had income only from interestParents Who Do Not File a and dividends (including capital gain distri-
Joint Return butions and Alaska Permanent Fund divi-
dends).31. For parents who do not file a joint return, the • The child's gross income was less thanfollowing discussions explain which parent's tax $9,500.return must be used to figure the tax.
Only the parent whose tax return is used can • The child is required to file a return unless
Tax on make the election described under Parent's you make this election.
Election To Report Child's Interest and Divi- • The child does not file a joint return for thedends. year.Investment
• No estimated tax payment was made forParents are married. If the child's parents file
the year, and no overpayment from theseparate returns, use the return of the parentIncome of previous year (or from any amended re-with the greater taxable income.
turn) was applied to this year under yourParents not living together. If the child's child's name and social security number.Certain Children parents are married to each other but not living
• No federal income tax was taken out oftogether, and the parent with whom the child
your child's income under the backup with-lives (the custodial parent) is considered unmar-
holding rules.ried, use the return of the custodial parent. If theIntroduction custodial parent is not considered unmarried, • You are the parent whose return must beuse the return of the parent with the greaterThis chapter discusses the following two rules used when applying the special tax rulestaxable income.that may affect the tax on investment income of for children. (See Which Parent's ReturnFor an explanation of when a married personcertain children. To Use, earlier.)living apart from his or her spouse is considered
These conditions are also shown in Figure 31-A.1. If the child's interest and dividend income unmarried, see Head of Household in chapter 2.
(including capital gain distributions) total
Certain January 1 birthdays. A child born onParents are divorced. If the child's parentsless than $9,500, the child's parent may be January 1, 1991, is considered to be age 19 atare divorced or legally separated, and the parentable to choose to include that income on the end of 2009. You cannot make this electionwho had custody of the child for the greater partthe parent's return rather than file a return for such a child unless the child was a full-timeof the year (the custodial parent) has not remar-for the child. (See Parent's Election To Re- student.ried, use the return of the custodial parent.port Child's Interest and Dividends, later.) A child born on January 1, 1986, is consid-
Custodial parent remarried. If the custo- ered to be age 24 at the end of 2009. You cannot2. If the child's interest, dividends, and other dial parent has remarried, the stepparent (rather make this election for such a child.investment income total more than $1,900, than the noncustodial parent) is treated as thepart of that income may be taxed at the Full-time student. A full-time student is achild's other parent. Therefore, if the custodial
parent's tax rate instead of the child's tax child who during any part of 5 calendar monthsparent and the stepparent file a joint return, use
of the year was enrolled as a full-time student atrate. (See Tax for Certain Children Who that joint return. Do not use the return of the
a school, or took a full-time, on-farm trainingHave Investment Income of More Than noncustodial parent.
course given by a school or a state, county, or$1,900, later.) If the custodial parent and the stepparent are
local government agency. A school includes amarried, but file separate returns, use the returnFor these rules, the term ªchildº includes a le- technical, trade, or mechanical school. It doesof the one with the greater taxable income. If thegally adopted child and a stepchild. These rules not include an on-the-job training course, corre-custodial parent and the stepparent are marriedapply whether or not the child is a dependent. spondence school, or school offering coursesbut not living together, the earlier discussion
only through the Internet.under Parents not living together applies.
Useful Items How to make the election. Make the election
Parents never married. If a child's parents by attaching Form 8814 to your Form 1040. (IfYou may want to see:
have never been married to each other, but lived you make this election, you cannot file Form
together all year, use the return of the parent 1040A or Form 1040EZ.) Attach a separatePublication
with the greater taxable income. If the parents Form 8814 for each child for whom you make❏ 929 Tax Rules for Children and did not live together all year, the rules explained the election. You can make the election for oneDependents earlier under Parents are divorced apply. or more children and not for others.
Form (and Instructions) Widowed parent remarried. If a widow or Effect of Making thewidower remarries, the new spouse is treated as❏ 8615 Tax for Certain Children Who Have
Electionthe child's other parent. The rules explainedInvestment Income of More Than earlier under Custodial parent remarried apply.$1,900 The federal income tax on your child's income
may be more if you make the Form 8814 elec-❏ 8814 Parents' Election To Report Child's
tion.Interest and Dividends
Rate may be higher. If your child receivedParent's Election
qualified dividends or capital gain distributions,
you may pay up to $95 more tax if you make thisTo Report Child's
election instead of filing a separate tax return for
Which Parent's the child. This is because the tax rate on theInterest and Dividends
child's income between $950 and $1,900 is 10%
if you make this election. However, if you file aReturn To Use You may be able to elect to include your child's
separate return for the child, the tax rate may beinterest and dividend income (including capital
If a child's parents are married to each other and as low as 0% (zero percent) because of thegain distributions) on your tax return. If you do,
preferential tax rates for qualified dividends andyour child will not have to file a return.file a joint return, use the joint return to figure the
capital gain distributions.You can make this election only if all thetax on the child's investment income. The tax
following conditions are met.rate and other return information from that return Deductions you cannot take. By making the
are used to figure the child's tax as explained • Your child was under age 19 (or under Form 8814 election, you cannot take any of the
later under Tax for Certain Children Who Have age 24 if a full-time student) at the end of following deductions that the child would be enti-
Investment Income of More Than $1,900. the year. tled to on his or her return.
Page 212 Chapter 31 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Children

Page 215 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• The additional standard deduction for a
blind child.
• The deduction for a penalty on an early
withdrawal of your child's savings.
• Itemized deductions (such as your child's
investment expenses or charitable contri-
butions).
Reduced deductions or credits. If you use
Form 8814, your increased adjusted gross in-
come may reduce certain deductions or credits
on your return including the following.
• Deduction for contributions to a traditional
individual retirement arrangement (IRA).
• Deduction for student loan interest.
• Itemized deductions for medical expenses,
casualty and theft losses, and certain mis-
cellaneous expenses.
• Total itemized deductions.
• Personal exemptions.
• Credit for child and dependent care ex-
penses.
• Child tax credit.
• Education tax credits.
• Earned income credit.
• Making work pay credit.
• First-time homebuyer credit.
Penalty for underpayment of estimated tax.
If you make this election for 2009 and did not
have enough tax withheld or pay enough esti-
mated tax to cover the tax you owe, you may be
subject to a penalty. If you plan to make this
election for 2010, you may need to increase your
federal income tax withholding or your estimated
tax payments to avoid the penalty. See chapter
4 for more information. 
Figuring Child's Income
Use Form 8814, Part I, to figure your child's
interest and dividend income to report on your
return. Only the amount over $1,900 is added to
your income. The amount over $1,900 is shown
on Form 8814, line 6. Unless the child's income
includes qualified dividends or capital gain distri-
butions (discussed next), the same amount is
shown on Form 8814, line 12. Include the
amount from Form 8814, line 12, on Form 1040,
line 21. Enter ªForm 8814º on the dotted line
next to line 21. If you file more than one Form
8814, include the total amounts from line 12 of
all your Forms 8814 on Form 1040, line 21.
Capital gain distributions and qualified divi-
dends. If your child's dividend income in-
cluded any capital gain distributions, see Capital
gain distributions under Figuring Child's Income
in Part 2 of Publication 929. If your child's divi-
dend income included any qualified dividends,
see Qualified dividends under Figuring Child's
Income in Part 2 of Publication 929.
Figuring Additional Tax
Figure 31-A. Can You Include Your Child’s Income On Your Tax
Return?
Start Here
/H17074
Was your child under age 19 at the end
of 2009?
No
/H17074
Is your child required to file a tax return
for 2009 if you do not make this
election?
/H17074
Yes
Was the child’s only income interest and
dividends (including capital gain
distributions and Alaska Permanent Fund
dividends)?
/H17074
Yes
Was the child’s income less than
$9,500?
/H17074
No
Did the child make any estimated tax
payments for 2009?
/H17074
No
Did the child have an overpayment of tax
on his or her 2008 return (or on any
amended return) applied to the 2009
estimated tax?
/H17074
No
Was any federal income tax withheld from
the child’s income (backup withholding)?
/H17074
No
Are you the parent whose return must
be used?*
/H17074
Yes
You can include your child’s income on
your tax return by completing Form 8814
and attaching it to your return. If you do,
your child is not required to file a return.
You cannot include
your child’s income
on your return.
No
/H17075
No
/H17075
No
/H17075
Yes
/H17075
Yes
/H17075
Yes
/H17075
No
/H17075
*See Which Parent’s Return To Use
Is your child filing a joint return for 2009?
/H17074
Yes
Yes
/H17075
Yes
Was your child under age 24 at the end
of 2009?
Yes
No
/H17074
/H17075
Was your child a full-time student in
2009?
Yes
No
/H17075
/H17074
/H17075
Use Form 8814, Part II, to figure the tax on the
$1,900 of your child's interest and dividends that
you do not include in your income. This tax is
added to the tax figured on your income.
This additional tax is the smaller of:
Chapter 31 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Children Page 213

Page 216 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1. 10% ×  (your child's gross income − $950),
or
2. $95.
Include the amount from line 15 of all your
Forms 8814 in the total on Form 1040, line 44.
Check box a on Form 1040, line 44.
Illustrated Example
David and Linda Parks are married and will file
separate tax returns for 2009. Their only child,
Philip, is 8. Philip received a Form 1099-INT
showing $1,650 taxable interest income and a
Form 1099-DIV showing $1,150 ordinary divi-
dends. All the dividends were qualified divi-
dends. His parents decide to include that
income on one of their returns so they will not
have to file a return for Philip.
First, David and Linda each figure their tax-
able income (Form 1040, line 43) without regard
to Philip's income. David's taxable income is
$56,700 and Linda's is $74,300. Because her
taxable income is greater, Linda can elect to
include Philip's income on her return. See Which
Parent's Return To Use, earlier.
On Form 8814 (see  illustrated form ), Linda
enters her name and social security number,
then Philip's name and social security number.
She enters Philip's taxable interest income,
$1,650, on line 1a. Philip had no tax-exempt
interest income, so she leaves line 1b blank.
She enters Philip's ordinary dividends, $1,150,
on line 2a. All of Philip's ordinary dividends were
qualified dividends, so Linda also enters $1,150
on line 2b. Philip did not have any capital gain
distributions, so she leaves line 3 blank.
Linda adds lines 1a and 2a and enters the
result, $2,800, on line 4. Because Philip had
qualified dividends, Linda must complete lines 7
through 11 of Form 8814. She includes the
amount from line 9 of Form 8814 ($370) on lines
9a and 9b of her Form 1040. On the dotted lines
next to lines 9a and 9b, she enters ªForm
8814±$370.º
Linda includes $530 in the total on line 21 of
her Form 1040 (not illustrated) and in the space
next to that line writes ªForm 8814 ±$530.º Ad-
ding that amount, plus the $370 of qualified
dividends, to her income increases each of the
amounts on lines 22, 37, 38, 41, and 43 of her
Form 1040 by $900. Linda is not claiming any
deductions that are affected by the increase to
her income. Therefore, her revised taxable in-
come on line 43 is $75,200 ($74,300 + $370 +
$530).
On Form 8814, Linda subtracts the $950
shown on line 13 from the $2,800 on line 4 and
enters the result, $1,850, on line 14. Because
that amount is not less than $950, she enters
$95 on line 15. This is the tax on the first $1,900
of Philip's income, which Linda did not have to
add to her income. She must add this additional
tax to the tax figured on her revised taxable
income.
The tax on her $75,200 revised taxable in-
come, figured using the Qualified Dividends and
Capital Gain Tax Worksheet in the Form 1040
instructions, is $15,139. She adds $95, and en-
Figure 31-B. Do You Have To Use Form 8615 To Figure Your
Child’s Tax?
Start Here
/H17074
Was the child’s investment income more than $1,900?
Yes
No
/H17074
Is the child required to file a tax return for 2009?
/H17074
Yes
Use Form 8615 to figure the child’s tax. Attach it to the
child’s return.
/H17075
No
/H17075
Note: If the child’s parent* chooses to report the child’s income
by filing Form 8814, the child is not required to file a tax return.
Do not use Form 8615. (See Parent’s Election To Report Child’s
Interest and Dividends.)
Do not use
Form 8615 to
figure the
child’s tax.
*See Which Parent’s Return To Use
Is the child filing a joint return for 2009?
/H17074
No
Yes
/H17075
Was the child under age 18 at the end of 2009?
/H17074
No
Was the child age 18 at the end of 2009?
/H17074
No
Yes
Yes
Was the child under age 24 at the end of 2009?
No
/H17075
/H17074
Yes
Was the child a full-time student in 2009?
No
/H17074
Yes
/H17075
Did the child have earned income that was more than
half of his or her support?
Yes
/H17074
No
/H17075
Was at least one of the child’s parents alive at the end
of 2009?
No
/H17074
Yes
/H17075/H17075
/H17075
ters the $15,234 total on Form 1040, line 44, and
checks box a.
Linda attaches Form 8814 to her Form 1040.
Page 214 Chapter 31 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Children

Page 217 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form 8814 
Department of the Treasury  
Internal Revenue Service (99)
Parents' Election To Report  
Child's Interest and Dividends
/H17075 See instructions.
/H17075 Attach to parents' Form 1040 or Form 1040NR.
OMB No. 1545-0074
2009
Attachment   
Sequence No. 40
Name(s) shown on your return Your social security number
Caution. The federal income tax on your child’s income, including qualified dividends and capital gain distributions, may be less if you 
file a separate tax return for the child instead of making this election. This is because you cannot take certain tax benefits that your 
child could take on his or her own return. For details, see Tax benefits you cannot take on page 2. 
A   Child's name (first, initial, and last) B   Child’s social security number 
C   If more than one Form 8814 is attached, check here ......................  /H17075
Part I Child’s Interest and Dividends To Report on Your Return 
1 a Enter your child’s taxable interest. If this amount is different from the amounts shown on the 
child’s Forms 1099-INT and 1099-OID, see the instructions ............  1a 
b Enter your child’s tax-exempt interest. Do not include this amount 
on line 1a ...................  1b 
2 a Enter your child’s ordinary dividends, including any Alaska Permanent Fund dividends. If your 
child received any ordinary dividends as a nominee, see the instructions ........  2a 
b Enter your child’s qualified dividends included on line 2a. See the 
instructions ..................  2b 
3 Enter your child’s capital gain distributions. If your child received any capital gain distributions 
as a nominee, see the instructions .................... 3 
4 Add lines 1a, 2a, and 3. If the total is $1,900 or less, skip lines 5 through 12 and go to line 13. If
the total is $9,500 or more, do not file this form. Your child must file his or her own return to 
report the income ..........................  4 
5 Base amount ........................... 5 1,900   00 
6 Subtract line 5 from line 4 .......................  6 
If both lines 2b and 3 are zero or blank, skip lines 7 through 10, enter -0- on line 11, and go 
to line 12. Otherwise, go to line 7. 
7 Divide line 2b by line 4. Enter the result as a decimal (rounded to at 
least three places) ................ 7 .
8 Divide line 3 by line 4. Enter the result as a decimal (rounded to at 
least three places) ................  8 .
9 Multiply line 6 by line 7. Enter the result here. See the instructions 
for where to report this amount on your return .......  9 
10 Multiply line 6 by line 8. Enter the result here. See the instructions 
for where to report this amount on your return .......  10 
11 Add lines 9 and 10 ..........................  11 
12 Subtract line 11 from line 6. Include this amount in the total on Form 1040, line 21, or Form 
1040NR, line 21. In the space next to line 21, enter “Form 8814” and show the amount. If you 
checked the box on line C above, see the instructions. Go to line 13 below .......  12 
Part II Tax on the First $1,900 of Child’s Interest and Dividends 
13 Amount not taxed ..........................  13 950  00 
14 Subtract line 13 from line 4. If the result is zero or less, enter -0- ........... 14 
15 Tax.  Is the amount on line 14 less than $950? 
No. Enter $95 here and see the Note below. 
Yes. Multiply line 14 by 10% (.10). Enter the result here and see the Note below. /H20854
... 15 
Note.  If you checked the box on line C above, see the instructions. Otherwise, include the amount from line 15 in the tax you enter 
on Form 1040, line 44, or Form 1040NR, line 41. Be sure to check box a on Form 1040, line 44, or Form 1040NR, line 41. 
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see page 3. Cat. No. 10750J Form  8814 (2009) 
Linda Parks 111-00-1111
Philip Parks 000-00-0000
1,650
1,150
1,150
2,800
900
411
370
370
530
1,850
/H12011 95
Chapter 31 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Children Page 215

Page 218 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
line 38, or Form 1040A, line 22. Form 1040EZIF a child was THEN, at the end
cannot be used if Form 8615 must be filed.born on... of 2009, the childTax for Certain If the child had earned income, figure theis considered to
amount to enter on Form 8615, line 1, by usingbe...Children Who Have the worksheet in the instructions for the form.
January 1, 1992 18* However, if the child has excluded any for-Investment Income of
eign earned income or deducted either a lossJanuary 1, 1991 19** from self-employment or a net operating lossMore Than $1,900
from another year, use the Alternate WorksheetJanuary 1, 1986 24***
for Form 8615, Line 1, in Publication 929 toIf a child's interest, dividends, and other invest- *This child is not under age 18. The child figure the amount to enter on Form 8615, line 1.ment income total more than $1,900, part of that meets condition 3 only if the child did notincome may be taxed at the parent's tax rate Investment income defined. Investmenthave earned income that was more than halfinstead of the child's tax rate. If the parent does income is generally all income other than sala-of the child's support.not or cannot choose to include the child's in- ries, wages, and other amounts received as pay**This child meets condition 3 only if the
come on the parent's return, use Form 8615 to child was a full-time student who did not for work actually done. It includes taxable inter-
figure the child's tax. Attach the completed form have earned income that was more than half est, dividends, capital gains (including capital
to the child's Form 1040 or Form 1040A. of the child's support. gain distributions), the taxable part of social se-
***Do not use Form 8615 for this child. curity and pension payments, and certain distri-When Form 8615 must be filed. Form 8615
butions from trusts. Investment income includesmust be filed for a child if all of the following
amounts produced by assets the child obtainedstatements are true.
with earned income (such as interest on a sav-Providing Parental1. The child's investment income was more ings account into which the child deposited
Information than $1,900. wages).
(Form 8615, lines A±C)2. The child is required to file a return for Nontaxable income. For this purpose, in-
2009. vestment income includes only amounts the
On Form 8615, lines A and B, enter the parent's child must include in total income. Nontaxable3. The child either: name and social security number. (If the parents investment income, such as tax-exempt interest
filed a joint return, enter the name and social and the nontaxable part of social security anda. Was under age 18 at the end of the security number listed first on the joint return.) pension payments, is not included.year, On line C, check the box for the parent's filing
Income from property received as a gift.b. Was age 18 at the end of the year and status.
A child's investment income includes all incomedid not have earned income that was See Which Parent's Return To Use  at the produced by property belonging to the child.more than half of his or her support, or beginning of this chapter for information on This is true even if the property was transferredwhich parent's return information must be usedc. Was a full-time student over age 18 and to the child, regardless of when the property wason Form 8615.under age 24 at the end of the year and transferred or purchased or who transferred it.did not have earned income that was A child's investment income includes incomeParent with different tax year. If the parentmore than half of his or her support. produced by property given as a gift to the child.and the child do not have the same tax year,
This includes gifts to the child from grandparentscomplete Form 8615 using the information on4. At least one of the child's parents was or any other person and gifts made under thethe parent's return for the tax year that ends inalive at the end of 2009. Uniform Gift to Minors Act.the child's tax year.
5. The child does not file a joint return for
Example. Amanda Black, age 13, received2009. Parent's return information not known
the following income.timely. If the information needed from the par-These conditions are also shown in Figure ent's return is not known by the time the child's • Dividends Ð $60031-B. return is due (usually April 15), you can file the
• Wages Ð $2,100Earned income. Earned income includes return using estimates.
wages, tips, and other payments received for You can use any reasonable estimate. This • Taxable interest Ð $1,200personal services performed. It does not include includes using information from last year's re-
• Tax-exempt interest Ð $100investment income as defined later in this chap- turn. If you use an estimated amount on Form
ter. 8615, enter ªEstimatedº on the line next to the • Net capital gains Ð $100
amount.Support. Your child's support includes all The dividends were qualified dividends on stockWhen you get the correct information, file anamounts spent to provide the child with food, given to her by her grandparents.amended return on Form 1040X, Amended U.S.lodging, clothing, education, medical and dental Individual Income Tax Return. Amanda's investment income is $1,900. Thiscare, recreation, transportation, and similar ne- Instead of using estimates, you can get an is the total of the dividends ($600), taxable inter-cessities. To figure your child's support, count automatic 6-month extension of time to file if, by est ($1,200), and net capital gains ($100). Hersupport provided by you, your child, and others. the date your return is due, you file Form 4868, wages are earned (not investment) income be-However, a scholarship received by your child is Application for Automatic Extension of Time To cause they are received for work actually done.not considered support if your child is a full-time File U.S. Individual Income Tax Return. Exten- Her tax-exempt interest is not included becausestudent. See chapter 3 for details about support. sions are discussed in chapter 1. it is nontaxable.Certain January 1 birthdays. Use the follow-
Trust income. If a child is the beneficiary ofing chart to determine whether certain children Step 1. Figuring the a trust, distributions of taxable interest, divi-with January 1 birthdays meet condition 3 under
dends, capital gains, and other investment in-When Form 8615 must be filed. Child's Net Investment
come from the trust are investment income to
Income the child.
However, for purposes of completing Form(Form 8615, Part I)
8615, a taxable distribution from a qualified disa-
bility trust is considered earned income, not in-The first step in figuring a child's tax using Form
vestment income.8615 is to figure the child's net investment in-
come. To do that, use Form 8615, Part I.
Line 2 (deductions). If the child does not
itemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040),Line 1 (investment income). If the child had
enter $1,900 on line 2.no earned income, enter on this line the adjusted
gross income shown on the child's return. Ad- If the child does itemize deductions, enter on
justed gross income is shown on Form 1040, line 2 the larger of:
Page 216 Chapter 31 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Children

Page 219 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1. $950 plus the portion of the child's item- Lines 12a and 12b (dividing the tentativeStep 2. Figuring Tentative tax). If an amount is entered on line 7, divideized deductions on Schedule A (Form
Tax at the Parent's Tax the tentative tax shown on line 11 among the1040), line 29, that are directly connected
children according to each child's share of thewith the production of investment income Rate total net investment income. This is done onentered on line 1, or (Form 8615, Part II) lines 12a, 12b, and 13. Add the amount on line 72. $1,900. to the amount on line 5 and enter the total on lineThe next step in completing Form 8615 is to 12a. Divide the amount on line 5 by the amountDirectly connected. Itemized deductions figure a tentative tax on the child's net invest- on line 12a and enter the result, as a decimal, onment income at the parent's tax rate. The tenta-are directly connected with the production of line 12b.tive tax at the parent's tax rate is the differenceinvestment income if they are for expenses paid
between the tax on the parent's taxable incometo produce or collect taxable income or to man- Example. In the earlier example under Linefigured with the child's net investment incomeage, conserve, or maintain property held for 7 (net investment income of other children),(plus the net investment income of any otherproducing income. These expenses include Sharon's Form 8615 shows $1,600 on line 7.child whose Form 8615 includes the tax returncustodian fees and service charges, service The amount entered on line 12a is $2,400, theinformation of that parent) and the tax figured total of the amounts on lines 5 and 7 ($800 +fees to collect taxable interest and dividends, without it. $1,600). The decimal on line 12b is .333, figuredand certain investment counsel fees. When figuring the tentative tax at the par- as follows and rounded to three places.These expenses are added to certain other ent's tax rate, do not refigure any of the exclu-
$800miscellaneous itemized deductions on Schedule sions, deductions, or credits on the parent's = .333A (Form 1040). Only the amount greater than return because of the child's net investment in- $2,4002% of the child's adjusted gross income can be come. For example, do not refigure the medical
deducted. See chapter 28 for more information. expense deduction.
 Figure the tentative tax on Form 8615, lines Step 3. Figuring theExample 1. Roger, age 12, has investment 6 through 13.
Child's Tax income of $8,000, no other income, no adjust-
Note. If the child or parent has any capitalments to income, and itemized deductions of (Form 8615, Part III)gains or losses, get Publication 929 for help in$300 (net of the 2% limit) that are directly con-
completing Form 8615, Part II.nected with his investment income. His adjusted The final step in figuring a child's tax using Form
8615 is to determine the larger of:gross income is $8,000, which is entered on Line 6 (parent's taxable income). Enter onForm 1040, line 38, and on Form 8615, line 1. line 6 the parent's taxable income from Form 1. The total of:Line 2 is $1,900 because that is more than the 1040, line 43, or Form 1040A, line 27.
sum of $950 and his directly-connected itemized If the Foreign Earned Income Tax Worksheet a. The child's share of the tentative tax
deductions of $300. (in the Form 1040 instructions) was used to based on the parent's tax rate, plus
figure the parent's tax, enter the amount from b. The tax on the child's taxable income inExample 2. Eleanor, age 8, has investment line 3 of that worksheet instead of the parent's excess of net investment income, fig-income of $16,000 and an early withdrawal pen- taxable income. ured at the child's tax rate, oralty of $100. She has no other income. She has Line 7 (net investment income of other chil-itemized deductions of $1,050 (net of the 2% 2. The tax on the child's taxable income, fig-dren). If the tax return information of the par-limit) that are directly connected with the produc- ured at the child's tax rate.ent is also used on any other child's Form 8615,tion of her investment income. Her adjusted enter on line 7 the total of the amounts from line This is the child's tax. It is figured on Formgross income, entered on line 1, is $15,900 5 of all the other children's Forms 8615. Do not 8615, lines 14 through 18.($16,000 − $100). The amount on line 2 is include the amount from line 5 of the Form 8615$2,000. This is the larger of: being completed. Alternative minimum tax. A child may be
1. $950 plus the $1,050 of directly connected subject to alternative minimum tax (AMT) if he orExample. Paul and Jane Persimmon haveitemized deductions, or she has certain items given preferential treat-three children, Sharon, Jerry, and Mike, who ment under the tax law. See Alternative Mini-2. $1,900. must attach Form 8615 to their tax returns. The mum Tax in chapter 30.children's net investment income amounts on
For more information on who is liable forline 5 of their Forms 8615 are:
AMT and how to figure it, see Form 6251, Alter-Line 3. Subtract line 2 from line 1 and enter the • Sharon Ð $800 native Minimum Tax ÐIndividuals. For informa-result on this line. If zero or less, do not complete
tion on special limits that apply to a child who• Jerry Ð $600the rest of the form. However, you must still files Form 6251, see Alternative Minimum Tax inattach Form 8615 to the child's tax return. Figure • Mike Ð $1,000 Publication 929.the tax on the child's taxable income in the
normal manner. Line 7 of Sharon's Form 8615 will show
Illustrated Example$1,600, the total of the amounts on line 5 of
Jerry's and Mike's Forms 8615.Line 4 (child's taxable income). Enter on line The following example includes a completedLine 7 of Jerry's Form 8615 will show $1,8004 the child's taxable income from Form 1040, Form 8615. Form 1040A is not shown.($800 + $1,000).line 43, or Form 1040A, line 27. John and Laura Brown have one child, Sara.Line 7 of Mike's Form 8615 will show $1,400
However, if the child files Form 2555 or She is 13 and has $2,800 taxable interest in-($800 + $600).
come and $1,500 earned income. She does not2555-EZ to claim the foreign earned income
Other children's information not available. itemize deductions. John and Laura file a jointexclusion or housing exclusion, see the Form If the net investment income of the other children return with John's name and social security8615 instructions. is not available when the return is due, either file number listed first. They claim three exemp-
the return using estimates or get an extension of tions, including an exemption for Sara, on theirLine 5 (net investment income). A child's net time to file. See Parent's return information not return.
investment income cannot be more than his or known timely, earlier. Because Sara is under age 18 and has moreher taxable income. Enter on Form 8615, line 5, than $1,900 investment income, part of her in-Line 11 (tentative tax). Subtract line 10 fromthe smaller of line 3 or line 4. This is the child's come may be subject to tax at her parents' rate.line 9 and enter the result on this line. This is thenet investment income. A completed Form 8615 must be attached to hertentative tax.
return.If zero or less, do not complete the rest of the If line 7 is blank, skip lines 12a and 12b and
form. However, you must still attach Form 8615 Sara's father, John, fills out Sara's return forenter the amount from line 11 on line 13. Also
to the child's tax return. Figure the tax on the her. He completes her Form 1040A through lineskip the discussion for lines 12a and 12b that
child's taxable income in the normal manner. 27, then begins completing her Form 8615.follows.
Chapter 31 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Children Page 217

Page 220 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
John enters his name and social security John enters $48,000 on line 6. This is the 14. Using the column for single filing status in
number on Sara's Form 8615 because his name taxable income from line 43 of John and Laura's the Tax Table, John finds the tax on $1,600 and
and number are listed first on the joint return he joint Form 1040 return. Sara is an only child, so enters this tax, $161, on line 15. He adds lines
and Laura are filing. He checks the box for line 7 is blank. He adds line 5 ($900), line 6 13 ($135) and 15 ($161) and enters $296 on line
married filing jointly. ($48,000), and line 7 (blank), and enters 16.
He enters Sara's investment income, $48,900 on line 8. Using the column for single filing status in the$2,800, on line 1. Sara does not itemize deduc- Using the column for married filing jointly in Tax Table, John finds the tax on $2,500 (line 4)tions, so John enters $1,900 on line 2. He enters the Tax Table, John finds the tax on $48,900. He and enters this tax, $251, on line 17.$900 ($2,800 − $1,900) on line 3. enters the tax, $6,504, on line 9. He entersSara's taxable income on her Form 1040A, John compares lines 16 and 17 and enters$6,369 on line 10. This is the tax from line 44 ofline 27, is $2,500. This is her total income the larger amount, $296, on line 18 of Sara'sJohn and Laura's Form 1040. He enters $135 on($4,300) minus her standard deduction Form 8615. He also enters that amount on lineline 11 ($6,504 − $6,369).($1,800). Her standard deduction is limited to 28 of Sara's Form 1040A.Because line 7 is blank, John skips lines 12athe amount of her earned income plus $300.
and 12b and enters $135 on line 13. John also completes Schedule B (FormJohn enters $2,500 on line 4.
John subtracts line 5 ($900) from line 4John compares lines 3 and 4 and enters the 1040A or 1040) for Sara.
($2,500) and enters the result, $1,600, on linesmaller amount, $900, on line 5.  
Page 218 Chapter 31 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Children

Page 221 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form  8615
Department of the Treasury  
Internal Revenue Service (99)
Tax for Certain Children Who Have Investment 
Income of More Than $1,900
/H17075 Attach only to the child's Form 1040, Form 1040A, or Form 1040NR.
 /H17075 See separate instructions.
OMB No. 1545-0074
2009
Attachment   
Sequence No. 33
Child’s name shown on return Child's social security number 
Before you begin:  If the child, the parent, or any of the parent’s other children for whom Form 8615 must be filed must use the Schedule 
D Tax Worksheet or has income from farming or fishing, see Pub. 929, Tax Rules for Children and Dependents. It 
explains how to figure the child’s tax using the Schedule D Tax Worksheet or Schedule J (Form 1040). 
A  Parent’s name (first, initial, and last). Caution: See instructions before completing. B  Parent’s social security number 
C  Parent’s filing status (check one): 
Single Married filing jointly Married filing separately Head of household Qualifying widow(er)
Part I Child’s Net Investment Income 
1 Enter the child’s investment income (see instructions) ............... 1 
2 If the child did not itemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040 or Form 1040NR), enter 
$1,900. Otherwise, see instructions ..................... 2 
3 Subtract line 2 from line 1. If zero or less, stop; do not complete the rest of this form but do 
attach it to the child’s return ....................... 3 
4 Enter the child’s taxable income from Form 1040, line 43; Form 1040A, line 27; or Form 1040NR, 
line 40. If the child files Form 2555 or 2555-EZ, see the instructions .......... 4 
5 Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 4. If zero, stop; do not complete the rest of this form but do 
attach it to the child’s return ....................... 5 
Part II Tentative Tax Based on the Tax Rate of the Parent 
6 Enter the parent’s  taxable income  from Form 1040, line 43; Form 1040A, line 27; Form 1040EZ, 
line 6; Form 1040NR, line 40; or Form 1040NR-EZ, line 14. If zero or less, enter -0-. If the parent 
files Form 2555 or 2555-EZ, see the instructions ................. 6
7 Enter the total, if any, from Forms 8615, line 5, of all other children of the parent named above. 
Do not include the amount from line 5 above .................. 7 
8 Add lines 5, 6, and 7 (see instructions) .................... 8 
9 Enter the tax on the amount on line 8 based on the parent’s filing status above (see instructions). 
If the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet, Schedule D Tax Worksheet, or 
Schedule J (Form 1040) is used to figure the tax, check here ......... /H17075 9 
10 Enter the parent’s tax from Form 1040, line 44; Form 1040A, line 28, minus any alternative 
minimum tax; Form 1040EZ, line 11; Form 1040NR, line 41; or Form 1040NR-EZ, line 15. Do not 
include any tax from Form 4972 or 8814  or any tax from recapture of an education credit. If the 
parent files Form 2555 or 2555-EZ, see the instructions. If the Qualified Dividends and Capital 
Gain Tax Worksheet, Schedule D Tax Worksheet, or Schedule J (Form 1040) was used to figure 
the tax, check here ...................... /H1707510 
11 Subtract line 10 from line 9 and enter the result. If line 7 is blank, also enter this amount on line 
13 and go to Part III .......................... 11 
12a Add lines 5 and 7 ................. . 12a 
b Divide line 5 by line 12a. Enter the result as a decimal (rounded to at least three places) .... 12b /H11003   . 
13 Multiply line 11 by line 12b ........................ 13 
Part III Child’s Tax—If lines 4 and 5 above are the same, enter -0- on line 15 and go to line 16. 
14 Subtract line 5 from line 4 .............. . 14 
15 Enter the tax on the amount on line 14 based on the child’s filing status (see instructions). If 
the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet, Schedule D Tax Worksheet, or 
Schedule J (Form 1040) is used to figure the tax, check here ......... /H1707515 
16 Add lines 13 and 15 .......................... 16 
17 Enter the tax on the amount on line 4 based on the child’s filing status (see instructions). If 
the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet, Schedule D Tax Worksheet, or 
Schedule J (Form 1040) is used to figure the tax, check here ......... /H1707517 
18 Enter the larger of line 16 or line 17 here and on the child’s Form 1040, line 44; Form 1040A, 
line  28; or Form 1040NR,  line  41. If the child  files Form  2555 or  2555-EZ,  see  the  instructions 18 
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see the instructions. Cat. No. 64113U Form  8615  (2009) 
Sara L Brown 117-00-1111
John J. Brown 007-00-0001
✔
2,800
1,900
900
2,500
900
48,000
48,900
6,504
6,369
135
135
1,600
161
296
251
296
Chapter 31 Tax on Investment Income of Certain Children Page 219

Page 222 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the amount of your credit. See Dependent Care 6. You must identify the care provider on your
tax return. (See Provider IdentificationBenefits under How To Figure the Credit, later.
Test, later.)32. Useful Items 7. If you exclude or deduct dependent care
benefits provided by a dependent careYou may want to see:
benefits plan, the total amount you exclude
Child and or deduct must be less than the dollar limitPublication
for qualifying expenses (generally, $3,000❏ 501 Exemptions, Standard Deduction, if one qualifying person was cared for orDependent Care and Filing Information $6,000 if two or more qualifying persons
were cared for). (If two or more qualifying❏ 503 Child and Dependent Care
Credit persons were cared for, the amount youExpenses
exclude or deduct will always be less than❏ 926 Household Employer's Tax Guide the dollar limit, since the amount you can
exclude or deduct is limited to $5,000. SeeWhat's New Form (and Instructions) Reduced Dollar Limit under How To Figure
❏ 2441 Child and Dependent Care the Credit, later.)Schedule 2 (Form 1040A) obsolete. Sched- Expenses These tests are presented in Figure 32-A andule 2 (Form 1040A), Child and Dependent Care
❏ Schedule H (Form 1040) Household are also explained in detail in this chapter.Expenses for Form 1040A Filers, has been elim-
Employment Taxesinated. Form 1040A filers will now use Form
2441, Child and Dependent Care Expenses. ❏ W-7 Application for IRS Individual Qualifying Person Test
Taxpayer Identification Number
Your child and dependent care expenses must❏ W-10 Dependent Care Provider's be for the care of one or more qualifying per-Identification and CertificationReminders sons.
A qualifying person is:
Taxpayer identification number needed for 1. Your qualifying child who is your depen-each qualifying person. You must include on
dent and who was under age 13 when theline 2 of Form 2441 the name and taxpayer Tests To Claim care was provided (but see Note later),identification number (generally the social se-
curity number) of each qualifying person. See 2. Your spouse who was not physically orthe CreditTaxpayer identification number under Qualifying mentally able to care for himself or herself
Person Test, later. and lived with you for more than half theTo be able to claim the credit for child and
year, ordependent care expenses, you must file FormYou may have to pay employment taxes. If
1040 or Form 1040A, not Form 1040EZ, andyou pay someone to come to your home and 3. A person who was not physically or men-
care for your dependent or spouse, you may be meet all the following tests. tally able to care for himself or herself,
a household employer who has to pay employ- lived with you for more than half the year,1. The care must be for one or more qualify-ment taxes. Usually, you are not a household and either:ing persons who are identified on the formemployer if the person who cares for your de-
a. Was your dependent, oryou use to claim the credit. (See Qualifyingpendent or spouse does so at his or her home or
Person Test.)place of business. See Employment Taxes for b. Would have been your dependent ex-Household Employers, later. cept that:2. You (and your spouse if filing jointly) must
have earned income during the year. i. He or she received gross income of(However, see Rule for student-spouse or $3,650 or more,spouse not able to care for self under
Introduction ii. He or she filed a joint return, orEarned Income Test, later.)
This chapter discusses the credit for child and iii. You, or your spouse if filing jointly,3. You must pay child and dependent care
dependent care expenses and covers the fol- could be claimed as a dependent onexpenses so you (and your spouse if filinglowing topics. someone else's 2009 return.jointly) can work or look for work. (See
Work-Related Expense Test, later.)• Tests you must meet to claim the credit.
4. You must make payments for child and• How to figure the credit. Special rules may apply for people who
dependent care to someone you (and your had to relocate because of the Mid-• How to claim the credit. spouse) cannot claim as a dependent. If western storms, tornadoes, or flooding.
TIP• Employment taxes you may have to pay you make payments to your child, he or For details, see Pub. 4492-B.as a household employer. she cannot be your dependent and must
be age 19 or older by the end of the year. Note. If you are divorced or separated, seeYou may be able to claim the credit if you pay You cannot make payments to: Child of divorced or separated parents or par-someone to care for your dependent who is ents living apart , later, to determine which par-under age 13 or for your spouse or dependent a. Your spouse, or ent may treat the child as a qualifying person.who is not able to care for himself or herself. The b. The parent of your qualifying person ifcredit can be up to 35% of your expenses. To your qualifying person is your child and Dependent defined. A dependent is a per-qualify, you must pay these expenses so you under age 13. son, other than you or your spouse, for whomcan work or look for work.
you can claim an exemption. To be your depen-(See Payments to Relatives or Depen-This credit should not be confused with dent, a person must be your qualifying child (ordents under Work-Related Expense Test ,the child tax credit discussed in chapter your qualifying relative).later.)34.
CAUTION
!
Qualifying child. To be your qualifying5. Your filing status must be single, head of child, a child must live with you for more thanhousehold, qualifying widow(er) with de-Dependent care benefits. If you received any half the year and meet other requirements.pendent child, or married filing jointly. Youdependent care benefits from your employer
must file a joint return if you are married, More information. For more informationduring the year, you may be able to exclude from
unless an exception applies to you. (See about who is a dependent or a qualifying child,your income all or part of them. You must com-
Joint Return Test, later.)plete Part III of Form 2441 before you can figure see chapter 3.
Page 220 Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit

Page 223 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure 32-A. Can You Claim the Credit?
Start Here
/H17074
Was the care for one or more qualifying persons?
No
No
/H17074
/H17075
No
/H17075
No
/H17075
/H17074
Were your payments made to your spouse or to the parent of your
qualifying person who is your qualifying child and under age 13?
Yes
Yes
/H17075
/H17074
Did you1 have earned income during the year?
Yes
No
/H17075
/H17074
Did you pay the expenses to allow you 1 to work or look for work?
Yes
No
/H17075
/H17074
Were your payments made to someone you or your spouse could
claim as a dependent?
No
Yes
/H17075
/H17074
Were your payments made to your child who was under the age of
19 at the end of the year?
No
Yes
/H17075
Are you single? Are you filing a joint return?
Do you meet the requirements
to be considered unmarried?
Do you know the care provider’s name, address,
and identifying number?
Did you make a reasonable effort to get this
information? (See Due diligence.)
Did you pay expenses for more than one
qualifying person?
You may be able to claim the child and
dependent care credit. Fill out Form 2441.
You CANNOT claim the child
and dependent care credit.
2
/H17074
No
/H17074
No
/H17074
Yes
/H17074No
/H17074Yes
/H17074No
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
Yes
This also applies to your spouse, unless your spouse was disabled or a full-time student.
If you had expenses that met the requirements for 2008, except that you did not pay them until 2009, you may be able to claim those expenses in 2009.
See Expenses not paid until the following year under How To Figure the Credit.
/H17075
Yes
1
2
Are you excluding or deducting at least $3,000 of
dependent care benefits?
Yes
/H17075
/H17074No
/H17074
/H17075
Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit Page 221

Page 224 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Physically or mentally not able to care for the special rules for a child of divorced or sepa- Full-time student. You are a full-time stu-
oneself. Persons who cannot dress, clean, or rated parents. dent if you are enrolled at a school for the num-
feed themselves because of physical or mental ber of hours or classes that the school considers
problems are considered not able to care for full time. You must have been a full-time studentEarned Income Testthemselves. Also, persons who must have con- for some part of each of 5 calendar months
stant attention to prevent them from injuring during the year. (The months need not be con-To claim the credit, you (and your spouse if filingthemselves or others are considered not able to secutive.)jointly) must have earned income during thecare for themselves. year. School. The term ªschoolº includes high
schools, colleges, universities, and technical,Person qualifying for part of year. You de- Earned income. Earned income includes trade, and mechanical schools. A school doestermine a person's qualifying status each day. wages, salaries, tips, other taxable employee not include an on-the-job training course, corre-For example, if the person for whom you pay compensation, and net earnings from spondence school, or school offering courseschild and dependent care expenses no longer self-employment. A net loss from only through the Internet.qualifies on September 16, count only those self-employment reduces earned income.
expenses through September 15. Also see Special rules may apply for people whoEarned income also includes strike benefits and
Yearly Limit under Dollar Limit, later. had to relocate because of the Mid-any disability pay you report as wages.
western storms, tornadoes, or flooding.Generally, only taxable compensation is in-
TIPBirth or death of otherwise qualifying per- For details, see Pub. 4492-B.cluded. However, you can elect to include non-son. In determining whether a person is a taxable combat pay in earned income. If you arequalifying person, a person who was born or filing a joint return and both you and your spouse Work-Related Expensedied in 2009 is treated as having lived with you received nontaxable combat pay, you can eachfor all of 2009 if your home was the person's make your own election. You should figure your Testhome the entire time he or she was alive in credit both ways and make the election if it gives2009. Child and dependent care expenses must beyou a greater tax benefit.
work-related to qualify for the credit. ExpensesMembers of certain religious faiths op-Taxpayer identification number. You must are considered work-related only if both of theposed to social security. Certain incomeinclude on your return the name and taxpayer following are true.earned by persons who are members of certainidentification number (generally the social se-
• They allow you (and your spouse if filingreligious faiths that are opposed to participationcurity number) of the qualifying person(s). If the
jointly) to work or look for work.in Social Security Act programs and have ancorrect information is not shown, the credit may
IRS-approved form that exempts certain incomebe reduced or disallowed. • They are for a qualifying person's care.from social security and Medicare taxes may notIndividual taxpayer identification number be considered earned income for this purpose.(ITIN) for aliens. If your qualifying person is a See Earned Income Test in Publication 503. Working or Looking for Worknonresident or resident alien who does not have
and cannot get a social security number (SSN), To be work-related, your expenses must allowNot earned income. Earned income does not
use that person's ITIN. The ITIN is entered you to work or look for work. If you are married,include:
wherever an SSN is requested on a tax return. generally both you and your spouse must work• Pensions and annuities,To apply for an ITIN, see Form W-7. or look for work. Your spouse is treated as work-
An ITIN is for tax use only. It does not entitle • Social security and railroad retirement ing during any month he or she is a full-time
the holder to social security benefits or change benefits, student or is not physically or mentally able to
the holder's employment or immigration status care for himself or herself.• Workers' compensation,under U.S. law. Your work can be for others or in your own
• Interest and dividends, business or partnership. It can be either full timeAdoption taxpayer identification number
or part time.(ATIN). If your qualifying person is a child who • Unemployment compensation, Work also includes actively looking for work.was placed in your home for adoption and for • Scholarship or fellowship grants, except However, if you do not find a job and have nowhom you do not have an SSN, you must get an for those reported on a Form W-2 and earned income for the year, you cannot take thisATIN for the child. File Form W-7A, Application paid to you for teaching or other services, credit. See Earned Income Test, earlier.for Taxpayer Identification Number for Pending
An expense is not considered work-relatedU.S. Adoptions. • Nontaxable workfare payments, merely because you had it while you were work-
• Child support payments received by you, ing. The purpose of the expense must be toChild of divorced or separated parents or
allow you to work. Whether your expenses allowparents living apart. Even if you cannot claim • Income of nonresident aliens that is not you to work or look for work depends on theyour child as a dependent, he or she is treated effectively connected with a U.S. trade or facts.as your qualifying person if: business, or
• The child was under age 13 or was not • Any amount received for work while an Example 1. The cost of a babysitter whilephysically or mentally able to care for him- inmate in a penal institution. you and your spouse go out to eat is not nor-self or herself, mally a work-related expense.
• The child received over half of his or her Rule for student-spouse or spouse not able Example 2. You work during the day. Yoursupport during the calendar year from one to care for self. Your spouse is treated as spouse works at night and sleeps during theor both parents who are divorced or legally having earned income for any month that he or day. You pay for care of your 5-year-old childseparated under a decree of divorce or she is: during the hours when you are working and yourseparate maintenance, are separated
spouse is sleeping. Your expenses are consid-1. A full-time student, orunder a written separation agreement, or
ered work-related.lived apart at all times during the last 6 2. Physically or mentally not able to care formonths of the calendar year. Volunteer work.  For this purpose, you arehimself or herself. (Your spouse also must
not considered to be working if you do unpaidlive with you for more than half the year.)• The child was in the custody of one or
volunteer work or volunteer work for a nominalboth parents for more than half the year, Figure the earned income of the nonworking salary.and spouse described under (1) or (2) above as
explained under Earned Income Limit, later. Work for part of year. If you work or actively• You were the child's custodial parent (the
This rule applies to only one spouse for any look for work during only part of the period cov-parent with whom the child lived for the
one month. If, in the same month, both you and ered by the expenses, then you must figure yourgreater part of 2009).
your spouse do not work and are either full-time expenses for each day. For example, if you work
The noncustodial parent cannot treat the child students or not physically or mentally able to all year and pay care expenses of $250 a month
as a qualifying person even if that parent is care for yourselves, only one of you can be ($3,000 for the year), all the expenses are
entitled to claim the child as a dependent under treated as having earned income in that month. work-related. However, if you work or look for
Page 222 Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit

Page 225 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
work for only 2 months and 15 days during the for care. Do not use these expenses to figure child. You later sent your child to a different
year and pay expenses of $250 a month, your your credit. pre-school and forfeited the deposit. The for-
work-related expenses are limited to $625 (2 1/2 However, expenses for before- or after- feited deposit is not for care and so is not a
months ×  $250). school care of a child in kindergarten or a higher work-related expense.
grade may be expenses for care. Household services. Expenses you pay forTemporary absence from work. You do not Summer school and tutoring programs are household services meet the work-related ex-have to figure your expenses for each day dur- not for care. pense test if they are at least partly for theing a short, temporary absence from work, such
well-being and protection of a qualifying person.as for vacation or a minor illness, if you have to Example 1. You take your 3-year-old child Household services are ordinary and usualpay for care anyway. Instead, you can figure to a nursery school that provides lunch and services done in and around your home that areyour credit including the expenses you paid for educational activities as a part of its preschool necessary to run your home. They include thethe period of absence. childcare service. The lunch and educational services of a housekeeper, maid, or cook. How-An absence of 2 weeks or less is a short, activities are incident to the childcare, and their ever, they do not include the services of a chauf-temporary absence. An absence of more than 2 cost cannot be separated from the cost of care. feur, bartender, or gardener. See Householdweeks may be considered a short, temporary You can count the total cost when you figure the Services in Publication 503 for more informa-absence, depending on the circumstances. credit. tion.
In this chapter, the term housekeeper refersExample. You pay a nanny to care for your Example 2. You place your 10-year-old to any household employee whose services in-2-year-old son and 4-year-old daughter so you child in a boarding school so you can work full clude the care of a qualifying person.can work. You become ill and miss 4 months of time. Only the part of the boarding school ex-work but receive sick pay. You continue to pay pense that is for the care of your child is a Taxes paid on wages. The taxes you paythe nanny to care for the children while you are work-related expense. You can count that part on wages for qualifying child and dependentill. Your absence is not a short, temporary ab- of the expense in figuring your credit if it can be care services are work-related expenses. Seesence, and your expenses are not considered separated from the cost of education. You can- Employment Taxes for Household Employers ,work-related. not count any part of the amount you pay the later.
school for your child's education.Part-time work. If you work part-time, you
generally must figure your expenses for each Care outside your home. You can count the Payments to Relatives orday. However, if you have to pay for care cost of care provided outside your home if the
Dependentsweekly, monthly, or in another way that includes care is for your dependent under age 13 or any
both days worked and days not worked, you can other qualifying person who regularly spends at You can count work-related payments you makefigure your credit including the expenses you least 8 hours each day in your home. to relatives who are not your dependents, even ifpaid for days you did not work. Any day when Dependent care center. You can count they live in your home. However, do not countyou work at least 1 hour is a day of work. care provided outside your home by a depen- any amounts you pay to:
dent care center only if the center complies withExample 1. You work 3 days a week. While 1. A dependent for whom you (or yourall state and local regulations that apply to theseyou work, your 6-year-old child attends a depen- spouse if filing jointly) can claim an exemp-centers.dent care center, which complies with all state tion,A dependent care center is a place that pro-and local regulations. You can pay the center vides care for more than six persons (other than 2. Your child who was under age 19 at the$150 for any 3 days a week or $250 for 5 days a persons who live there) and receives a fee, end of the year, even if he or she is notweek. Your child attends the center 5 days a payment, or grant for providing services for any your dependent,week. Your work-related expenses are limited to of those persons, even if the center is not run for$150 a week. 3. A person who was your spouse any timeprofit.
during the year, orExample 2. The facts are the same as in Camp. The cost of sending your child to an
4. The parent of your qualifying person if yourExample 1 except the center does not offer a overnight camp is not considered a work-related
qualifying person is your child and under3-day option. The entire $250 weekly fee may be expense. The cost of sending your child to a day
age 13.a work-related expense. camp may be a work-related expense, even if
the camp specializes in a particular activity,
such as computers or soccer.
Joint Return TestCare of a Qualifying Person Transportation. If a care provider takes a
qualifying person to or from a place where care Generally, married couples must file a joint re-To be work-related, your expenses must be to
is provided, that transportation is for the care of turn to take the credit. However, if you are legallyprovide care for a qualifying person.
the qualifying person. This includes transporta- separated or living apart from your spouse, youYou do not have to choose the least expen-
tion by bus, subway, taxi, or private car. How- may be able to file as Head of Household andsive way of providing care. The cost of a paid
ever, transportation not provided by a care still take the credit. However, you cannot use thecare provider may be an expense for the care of
provider is not for the care of a qualifying person. filing status Ð Married Filing Separately, if youa qualifying person even if another care provider
Also, if you pay the transportation cost for the plan to claim the credit.is available at no cost.
care provider to come to your home, that ex-Expenses are for the care of a qualifying Legally separated. You are not consideredpense is not for care of a qualifying person.person only if their main purpose is the person's married if you are legally separated from yourwell-being and protection. Fees and deposits. Fees you paid to an spouse under a decree of divorce or separateExpenses for household services qualify if agency to get the services of a care provider, maintenance. You may be eligible to take thepart of the services is for the care of qualifying deposits you paid to an agency or pre-school, credit on your return using Head of Householdpersons. See Household services, later. application fees, and other indirect expenses filing status.
are work-related expenses if you have to payExpenses not for care. Expenses for care do Married and living apart. You are not consid-them to get care, even though they are notnot include amounts you pay for food, lodging, ered married and are eligible to take the credit ifdirectly for care. However, a forfeited deposit isclothing, education, and entertainment. How- all the following apply.not for the care of a qualifying person if care isever, you can include small amounts paid for not provided.these items if they are incident to and cannot be 1. You file a return apart from your spouse.
separated from the cost of caring for the qualify- Example 1. You paid a fee to an agency to 2. Your home is the home of a qualifying per-ing person. get the services of the nanny who cares for your son for more than half the year.
Education. Expenses for a child in nursery 2-year-old daughter while you work. The fee you 3. You pay more than half the cost of keepingschool, pre-school, or similar programs for chil- paid is a work-related expense. up your home for the year.dren below the level of kindergarten are ex-
penses for care. Expenses to attend Example 2. You placed a deposit with a 4. Your spouse does not live in your home for
kindergarten or a higher grade are not expenses pre-school to reserve a place for your 3-year-old the last 6 months of the year.
Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit Page 223

Page 226 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Costs of keeping up a home. The costs of Due diligence. If the care provider information reimburse you for some of your child and depen-
keeping up a home normally include property you give is incorrect or incomplete, your credit dent care expenses, you cannot count the ex-
taxes, mortgage interest, rent, utility charges, may not be allowed. However, if you can show penses that are reimbursed as work-related
home repairs, insurance on the home, and food that you used due diligence in trying to supply expenses.
eaten at home. the information, you can still claim the credit.
Example. You paid work-related expensesThe costs of keeping up a home do not You can show due diligence by getting and
of $3,000. You are reimbursed $2,000 by a stateinclude payments for clothing, education, medi- keeping the provider's completed Form W-10 or
social services agency. You can use onlycal treatment, vacations, life insurance, trans- one of the other sources of information listed
$1,000 to figure your credit.portation, or mortgage principal. earlier. Care providers can be penalized if they
They also do not include the purchase, per- do not provide this information to you or if they Medical expenses. Some expenses for themanent improvement, or replacement of prop- provide incorrect information. care of qualifying persons who are not able toerty. For example, you cannot include the cost of Provider refusal. If the provider refuses to care for themselves may qualify as work-relatedreplacing a water heater. However, you can in- give you their identifying information, you should expenses and also as medical expenses. Youclude the cost of repairing a water heater. report whatever information you have (such as can use them either way, but you cannot use the
the name and address) on the form you use to same expenses to claim both a credit and aDeath of spouse. If your spouse died during
claim the credit. Enter ªSee Attached Statementº medical expense deduction.the year and you do not remarry before the end
in the columns calling for the information you do If you use these expenses to figure the creditof the year, you generally must file a joint return
not have. Then attach a statement explaining and they are more than the earned income limitto take the credit. If you do remarry before the
that you requested the information from the care or the dollar limit, discussed later, you can addend of the year, the credit can be claimed on
provider, but the provider did not give you the the excess to your medical expenses. However,your deceased spouse's own return.
information. Be sure to write your name and if you use your total expenses to figure your
social security number on this statement. The medical expense deduction, you cannot use anyProvider statement will show that you used due diligence part of them to figure your credit.
in trying to furnish the necessary information.Identification Test Amounts excluded from your income
under your employer's dependent careU.S. citizens and resident aliens livingYou must identify all persons or organizations benefits plan cannot be used to claim aabroad. If you are living abroad, your care
CAUTION
!that provide care for your child or dependent. medical expense deduction.provider may not have, and may not be requiredUse Part I of Form 2441 to show the information.
to get, a U.S. taxpayer identification number (for
example, an SSN or EIN). If so, enter ªLAFCPºInformation needed. To identify the care pro-
(Living Abroad Foreign Care Provider) in thevider, you must give the provider's: Dependent Care Benefits
space for the care provider's taxpayer identifica-
1. Name, If you receive dependent care benefits, yourtion number.
dollar limit for purposes of the credit may be2. Address, and reduced. See Reduced Dollar Limit , later. But,
3. Taxpayer identification number. even if you cannot take the credit, you may be
able to take an exclusion or deduction for theIf the care provider is an individual, the tax- How To Figure dependent care benefits.payer identification number is his or her social
security number or individual taxpayer identifi- the Credit Dependent care benefits. Dependent care
cation number. If the care provider is an organi- benefits include:
zation, then it is the employer identification Your credit is a percentage of your work-related
1. Amounts your employer paid directly to ei-number (EIN). expenses. Your expenses are subject to the
ther you or your care provider for the careYou do not have to show the taxpayer identi- earned income limit and the dollar limit. The
of your qualifying person while you work,fication number if the care provider is a percentage is based on your adjusted gross
tax-exempt organization (such as a church or income. 2. The fair market value of care in a daycareschool). In this case, enter ªTax-Exemptº in the facility provided or sponsored by your em-space where the tax form calls for the number. ployer, andFiguring Total If you cannot provide all of the information or
3. Pre-tax contributions you made under aif the information is incorrect you must be able to Work-Related Expenses
dependent care flexible spending arrange-show that you used due diligence (discussed
To figure the credit for 2009 work-related ex- ment.later) in trying to furnish the necessary informa-
penses, count only those you paid by Decembertion. Your salary may have been reduced to pay for31, 2009. these benefits. If you received benefits as anGetting the information. You can use Form employee, they should be shown in box 10 ofExpenses prepaid in an earlier year. If youW-10 to request the required information from your Form W-2. See Statement for employee ,pay for services before they are provided, youthe care provider. If you do not use Form W-10, later. Benefits you received as a partner shouldcan count the prepaid expenses only in the yearyou can get the information from one of the other be shown in box 13 of your Schedule K-1 (Formthe care is received. Claim the expenses for thesources listed in the instructions for Form W-10 1065) with code O. Enter the amount of theselater year as if they were actually paid in thatincluding: benefits on the first line of Part III of Form 2441.later year.
1. A copy of the provider's social security Exclusion or deduction. If your employerExpenses not paid until the following year.card, provides dependent care benefits under a quali-Do not count 2008 expenses that you paid in fied plan, you may be able to exclude these2. A copy of the provider's completed Form 2009 as work-related expenses for 2009. You benefits from your income. Your employer canW-4 if he or she is your household em- may be able to claim an additional credit for tell you whether your benefit plan qualifies. Toployee, them on your 2009 return, but you must figure it claim the exclusion, you must complete Part IIIseparately. See Payments for previous year's3. A copy of the statement furnished by your of Form 2441. You cannot use Form 1040EZ.expenses under Amount of Credit in Publicationemployer if the provider is your employer's If you are self-employed and receive benefits503.dependent care plan, or from a qualified dependent care benefit plan,
If you had expenses in 2009 that you you are treated as both employer and employee.4. A letter or invoice from the provider if it
did not pay until 2010, you cannot Therefore, you would not get an exclusion fromshows the information.
count them when figuring your 2009 wages. Instead, you would get a deduction on
TIP
credit. You may be able to claim a credit for themYou should keep this information with Form 1040, Schedule C, line 14; Schedule E,
on your 2010 return.your tax records. Do not send Form line 18 or 28; or Schedule F, line 17. To claim the
W-10 (or other document containing deduction, you must use Form 2441.
RECORDS
this information) to the Internal Revenue Serv- Expenses reimbursed. If a state social serv- The amount you can exclude or deduct is
ice. ices agency pays you a nontaxable amount to limited to the smallest of:
Page 224 Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit

Page 227 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
George's Reduced Dollar Limit1. The total amount of dependent care bene- earned income for each month is considered to
fits you received during the year, be at least $250 if there is one qualifying person 1) Maximum allowable expensesin your home, or at least $500 if there are two or for one qualifying person .... . $3,0002. The total amount of qualified expenses you more. 2) Minus: Dependent care benefitsincurred during the year,
George excludes from income −1,000Spouse works. If your spouse works during3. Your earned income, 3) Reduced dollar limit on expensesthat month, use the higher of $250 (or $500) or George can use for the credit . . $2,0004. Your spouse's earned income, or his or her actual earned income for that month.
5. $5,000 ($2,500 if married filing separately). Spouse qualifies for part of month.  If
See Earned Income Limit, below. your spouse is a full-time student or not able to Amount of Credit
care for himself or herself for only part of aThe definition of earned income for the exclu- month, the full $250 (or $500) still applies for that To determine the amount of your credit, multiplysion or deduction is the same as the definition month. your work-related expenses (after applying theused when figuring the credit except that earned earned income and dollar limits) by a percent-income for the exclusion or deduction does not Both spouses qualify. If, in the same age. This percentage depends on your adjustedinclude any dependent care benefits you re- month, both you and your spouse are either gross income shown on Form 1040, line 38, orceive. For details or if you or your spouse had full-time students or not able to care for your- Form 1040A, line 22. The following table showsnontaxable combat pay, see the instructions for selves, only one spouse can be considered to
the percentage to use based on adjusted grossForm 2441. have this earned income of $250 (or $500) for
income.that month.Statement for employee. Your employer IF your adjusted gross THEN themust give you a Form W-2 (or similar statement) income is: percentageshowing in box 10 the total amount of dependent Dollar Limit But not is:care benefits provided to you during the year Over overThere is a dollar limit on the amount of yourunder a qualified plan. Your employer will also
work-related expenses you can use to figure the $ 0 $15,000 35%include any dependent care benefits over
credit. This limit is $3,000 for one qualifying 15,000 17,000 34%$5,000 in your wages shown on your Form W-2
17,000 19,000 33%person, or $6,000 for two or more qualifyingin box 10.
19,000 21,000 32%persons.Effect of exclusion. If you exclude dependent 21,000 23,000 31%If you paid work-related expenses forcare benefits from your income, the amount of 23,000 25,000 30%the care of two or more qualifying per-the excluded benefits: 25,000 27,000 29%
sons, the $6,000 limit does not need to 27,000 29,000 28%
TIP1. Is not included in your work-related ex- be divided equally among them. For example, if 29,000 31,000 27%
penses, and your work-related expenses for the care of one 31,000 33,000 26%
qualifying person are $3,200 and your 33,000 35,000 25%2. Reduces the dollar limit, discussed later. 35,000 37,000 24%work-related expenses for another qualifying
37,000 39,000 23%person are $2,800, you can use the total,
39,000 41,000 22%$6,000, when figuring the credit.Earned Income Limit 41,000 43,000 21%
Yearly limit. The dollar limit is a yearly limit. 43,000 No limit 20%The amount of work-related expenses you use The amount of the dollar limit remains the sameto figure your credit cannot be more than: no matter how long, during the year, you have a
qualifying person in your household. Use the1. Your earned income for the year if you are
$3,000 limit if you paid work-related expensessingle at the end of the year, or
for the care of one qualifying person at any time How To Claim the2. The smaller of your or your spouse's during the year. Use $6,000 if you paidearned income for the year if you are mar- work-related expenses for the care of more than Creditried at the end of the year. one qualifying person at any time during the
year.Earned income is defined under Earned Income To claim the credit, you can file Form 1040 or
Test, earlier. Form 1040A. You cannot claim the credit on
Form 1040EZ.For purposes of item (2), use your Reduced Dollar Limitspouse's earned income for the entire
Form 1040 or 1040A. You must completeyear, even if you were married for only If you received dependent care benefits that you
TIP Form 2441 and attach it to your Form 1040 orpart of the year. exclude or deduct from your income, you must 1040A. Enter the credit on Form 1040, line 48, orsubtract that amount from the dollar limit thatSeparated spouse. If you are legally sepa- Form 1040A, line 29. An example of a filled-inapplies to you. Your reduced dollar limit is fig-rated or married and living apart from your Form 2441 is at the end of this chapter.ured in Part III of Form 2441. See Dependentspouse (as described under Joint Return Test , Care Benefits, earlier, for information on exclud-earlier), you are not considered married for pur- Limit on credit. The amount of credit you caning or deducting these benefits.poses of the earned income limit. Use only your claim is limited to your regular tax (after reduc-income in figuring the earned income limit. tion by any allowable foreign tax credit) plus yourExample. George is a widower with one
alternative minimum tax, if any.child and earns $24,000 a year. He paysSurviving spouse. If your spouse died during
work-related expenses of $2,900 for the care ofthe year and you file a joint return as a surviving Tax credit not refundable. You cannot gethis 4-year-old child and qualifies to claim thespouse, you are not considered married for pur- a refund for any part of the credit that is morecredit for child and dependent care expenses.poses of the earned income limit. Use only your than this limit.His employer pays an additional $1,000 under aincome in figuring the earned income limit.
Recordkeeping. You should keep rec-dependent care benefit plan. This $1,000 is ex-Community property laws. You should dis- ords of your work-related expenses.cluded from George's income.regard community property laws when you fig- Also, if your dependent or spouse isAlthough the dollar limit for his work-related
RECORDSure earned income for this credit. not able to care for himself or herself, your rec-expenses is $3,000 (one qualifying person),
ords should show both the nature and the lengthStudent-spouse or spouse not able to care George figures his credit on only $2,000 of the
of the disability. Other records you should keepfor self. Your spouse who is either a full-time $2,900 work-related expenses he paid. This is
to support your claim for the credit are describedstudent or not able to care for himself or herself because his dollar limit is reduced as shown
is treated as having earned income. His or her next. earlier under Provider Identification Test.
Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit Page 225

Page 228 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
matched by the employer. Federal unemploy- Joan's younger child (Susan) stays at her
employer's on-site childcare center while shement (FUTA) tax is paid by the employer onlyEmployment Taxes for works. The benefits from this childcare centerand provides for payments of unemployment
qualify to be excluded from her income. Hercompensation to workers who have lost theirHousehold Employers employer reports the value of this service asjobs. Federal income tax is withheld from the
$3,000 for the year. This $3,000 is shown on heremployee's total pay if the employee asks you toIf you pay someone to come to your home and Form W-2 in box 10, but is not included in tax-do so and you agree.care for your dependent or spouse, you may be able wages in box 1.For more information on a household em-a household employer. If you are a household A neighbor cares for Joan's older child (Seth)ployer's tax responsibilities, see Publication 926employer, you will need an employer identifica- after school, on holidays, and during the sum-and Schedule H (Form 1040) and its instruc-tion number (EIN) and you may have to pay mer. Joan pays her neighbor $2,400 for thistions.employment taxes. If the individuals who work in care.your home are self-employed, you are not liable Joan figures her credit on Form 2441 asState employment tax. You may also have tofor any of the taxes discussed in this section. follows.pay state unemployment tax. Contact your stateSelf-employed persons who are in business for
unemployment tax office for information. Youthemselves are not household employees. Usu- 1) Work-related expenses Joan paid $ 2,400should also find out whether you need to pay orally, you are not a household employer if the 2) Dollar limit (2 or more qualifiedcollect other state employment taxes or carryperson who cares for your dependent or spouse individuals) .............. . $ 6,000workers' compensation insurance. A list of statedoes so at his or her home or place of business. 3) Minus: Dependent care benefitsemployment tax agencies, including addressesIf you use a placement agency that exercises excluded from Joan's income .. . -3,000and phone numbers, is in Publication 926.control over what work is done and how it will be 4) Reduced dollar limit ........ . $ 3,000
done by a babysitter or companion who works in 5) Lesser of expenses paid ($2,400)
your home, the worker is not your employee. or dollar limit ($3,000) ....... . $ 2,400
This control could include providing rules of con- 6) Percentage for AGI of $29,000
duct and appearance and requiring regular re- (28%) .................. . .28Example
ports. In this case, you do not have to pay 7) Multiply the amount on line 5 by
the percentage on line 6 ($2,400employment taxes. But, if an agency merely The following example shows how to figure the x .28) .................. . $ 672gives you a list of sitters and you hire one from credit for child and dependent care expenses for 8) Enter the amount from Formthat list, and pay the sitter directly, the sitter may two children when employer-provided depen- 1040, line 46 ............. . $ 973be your employee. dent care benefits are involved. The filled-in 9) Enter the amount from FormIf you have a household employee, you may draft Form 2441  is shown at the end of this 1040, line 47 ............. . 0be subject to: chapter. 10) Subtract line 9 from line 8 .... . $ 973
11) Credit (Enter the smaller of line 71. Social security and Medicare taxes, Illustrated example. Joan Thomas is di- or line 10) ............... . $ 672vorced and has two children, ages 3 and 9. She2. Federal unemployment tax, and
works at ACME Computers. Her adjusted gross3. Federal income tax withholding. income (AGI) (shown on her Form 1040A, line
22) is $29,000, and the entire amount is earnedSocial security and Medicare taxes are gener-
income.ally withheld from the employee's pay and
Page 226 Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit

Page 229 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form    2441
Department of the Treasury  
Internal Revenue Service (99) 
     Child and Dependent Care Expenses
  
/H17075 Attach to Form 1040, Form 1040A, or Form 1040NR.       
/H17075 See separate instructions.
1040A 
. . . . . . . . . . 
1040 
2441
/H17076
. . . . . . . . . . 
1040NR 
OMB No. 1545-0074
2009
Attachment   
Sequence No. 21
Name(s) shown on return Your social security number
Part I Persons or Organizations Who Provided the Care—You must complete this part.   
(If you have more than two care providers, see the instructions.)
1 (a)  Care provider’s  
name
(b)  Address  
(number, street, apt. no., city, state, and ZIP code)
(c)  Identifying number 
(SSN or EIN)
(d)  Amount paid  
(see instructions)
Did you receive  
dependent care benefits?
No /H17075Complete only Part II below.
Yes /H17075Complete Part III on the back next.
Caution. If the care was provided in your home, you may owe employment taxes. If you do, you cannot file Form 1040A. For details, 
see the instructions for Form 1040, line 59, or Form 1040NR, line 56.
Part II Credit for Child and Dependent Care Expenses
2 Information about your qualifying person(s). If you have more than two qualifying persons, see the instructions.
(a)  Qualifying person’s name
First Last
(b)  Qualifying person’s social 
security number
(c) Qualified expenses you 
 incurred and paid in 2009 for the 
person listed in column (a)
3 Add the amounts in column (c) of line 2. Do not enter more than $3,000 for one qualifying 
person or $6,000 for two or more persons. If you completed Part III, enter the amount 
from line 34 .......................... 3 
4 Enter your earned income. See instructions ............... 4 
5 If married filing jointly, enter your spouse’s earned income (if your spouse was a student 
or was disabled, see the instructions); all others, enter the amount from line 4 .... 5 
6 Enter the smallest of line 3, 4, or 5 .................. 6 
7 Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 38; Form 
1040A,  line 22; or Form 1040NR, line 36..... 7 
8 Enter on line 8 the decimal amount shown below that applies to the amount on line 7
If line 7 is:
Over
But not  
over
Decimal  
amount is
$0—15,000
.35
15,000—17,000 .34
17,000—19,000 .33
19,000—21,000 .32
21,000—23,000 .31
23,000—25,000 .30
25,000—27,000 .29
27,000—29,000 .28
If line 7 is:
Over
But not  
over
Decimal  
amount is
$29,000—31,000 .27
31,000—33,000 .26
33,000—35,000 .25
35,000—37,000 .24
37,000—39,000 .23
39,000—41,000 .22
41,000—43,000 .21
43,000—No limit .20
8 X .
9 Multiply line 6 by the decimal amount on line 8. If you paid 2008 expenses in 2009, see 
the instructions ......................... 9 
10 Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 46; Form 
1040A,  line 28; or Form 1040NR, line 43..... 10 
11 Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 47; or Form 
1040NR, line 44. Form 1040A filers, enter -0- . . . 11 
12 Subtract line 11 from line 10. If zero or less, stop. You cannot take the credit .... 12 
13 Credit for child and dependent care expenses. Enter the smaller of line 9 or line 12 
here and on Form 1040, line 48; Form 1040A, line 29; or Form 1040NR, line 45 .... 13 
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see page 4 of the instructions. Cat. No. 11862M Form 2441 (2009)
Joan Thomas 559-00-3436
Pat Green
12 Ash Avenue
Hometown, TX 75240 240-00-3811 2,400
ACME Computers
(See W-2)
Seth Thomas 559-00-1234 2,400
Susan Thomas 559-00-5678
2,400
29,000
29,000
2,400
29,000
28
672
973
-0-
973
672
Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit Page 227

Page 230 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form 2441 (2009) Page 2
Part III   Dependent Care Benefits
14 Enter the total amount of dependent care benefits you received in 2009. Amounts you
received as an employee should be shown in box 10 of your Form(s) W-2. Do not include
amounts reported as wages in box 1 of Form(s) W-2. If you were self-employed or a 
partner, include amounts you received under a dependent care assistance program from
your sole proprietorship or partnership .................. 14 
15 Enter the amount, if any, you carried over from 2008 and used in 2009 during the grace 
period. See instructions ....................... 15 
16 Enter the amount, if any, you forfeited or carried forward to 2010. See instructions . . . 16 ( )
17 Combine lines 14 through 16. See instructions ............... 17 
18 Enter the total amount of qualified expenses incurred 
in 2009 for the care of the qualifying person(s) ...  18 
19 Enter the smaller of line 17 or 18 ........ 19 
20 Enter your earned income. See instructions ....  20 
21 Enter    the    amount    shown    below    that    applies  
to you.    
● If   married   filing   jointly,   enter   your 
spouse’s  earned  income  (if  your 
spouse was a student or was disabled, 
see the instructions for line 5).
● If   married   filing  separately, see  
instructions.
● All others, enter the amount from line 20.
/H20854 
 ... 21 
22 Enter the smallest of line 19, 20, or 21 ...... 22 
23 Enter $5,000 ($2,500 if married filing separately and 
you were required to enter your spouse’s earned 
income on line 21).............
23 
24 Are you filing Form 1040A?
Yes. Skip lines 24 through 27 and go to line 28.
No. Enter the amount from line 14 that you received from your sole proprietorship or 
partnership. If you did not receive any such amounts, enter -0- ........ . 24 
25 Subtract line 24 from line 17 ......... 25 
26 Enter the smaller of line 22 or 23 ........ 26 
27 Deductible benefits. Enter the smallest of line 22, 23, or 24. Also, include this amount on
the appropriate line(s) of your return. See instructions ............ . 27 
28 Excluded benefits. Form 1040 and 1040NR filers: Subtract line 27 from line 26. If zero or 
less, enter-0-. Form 1040A filers: Enter the smaller of line 22 or line 23 ...... . 28 
29 Taxable benefits. Form 1040 and 1040NR filers: Subtract line 28 from line 25. If zero or 
less, enter -0-. Also, include this amount on Form 1040, line 7; or Form 1040NR, line 8. On
the dotted line next to Form 1040, line 7; or Form 1040NR, line 8, enter “DCB.”
Form 1040A filers: Subtract line 28 from line 17. Also, include this amount on Form 1040A, 
line 7. In the space to the left of line 7, enter “DCB” ............. . 29 
To claim the child and dependent care  
credit, complete lines 30 through 34 below.
30 Enter $3,000 ($6,000 if two or more qualifying persons) ........... . 30 
31 Form 1040 and 1040NR filers: Add lines 27 and 28. Form 1040A filers: Enter the amount 
from line 28 .......................... . 31 
32 Subtract line 31 from line 30. If zero or less, stop. You cannot take the credit. 
Exception. If you paid 2008 expenses in 2009, see the instructions for line 9 .... .  32 
33 Complete line 2 on the front of this form. Do not include in column (c) any benefits shown 
on line 31 above. Then, add the amounts in column (c) and enter the total here.... . 33 
34 Enter the smaller of line 32 or 33. Also, enter this amount on line 3 on the front of this form
and complete lines 4 through 13 ................... . 34 
Form 2441 (2009)
3,000
3,000
5,400
3,000
29,000
29,000
3,000
5,000
✔
3,000
-0-
6,000
3,000
3,000
2,400
2,400
EPS Filename: 10311g64 Size: Width = 44.0 picas, Depth = 46.0 picas
Page 228 Chapter 32 Child and Dependent Care Credit

Page 231 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Use Figure 33-A first to see if you are a quali- Under Age 65
fied individual. If you are, go to Figure 33-B to
If you are under age 65 at the end of 2009, youmake sure your income is not too high to take33. can qualify for the credit only if you are retired onthe credit.
permanent and total disability (discussed next)You can take the credit only if you file and have taxable disability income (discussedForm 1040 or Form 1040A. You cannot later under Disability income). You are retired onCredit for the take the credit if you file Form 1040EZ.
TIP permanent and total disability if:
• You were permanently and totally disabledElderly or the when you retired, andQualified Individual
• You retired on disability before the close ofYou are a qualified individual for this credit if youDisabled the tax year.are a U.S. citizen or resident alien, and either of
the following applies. Even if you do not retire formally, you may be
considered retired on disability when you have1. You were age 65 or older at the end ofWhat's New stopped working because of your disability.2009.
If you retired on disability before 1977, andForm 1040A filers. Schedule 3 (Form 1040A) 2. You were under age 65 at the end of 2009 were not permanently and totally disabled at theis obsolete. The credit previously figured on that and all three of the following statements time, you can qualify for the credit if you wereschedule will now be figured on Schedule R are true. permanently and totally disabled on January 1,(Form 1040A or 1040). 1976, or January 1, 1977.a. You retired on permanent and total dis-
ability (explained later). Permanent and total disability. You are per-
manently and totally disabled if you cannot en-b. You received taxable disability income gage in any substantial gainful activity becauseIntroduction for 2009. of your physical or mental condition. A physician
If you qualify, you may be able to reduce the tax c. On January 1, 2009, you had not must certify that the condition has lasted or can
you owe by taking the credit for the elderly or the reached mandatory retirement age (de- be expected to last continuously for 12 months
disabled. fined later under Disability income). or more, or that the condition can be expected to
This chapter explains the following. result in death. See Physician's statement, later.
Age 65. You are considered to be age 65 on• Who qualifies for the credit for the elderly Substantial gainful activity. Substantial
the day before your 65th birthday. Therefore, ifor the disabled. gainful activity is the performance of significant
you were born on January 1, 1945, you are duties over a reasonable period of time while• How to figure the credit. considered to be age 65 at the end of 2009. working for pay or profit, or in work generally
done for pay or profit. Full-time work (or You may be able to take the credit for the part-time work done at your employer's conve-elderly or the disabled if: U.S. Citizen or Resident Alien nience) in a competitive work situation for at
• You are age 65 or older, or least the minimum wage conclusively shows
You must be a U.S. citizen or resident alien (or that you are able to engage in substantial gainful• You retired on permanent and total disabil- be treated as a resident alien) to take the credit. activity.ity and have taxable disability income. Generally, you cannot take the credit if you were Substantial gainful activity is not work you do
a nonresident alien at any time during the tax to take care of yourself or your home. It is not
year. unpaid work on hobbies, institutional therapy orUseful Items
training, school attendance, clubs, social pro-You may want to see: Exceptions. You may be able to take the
grams, and similar activities. However, doingcredit if you are a nonresident alien who is mar-
this kind of work may show that you are able toPublication ried to a U.S. citizen or resident alien at the end
engage in substantial gainful activity.of the tax year and you and your spouse choose❏ 524 Credit for the Elderly or the The fact that you have not worked for someto treat you as a U.S. resident alien. If you makeDisabled time is not, of itself, conclusive evidence that youthat choice, both you and your spouse are taxed
cannot engage in substantial gainful activity.on your worldwide incomes.❏ 554 Tax Guide for Seniors
If you were a nonresident alien at the begin- Sheltered employment. Certain work of-❏ 967 The IRS Will Figure Your Tax ning of the year and a resident alien at the end of fered at qualified locations to physically or men-
the year, and you were married to a U.S. citizen tally impaired persons is considered shelteredForm (and Instruction) or resident alien at the end of the year, you may employment. These qualified locations are in
be able to choose to be treated as a U.S. resi- sheltered workshops, hospitals, and similar in-❏ Schedule R (Form 1040A or 1040) dent alien for the entire year. In that case, you stitutions, homebound programs, and Depart-Credit for the Elderly or the may be allowed to take the credit. ment of Veterans Affairs (VA) sponsoredDisabled  For information on these choices, see chap- homes.
ter 1 of Publication 519, U.S. Tax Guide for Compared to commercial employment, pay
Aliens. is lower for sheltered employment. Therefore,
one usually does not look for sheltered employ-
Are You Eligible ment if he or she can get other employment. The
Married Persons fact that one has accepted sheltered employ-
for the Credit? ment is not proof of that person's ability to en-Generally, if you are married at the end of the tax gage in substantial gainful activity.year, you and your spouse must file a joint returnYou can take the credit for the elderly or the Physician's statement. If you are under ageto take the credit. However, if you and yourdisabled if you meet both of the following re- 65, you must have your physician complete aspouse did not live in the same household at anyquirements. statement certifying that you were permanentlytime during the tax year, you can file either joint
• You are a qualified individual. and totally disabled on the date you retired. Youor separate returns and still take the credit.
can use the statement in the instructions for• Your income is not more than certain lim- Head of household. You can file as head of Schedule R.its. household and qualify to take the credit, even if
your spouse lived with you during the first 6You can use Figure 33-A and Figure 33-B as months of the year, if you meet all the tests. Seeguides to see if you are eligible for the credit. Head of Household in chapter 2 for the tests you
must meet.
Chapter 33 Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled Page 229

Page 232 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure 33-A. Are You a Qualified Individual?
/H17074
Were you married at the end of the tax
year?
No
Yes
No
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
Yes
Did you receive taxable disability
benefits this year?
You are a qualified
individual and may be able
to take the credit for the
elderly or the disabled
unless your income
exceeds the limits in
Figure 33-B.
/H17074
Yes/H17076
You are not a qualified
individual and cannot
take the credit for the
elderly or the disabled.
/H17074
Yes
/H17073
No
/H17076
Yes
If you were a nonresident alien at any time during the tax year and were married to a U.S. citizen or resident alien at the end of the tax year, see U.S. Citizen or
Resident Alien under Qualified Individual. If you and your spouse choose to treat you as a U.S. resident alien, answer “Yes” to this question.
Mandatory retirement age is the age set by your employer at which you would have been required to retire, had you not become di sabled.
Figure 33-B. Income Limits
IF your filing status is ...
Your adjusted gross income (AGI)*
is equal to or more than ...
single, head of household, or
qualifying widow(er) with
dependent child
$17,500
married filing a joint return
and both spouses qualify in
Figure 33-A
$25,000
married filing a joint return
and only one spouse qualifies
in Figure 33-A
$20,000
married filing a separate return $12,500
THEN even if you qualify (see Figure 33-A), you CANNOT take the
credit if ...
OR the total of your nontaxable
social security and other nontaxable
pension(s) is equal to or more than ...
$5,000
$7,500
$5,000
$3,750
*AGI is the amount on Form 1040A, line 22, or Form 1040, line 38.
START HERE
/H17073
1
2
Did you live with your
spouse at any time
during the year?
/H17076
Are you a U.S. citizen or resident alien? 1
No
/H17074Yes
Are you filing a joint
return with your spouse?
Yes /H17075
Were you 65 or older at the end of
the tax year?
/H17074
No
Are you retired on permanent and
total disability?
No
/H17074
No
Did you reach mandatory retirement
age before this year?
2
/H17074
No
Page 230 Chapter 33 Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled

Page 233 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you choose to have the IRS figure theTable 33-1. Initial Amounts credit for you, read the following discussion for
the form you will file (Form 1040 or 1040A).
THEN enter on line 10  If you want the IRS to figure your tax, see
IF your filing status is ... of Schedule R... chapter 30.
single, head of household, or qualifying Form 1040. If you want the IRS to figure yourwidow(er) with dependent child and, by the end credit, see Form 1040 Line Entries  under Taxof 2009, you were Figured by IRS in chapter 30.
• 65 or older .............................. . $5,000
• under 65 and retired on permanent and total disability1 $5,000 Form 1040A. If you want the IRS to figure your
credit, see Form 1040A Line Entries under Tax
married filing a joint return and by the end of Figured by IRS in chapter 30.
2009
• both of you were 65 or older ................. . $7,500
• both of you were under 65 and one of you retired on $5,000permanent and total disability1 ................. . Figuring the Credit
• both of you were under 65 and both of you retired on $7,500 Yourselfpermanent and total disability2 ................. .
• one of you was 65 or older, and the other was under $7,500 If you figure the credit yourself, fill out the front of65 and retired on permanent and total disability3 .... . Schedule R. Next, fill out Part III of Schedule R.• one of you was 65 or older, and the other was under If you file Form 1040A, enter the amount from$5,00065 and not retired on permanent and total disability .. . Schedule R, line 24, on line 30. If you file Form
1040, include the amount from Schedule R, linemarried filing a separate return and you did not 24, on line 53, check box c, and enter ªSch Rº onlive with your spouse at any time during the year the line next to that box.and, by the end of 2009, you were
There are five steps in Part III to deter-• 65 or older .............................. . $3,750 mine the amount of your credit:• under 65 and retired on permanent and total disability1 $3,750
1Amount cannot be more than the taxable disability income.
2Amount cannot be more than your combined taxable disability income.
1. Determine your initial amount (lines3Amount is $5,000 plus the taxable disability income of the spouse under age 65, but not more than $7,500.
10±12).
2. Determine the total of any nontaxable so-You do not have to file this statement with Payments that are not disability income.
cial security and certain other nontaxableAny payment you receive from a plan that doesyour Form 1040 or Form 1040A, but you must
pensions and disability benefits you re-not provide for disability retirement is not disabil-keep it for your records.
ceived (lines 13a, 13b, and 13c).ity income. Any lump-sum payment for accruedVeterans. If the Department of Veterans Af- annual leave that you receive when you retire on 3. Determine your excess adjusted gross in-fairs (VA) certifies that you are permanently and disability is a salary payment and is not disability come (lines 14±17).totally disabled, you can substitute VA Form income. 
21-0172, Certification of Permanent and Total 4. Determine the total of Steps 2 and 3 (lineFor purposes of the credit for the elderly orDisability, for the physician's statement you are 18).the disabled, disability income does not includerequired to keep. VA Form 21-0172 must be amounts you receive after you reach mandatory 5. Determine your credit (lines 19±24).signed by a person authorized by the VA to do retirement age. Mandatory retirement age is the These steps are discussed in more detail next.so. You can get this form from your local VA age set by your employer at which you would
regional office. have had to retire, had you not become dis-
abled.Physician's statement obtained in earlier
year. If you got a physician's statement in an
earlier year and, due to your continued disabled Step 1. Determine Income Limits
condition, you were unable to engage in any Initial AmountTo determine if you can claim the credit, yousubstantial gainful activity during 2009, you may
must consider two income limits. The first limit isnot need to get another physician's statement To figure the credit, you must first determinethe amount of your adjusted gross incomefor 2009. For a detailed explanation of the condi- your initial amount using lines 10 through 12.(AGI). The second limit is the amount of nontax-tions you must meet, see the instructions for See Table 33-1. Your initial amount is on line 12.able social security and other nontaxable pen-Part II of Schedule R. If you meet the required
sions you received. The limits are shown inconditions, check the box on line 2 of Part II of Initial amounts for persons under age 65. IfFigure 33-B.Schedule R. you are a qualified individual under age 65, your
If both your AGI and nontaxable pensions initial amount cannot be more than your taxableIf you checked box 4, 5, or 6 in Part I of are less than the income limits, you may be able disability income.Schedule R, enter in the space above the box on to claim the credit. See Figuring the Credit Your-line 2 in Part II the first name(s) of the spouse(s) self, later.for whom the box is checked. Step 2. Total Certain
If either your AGI or your nontaxable Nontaxable Pensions pensions are equal to or more than theDisability income. If you are under age 65, income limits, you cannot take the and Benefits
CAUTION
!you must also have taxable disability income to credit.qualify for the credit. Disability income must Step 2 is to figure the total amount of nontaxable
meet both of the following requirements. social security and certain other nontaxable pay-
ments you received during the year. You must• It must be paid under your employer's ac- reduce your initial amount by these payments.cident or health plan or pension plan. Enter these nontaxable payments on linesCredit Figured for You
• It must be included in your income as 13a or 13b, and total them on line 13c. If you are
wages (or payments instead of wages) for You can figure the credit yourself, or the Internal married filing a joint return, you must enter the
the time you are absent from work be- Revenue Service (IRS) will figure it for you. See combined amount of nontaxable payments both
cause of permanent and total disability. Figuring the Credit Yourself next. you and your spouse receive.
Chapter 33 Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled Page 231

Page 234 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheets are provided in the in- 1. Subtract from your adjusted gross income You cannot take the credit because your
structions for Forms 1040 and 1040A nontaxable social security (line 2) plus your ex-(Form 1040, line 38 or Form 1040A, line
to help you determine if any of your cess adjusted gross income (line 3) is more than22) the amount shown for your filing status
TIP
social security benefits (or equivalent railroad your initial amount (line 1).in the following list.
retirement benefits) are taxable. Limit on credit. The amount of credit you cana. $7,500 if you are single, a head of claim is generally limited to the amount of yourNontaxable payments. Include the following household, or a qualifying widow(er), tax. For more information, see the instructionsnontaxable payments in the amounts you enter
for Part III, Schedule R.b. $10,000 if you are married filing a jointon lines 13a and 13b.
return, or• Nontaxable social security payments. This
c. $5,000 if you are married filing a sepa-is the nontaxable part of the benefits Examplerate return and you and your spouse didshown in box 5 of Form SSA-1099, Social
Security Benefit Statement, which includes not live in the same household at any The following example illustrates the credit for
disability benefits, before deducting any the elderly or the disabled. The initial amount istime during the tax year.
amounts withheld to pay premiums on taken from Table 33-1, shown earlier.
supplementary Medicare insurance, and 2. Divide the result of (1) by 2.
before any reduction because of benefits James Davis is 58 years old, single, and files
received under workers' compensation. Form 1040A. In 2004 he retired on permanent
(Do not include a lump-sum death benefit Step 4. Determine the Total and total disability, and he is still permanently
payment you may receive as a surviving and totally disabled. He got the required physi-of Steps 2 and 3spouse, or a surviving child's insurance cian's statement in 2004, and kept it with his tax
benefit payments you may receive as a records. His physician signed on line B of theTo determine if you can take the credit, you mustguardian.) statement. This year James checks the box inadd (on line 18) the amounts you figured in Step Part II of Schedule R. He does not need to get• Nontaxable railroad retirement pension 2 and Step 3. another statement for 2009.payments treated as social security. This He received the following income for theis the nontaxable part of the benefits IF the total of Steps year:2 and 3 is ... THEN ...shown in box 5 of Form RRB-1099, Pay-
ments by the Railroad Retirement Board. Nontaxable social security ....... . $1,500equal to or more you cannot take the Interest (taxable) ............. . 100than the amount in credit.• Nontaxable pension or annuity payments Taxable disability pension ....... . 11,400Step 1or disability benefits that are paid under a
law administered by the Department of James' adjusted gross income is $11,500less than the you can take theVeterans Affairs (VA). (Do not include ($11,400 + $100). He figures the credit onamount in Step 1 credit.amounts received as a pension, annuity, Schedule R as follows:or similar allowance for personal injuries
1) Initial amount ............. . $5,000or sickness resulting from active service in
2) Taxable disability pension .... . 11,400the armed forces of any country or in the Step 5. Determine Your 3) Smaller of (1) or (2) ......... . 5,000National Oceanic and Atmospheric Admin- 4) Nontaxable social securityCreditistration, or the Public Health Service, or benefits ............ . $1,500as a disability annuity under section 808 of 5) Excess adjusted grossIf you can take the credit, subtract the amountthe Foreign Service Act of 1980.) incomedetermined in Step 4 (line 18) from the amount ($11,500 ± $7,500) ÷  2 . . 2,000• Pension or annuity payments or disability determined in Step 1 (line 12) and multiply the 6) Add lines 4 and 5 ..... . 3,500benefits that are excluded from income result by 15%. 7) Subtract line 6 from line 3under any provision of federal law other
(Do not enter less than -0-) .... . 1,500In certain cases, the amount of your creditthan the Internal Revenue Code. (Do not 8) Multiply line 7 by 15% (.15) .... . 225may be limited. See Limit on credit, later.include amounts that are a return of your 9) Enter the amount fromcost of a pension or annuity. These Form 1040A, line 28 ... . 216Example. You are 66 years old and youramounts do not reduce your initial 10) Enter any amounts fromspouse is 64. Your spouse is not disabled. Youamount.) Form 1040A, line 29 ... . -0-file a joint return on Form 1040. Your adjusted 11) Subtract line 10 from line 9 216gross income is $14,630. Together you received 12) CreditYou should be sure to take into ac- $3,200 from social security, which was nontax- (Enter the smaller of line 8count all of the nontaxable amounts
able. You figure the credit as follows: or line 11) .......... . $216you receive. These amounts are veri-
CAUTION
!
fied by the IRS through information supplied by His credit is $216. He enters $216 on line 30Applying the 5 Step Process Amountother government agencies. of Form 1040A. The Schedule R for James Da-1)Initial amount ............ . $5,000 vis is not shown.2)Total of social security $3,200
andStep 3. Determine Excess other nontaxable
Adjusted Gross Income pensions
3)Excess adjusted gross
You also must reduce your initial amount by your income
excess adjusted gross income. Figure your ex- ($14,630 − $10,000) ÷  2 2,315
cess adjusted gross income on lines 14±17. 4)Add line 2 and line 3 .. . 5,515
You figure your excess adjusted gross in- 5)Subtract line 4 from line 1
(Do not enter less than -0-) ... . -0-come as follows:
Page 232 Chapter 33 Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled

Page 235 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1. Is your son, daughter, stepchild, foster 2. Your modified adjusted gross income
child, brother, sister, stepbrother, stepsis- (AGI) is above the amount shown below
ter, or a descendant of any of them (for for your filing status.
34. example, your grandchild, niece, or
a. Married filing jointly - $110,000.nephew),
b. Single, head of household, or qualifying2. Was under age 17 at the end of 2009,
widow(er) - $75,000.Child Tax Credit 3. Did not provide over half of his or her own
c. Married filing separately - $55,000.support for 2009,
4. Lived with you for more than half of 2009
Modified AGI. For purposes of the child tax(see Exceptions to time lived with you be-What's New credit, your modified AGI is your AGI plus thelow),
following amounts that may apply to you.5. Is claimed as a dependent on your return,Definition of qualifying child changed. Be-
• Any amount excluded from income be-andginning in 2009, you must claim the child as a
cause of the exclusion of income from dependent to be a qualifying child for the child 6. Was a U.S. citizen, a U.S. national, or a Puerto Rico. On the dotted line next to linetax credit. See Qualifying Child, later, for more resident of the United States. If the child 38, Form 1040, enter the amount excludedinformation. was adopted, see Adopted child below. and identify as ªEPRI.º Also attach a copy
Earned income threshold. The earned in- of any Form(s) 499R-2/W-2PR to your re-For each qualifying child you must check the
come threshold generally needed to claim the turn.box on Form 1040 or Form 1040A, line 6c,
additional child tax credit is reduced to $3,000. column (4). • Any amount on line 45 or line 50 of Form
2555, Foreign Earned Income.Example. Your son turned 17 on December
• Any amount on line 18 of Form 2555-EZ,30, 2009. He is a citizen of the United States and
Foreign Earned Income Exclusion.you claimed him as a dependent on your return.Introduction
He is not a qualifying child for the child tax credit • Any amount on line 15 of Form 4563, Ex-The child tax credit is a credit that may reduce because he was not under age 17 at the end of clusion of Income for Bona Fide Residentsyour tax by as much as $1,000 for each of your 2009. of American Samoa.qualifying children.
Exceptions to time lived with you. A child isThe additional child tax credit is a credit you If you do not have any of the above, yourconsidered to have lived with you for all of 2009may be able to take if you are not able to claim modified AGI is the same as your AGI.if the child was born or died in 2009 and yourthe full amount of the child tax credit.
home was this child's home for the entire time he AGI. Your AGI is the amount on line 38,This chapter explains the following. or she was alive. Temporary absences for spe- Form 1040, or line 22, Form 1040A.• Who is a qualifying child. cial circumstances, such as for school, vacation,
medical care, military service, or detention in a• How much is the credit. juvenile facility, count as time lived at home.
• How to claim the credit. There are also exceptions for kidnapped chil- Claiming the Creditdren and children of divorced or separated par-• Why you should check your tax withhold-
ents. For details, see Residency Test, in chaptering. To claim the child tax credit, you must file Form3. 1040 or Form 1040A. You cannot claim the child
tax credit on Form 1040EZ. You must provideQualifying child of more than one person. AThe child tax credit and the additional
the name and identification number (usually aspecial rule applies if your qualifying child is thechild tax credit should not be confused
social security number) on your tax return forqualifying child of more than one person. Forwith the child and dependent care
CAUTION
!
each qualifying child.details, see Special Test for Qualifying Child ofcredit discussed in chapter 32.
If you are filing Form 1040 answer the Ques-More Than One Person, in chapter 3.
tions in your form instructions for line 51, FormIf you have no tax. Credits, such as the child Adopted child. An adopted child is always 1040, to find out which child tax credit worksheettax credit, the adoption credit, or the credit for treated as your own child. An adopted child you can use to figure the credit.child and dependent care expenses, are used to includes a child lawfully placed with you for legal If you answer ªYesº to question 1 or 2 in yourreduce tax. If your tax on Form 1040, line 46, or adoption. Form 1040 instructions, you must complete theForm 1040A, line 28, is zero, do not figure the If you are a U.S. citizen or U.S. national and child tax credit worksheet in Publication 972.child tax credit because there is no tax to re- your adopted child lived with you as a member of Otherwise, you can use the Child Tax Creditduce. However, you may qualify for the addi- your household all year, that child meets condi- Worksheet in your Form 1040 or Form 1040Ational child tax credit on line 65 (Form 1040) or tion (6) above to be a qualifying child for the child instructions. (See the filled-in example, later.)line 42 (Form 1040A). tax credit.
Useful Items
You may want to see: Additional Child TaxAmount of CreditPublication Credit
The maximum amount you can claim for the❏ 972 Child Tax Credit
credit is $1,000 for each qualifying child. This credit is for certain individuals who get less
than the full amount of the child tax credit. TheForm (and Instructions)
additional child tax credit may give you a refundLimits on the Credit❏ 8812 Additional Child Tax Credit even if you do not owe any tax.
❏ W-4 Employee's Withholding Allowance You must reduce your child tax credit if either (1) How to claim the additional child tax credit.Certificate or (2) applies. To claim the additional child tax credit, follow the
steps below.1. The amount on line 46, Form 1040, or line
28, Form 1040A, is less than the credit. If 1. Make sure you figured the amount, if any,this amount is zero, you cannot take this of your child tax credit. See Claiming thecredit because there is no tax to reduce.Qualifying Child Credit, earlier.But you may be able to take the additional
A qualifying child for purposes of the child tax child tax credit. See Additional Child Tax 2. If you answered ªYesº on line 9 or line 10
credit is a child who: Credit, later. of the Child Tax Credit Worksheet in the
Chapter 34 Child Tax Credit Page 233

Page 236 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form 1040 instructions or line 9 or 10 in
the Form 1040A instructions, or line 13 of
the Child Tax Credit Worksheet in Publica-
tion 972, use Form 8812 to see if you can
take the additional child tax credit.
3. If you have an additional child tax credit on
line 13 of Form 8812, carry it to line 65,
Form 1040, or line 42, Form 1040A.
Checking Your
Withholding
The child tax credit decreases your tax. You can
check your tax withholding by using Publication
919, How Do I Adjust My Tax Withholding.
If you are having too much tax withheld, and
you prefer to have the money during the year,
you may be able to decrease your withholding.
You do this by completing a new Form W-4 and
giving it to your employer.
Example
Amy Brown files as head of household and has
two dependent children under age 17. The chil-
dren are qualifying children for purposes of the
child tax credit. Amy's only income is her salary
of $30,450. Amy chooses to itemize her deduc-
tions and files Form 1040. Her AGI, shown on
line 38 of her Form 1040, is $30,450. This is her
taxable earned income.
Amy does not file Form 2555, 2555-EZ, or
4563. She does not exclude income from Puerto
Rico. Her modified AGI is $30,450.
Amy's tax, shown on line 46 of her Form
1040, is $1,108. She claims a $225 credit for
child and dependent care expenses on line 48.
She claims a $2,089 earned income credit on
line 64a. She has no other credits.
After answering the Questions in the Form
1040 instructions for line 51, she completes the
child tax credit worksheet to figure her child tax
credit of $883. Amy's completed questions and
child tax credit worksheet are shown later.
Amy reads the TIP in the worksheet and
finds that she may be able to take the additional
child tax credit. See Additional Child Tax Credit
and Amy's completed Form 8812, later.
EPS File Name: 10311G94 Size: Width = 29.0 picas, Depth = 50.0 picas
Filled-in Questions for Amy Brown
(Page references are to the Form 1040 instructions.)
Who Must Use
Pub. 972
Questions Pub.
972
Keep this graphic. Ask for text changes. From SGML conversion.
/H12011
2. Are you excluding income from Puerto Rico or are you
filing any of the following forms?
● Form 2555 or 2555-EZ (relating to foreign earned
income).
● Form 4563 (exclusion of income for residents of
American Samoa).
No. Continue
Yes.
Y ou must use Pub. 972 to
figure your credit.
/H17074
STOP
1. Are you claiming any of the following credits?
No. Use the
worksheet on
pages 43 and 44 to
figure your credit.
Yes. 
You must use
Pub. 972 to figure your
child tax credit. You will
also need the form(s) listed
above for any credit(s) you
are claiming.
/H12011
● Mortgage interest credit, Form 8396.
● District of Columbia first-time homebuyer credit, 
Form 8859.
● Adoption credit, Form 8839.
STOP
● Residental energy efficient property credit, 
Form 5695, Part II.
Page 234 Chapter 34 Child Tax Credit

Page 237 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
EPS File Name: 10311G99 Size: Width = 44.0 picas, Depth = 58.0 picas
2
2,000
30,450
2,000
75,000
-0-
24811v37 -- 1040 Instructions
Child Tax Credit Worksheet—Line 51
Yes. Subtract line 3 from line 2.
● To be a qualifying child for the child tax credit, the child must be your dependent, under age 17 at the end
of 2009, and meet all the conditions in Steps 1 through 3 on page 17.
● Do not use this worksheet if you answered “Yes” to question 1 or 2 on page 42. Instead, use Pub. 972.
1.
4.
5.
1/H11003Number of qualifying children: $1,000.
Enter the result.
Is the amount on line 2 more than the amount on line 3?
If the result is not a multiple of $1,000,
increase it to the next multiple of $1,000.
For example, increase $425 to $1,000,
increase $1,025 to $2,000, etc.
No. Leave line 4 blank. Enter -0- on line 5.
Multiply the amount on line 4 by 5% (.05). Enter the result.
4
2. 2Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 38.
3. Enter the amount shown below for your filing status.
3
Keep for Y our Records
CAUTION
● Married filing jointly — $110,000
● Single, head of household, or
qualifying widow(er) — $75,000
● Married filing separately — $55,000
/H20854
No. STOP
6. Is the amount on line 1 more than the amount on line 5?
You cannot take the child tax credit on Form 1040,
line 51. You also cannot take the additional child
tax credit on Form 1040, line 65. Complete the rest
of your Form 1040.
Go to Part 2 on the next page.
Yes. Subtract line 5 from line 1. Enter the result.
5
Part 1
6
/H12011
/H12011
Chapter 34 Child Tax Credit Page 235

Page 238 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
EPS File Name: 10311g93 Size: Width = 44.0 picas, Depth = 58.0 picas
Child Tax Credit Worksheet— Continued from page 43
1040
Yes. STOP
9.
10.
Are the amounts on lines 7 and 8 the same?
TIP 
Y ou cannot take this credit because there is no tax
to reduce. However, you may be able to take the
additional child tax credit. See the below .
No. Subtract line 8 from line 7.
Is the amount on line 6 more than the amount on line 9?
TIP 
Yes. Enter the amount from line 9.
Also, you may be able to take the
additional child tax credit. See the
below.
No. Enter the amount from line 6.
This is your child tax
credit.
Enter this amount on
Form 1040, line 51.
You may be able to take the additional child tax credit
on Form 1040, line 65, if you answered “Yes” on line 9 or
line 10 above.
● First, complete your Form 1040 through lines 64a and 64b.
● Then, use Form 8812 to figure any additional child tax
credit.
9
/H20854
10
/H17076
7. 7Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 46.
8. Add the following amounts from:
8
Keep for Y our Records
TIP
Form 1040, line 47
+Form 1040, line 48
+Form 1040, line 49
Enter the total.
+Form 1040, line 50
Part 2
+Form 5695, line 11
+Form 8834, line 22
+Form 8910, line 21
+Form 8936, line 14
+Schedule R, line 24
Before you begin Part 2: Figure the amount of any credits you are claiming on Form 5695, Part I; Form 8834, Part I; Form 8910;
Form 8936; or Schedule R.
/H12011
1,108
883
225
883
225
/H12011
/H12011
Page 236 Chapter 34 Child Tax Credit

Page 239 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form     8812 
Department of the Treasury  
Internal Revenue Service (99) 
Additional Child Tax Credit
Complete and attach to Form 1040, Form 1040A, or Form 1040NR. 
1040A 
. . . . . . . . . . 
1040 
8812
/H17076
. . . . . . . . . . 
1040NR 
OMB No. 1545-0074
2009
Attachment   
Sequence No. 47 
Name(s) shown on return Your social security number 
Part I All Filers 
1 1040 filers: Enter the amount from line 6 of your Child Tax Credit Worksheet (see the 
Instructions for Form 1040, line 51).
1040A filers: Enter the amount from line 6 of your Child Tax Credit Worksheet (see the 
Instructions for Form 1040A, line 33).
1040NR filers: Enter the amount from line 6 of your Child Tax Credit Worksheet (see the 
Instructions for Form 1040NR, line 47).
If you used Pub. 972, enter the amount from line 8 of the worksheet on page 4 of the publication.
/H20854
1
2 Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 51, Form 1040A, line 33, or Form 1040NR, line 47 ...... 2 
3 Subtract line 2 from line 1. If zero, stop; you cannot take this credit ............. 3 
4a Earned income (see instructions on back) ............ 4a 
b Nontaxable combat pay (see instructions on 
back) ............. 4b 
5 Is the amount on line 4a more than $3,000? 
No. Leave line 5 blank and enter -0- on line 6. 
Yes. Subtract $3,000 from the amount on line 4a. Enter the result . . . 5
6 Multiply the amount on line 5 by 15% (.15) and enter the result .............. 6 
Next.  Do you have three or more qualifying children? 
No. If line 6 is zero, stop; you cannot take this credit. Otherwise, skip Part II and enter the smaller of 
line 3 or line 6 on line 13. 
Yes. If line 6 is equal to or more than line 3, skip Part II and enter the amount from line 3 on line 13. 
Otherwise, go to line 7. 
Part II Certain Filers Who Have Three or More Qualifying Children 
7 Withheld social security and Medicare taxes from Form(s) W-2, boxes 4 and  6. 
If married filing jointly, include your spouse’s amounts with yours. If you 
worked for a railroad, see instructions on back .......... 7 
8 1040 filers: Enter the total of the amounts from Form 1040, lines 
27 and 57, plus any taxes that you identified using code 
“UT” and entered on the dotted line next to line 60. 
1040A filers: Enter -0-. 
1040NR filers: Enter the total of the amounts from Form 1040NR, line 
53, plus any taxes that you identified using code "UT" 
and entered on the dotted line next to line 57. 
/H20854
8 
9 Add lines 7 and 8 ................... 9 
10 1040 filers: Enter the total of the amounts from Form 1040, lines 
64a and 69. 
1040A filers: Enter the total of the amount from Form 1040A, line 
41a, plus any excess social security and tier 1 RRTA 
taxes withheld that you entered to the left of line 44 
(see instructions on back). 
1040NR filers: Enter the amount from Form 1040NR, line 63. 
/H20854
10 
11 Subtract line 10 from line 9. If zero or less, enter -0- ................. 11 
12 Enter the larger of line 6 or line 11 ...................... 12 
Next, enter the smaller of line 3 or line 12 on line 13. 
Part III Additional Child Tax Credit 
13 This is your additional child tax credit ................... 13 
. . . . . . . . . . 
1040A 
1040 
. . . . . . . . . . 
1040NR /H17076
Enter this amount on 
Form 1040, line 65, 
Form 1040A, line 42, or 
Form 1040NR, line 61.
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see back of form Cat. No. 10644E Form 8812 (2009)
Amy Brown 012-00-5678
2,000
883
1,117
30,450
✔ 27,450
4,118
✔
1,117
EPS Filename: 10311g3A Size: Width = 44.0 picas, Depth = 46.0
Chapter 34 Child Tax Credit Page 237

Page 240 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The chapter will present an overview of these You cannot use any amount paid in
education credits. To get the detailed informa- 2008 or 2010 to figure your 2009 edu-
tion you will need to claim any of the credits, and cation credit(s).
CAUTION
!
35. for examples illustrating that information, see
chapters 2, 3, and 4 of Publication 970. Academic period. An academic period in-
cludes a semester, trimester, quarter, or otherCan you claim more than one education period of study (such as a summer school ses-Education credit this year? For each student, you can sion) as reasonably determined by an educa-choose for any year only one of the credits. For tional institution. In the case of an educationalexample, if you choose to take the AmericanCredits institution that uses credit hours or clock hoursopportunity credit for a child on your 2009 tax and does not have academic terms, each pay-return, you cannot, for that same child, also ment period can be treated as an academicclaim the lifetime learning credit for 2009. period.What's New If you are eligible to claim the American op-
portunity credit and you are also eligible to claim Eligible educational institution. An eligible
American opportunity credit. This new edu- the lifetime learning credit for the same student educational institution is any college, university,
cation tax credit (a modification of the Hope in the same year, you can choose to claim either vocational school, or other postsecondary edu-
credit) is available for 2009 and 2010. The maxi- credit, but not both. cational institution eligible to participate in a stu-
mum credit per student is $2,500 (100% of the If you pay qualified education expenses for dent aid program administered by the U.S.
first $2,000 and 25% of the next $2,000 of quali- more than one student in the same year, you Department of Education. It includes virtually all
fied education expenses). The credit is available can choose to take the American opportunity accredited public, nonprofit, and proprietary (pri-
for the first 4 years of postsecondary education, and the lifetime learning credits on a vately owned profit-making) postsecondary in-
and 40% of the credit is refundable for most per-student, per-year basis. This means that, for stitutions. The educational institution should be
taxpayers. The threshold at which this credit is example, you can claim the American opportu- able to tell you if it is an eligible educational
reduced is higher than that for the Hope and nity credit for one student and the lifetime learn- institution.
lifetime learning credits. For 2009, the amount of ing credit for another student in the same year. Certain educational institutions located
your credit is gradually reduced (phased out) if However, you cannot claim the American outside the United States also participate in the
your modified adjusted gross income (MAGI) is opportunity credit for one student and the Hope U.S. Department of Education's Federal Stu-
between $80,000 and $90,000 ($160,000 and credit for another student in the same year. If dent Aid (FSA) programs.
$180,000 if you file a joint return). You cannot you want to claim either of these credits for
claim a credit if your MAGI is $90,000 or more 2009, you must use the same credit (American Who can claim a dependent's expenses. If
($180,000 or more if you file a joint return). opportunity or Hope) for all eligible students. a student is claimed as a dependent on another
And, in order to claim the Hope credit for any person's tax return, only the person who claimsEligibility for the Hope credit. For 2009, you student, at least one of the students must qualify the student as a dependent can claim a credit forcan claim a Hope credit only if at least one under the rules for the Midwestern disaster ar- the student's qualified education expenses. If aeligible student is attending an eligible educa- eas. None of the requirements in this paragraph student is not claimed as a dependent on an-tional institution in a Midwestern disaster area will prevent any eligible student from claiming other person's tax return, only the student canand you do not claim an American opportunity the lifetime learning credit. claim a credit.credit for any other student in the same year. Generally, qualified education expenses
Differences between the American opportu- paid on behalf of the student by someone otherHope and lifetime learning credit income lim- nity, Hope, and lifetime learning credits. than the student (such as a relative) are treatedits increased. For 2009, the amount of your There are several differences between these as paid by the student. However, qualified edu-Hope or lifetime learning credit is gradually re- three credits. These differences are summa- cation expenses paid (or treated as paid) by aduced (phased out) if your MAGI is between rized in Table 35-1, later. student who is claimed as a dependent on your$50,000 and $60,000 ($100,000 and $120,000 if
tax return are treated as paid by you. Therefore,you file a joint return). You cannot claim a credit
you are treated as having paid expenses thatUseful Itemsif your MAGI is $60,000 or more ($120,000 or
were paid from your dependent student's earn-more if you file a joint return). This is an increase You may want to see: ings, gifts, inheritances, savings, etc.from the 2008 limits of $48,000 and $58,000
($96,000 and $116,000 if filing a joint return). Publication Who cannot claim a credit. You cannot takeFor more information, see Effect of the Amount ❏ 970 Tax Benefits for Education an education credit if any of the following apply.of Your Income on the Amount of Your Credit in
Publication 970, chapters 3 and 4. 1. You are claimed as a dependent on an-Form (and Instructions)
other person's tax return, such as your
❏ 8863 Education Credits (American parent's return.
Opportunity, Hope, and Lifetime
2. Your filing status is married filing sepa-Learning Credits)Reminder rately.
3. You (or your spouse) were a nonresidentStudents in Midwestern disaster areas. alien for any part of 2009 and did not electSpecial rules apply only to students attending an to be treated as a resident alien for taxeligible educational institution in a Midwestern Who Can Claim an purposes.disaster area in the states of Arkansas, Illinois,
Indiana, Iowa, Missouri, Nebraska, and Wiscon- 4. Your MAGI is one of the following.Education Credit
sin. See Special Rules for Students in Midwest-
a. American opportunity credit: $180,000ern Disaster Areas, later. You may be able to claim an education credit if or more if married filing jointly, oryou, your spouse, or a dependent you claim on $90,000 or more if single, head ofyour tax return was a student enrolled at or household, or qualifying widow(er).attending an eligible educational institution. The
credits are based on the amount of qualified b. Hope and lifetime learning credits:Introduction
education expenses paid for the student in 2009 $120,000 or more if married filingFor 2009, there are three tax credits available to for academic periods beginning in 2009 and in jointly, or $60,000 or more if single,persons who pay expenses for higher (postsec- the first 3 months of 2010. head of household, or qualifyingondary) education. They are: For example, if you paid $1,500 in December widow(er).
2009 for qualified tuition for the spring 2010• The American opportunity credit,
semester beginning in January 2010, you may Figure 35-A, at the end of this chapter, may• The Hope credit, and be able to use that $1,500 in figuring your 2009 be helpful in determining if you can claim an
• The lifetime learning credit. education credit(s). education credit on your tax return.
Page 238 Chapter 35 Education Credits

Page 241 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 35-1. Comparison of Education Credits
Caution. If you have more than one student eligible for the American opportunity credit or the Hope credit, you must claim the same credit for all
eligible students. You cannot claim both the American opportunity credit and the Hope credit on the same tax return. However, you can claim both
the American opportunity credit and the lifetime learning credit, or the Hope credit and the lifetime learning credit on the same return Ðbut not for the
same student.
American Opportunity Credit ± NEW Hope Credit* Lifetime Learning Credit
Maximum credit Up to $2,500 credit per eligible student Up to $1,800 ($3,600 if a student in a Up to $2,000 ($4,000 if a student in a
Midwestern disaster area) credit per Midwestern disaster area) credit per
eligible student return
Limit on modified $180,000 if married filling jointly; $120,000 if married filling jointly; 
adjusted gross $90,000 if single, head of household, or $60,000 if single, head of household, or qualifying widow(er)
income (MAGI) qualifying widow(er)
Refundable or 40% of credit may be refundable Credit limited to the amount of tax you must pay on your taxable income
nonrefundable
Number of years Available ONLY for the first 4 years of Available ONLY for the first 2 years of Available for all years of postsecondary
of postsecondary postsecondary education postsecondary education education and for courses to acquire or
education improve job skills
Number of tax Available ONLY for 4 tax years per Available ONLY for 2 tax years per Available for an unlimited number of
years credit eligible student eligible student years
available
Type of degree Student must be pursuing an undergraduate degree or other recognized education Student does not need to be pursuing a
required credential degree or other recognized education
credential
Number of Student must be enrolled at least half time for at least one academic period Available for one or more courses
courses beginning during the tax year
Felony drug No felony drug convictions on student's records Felony drug convictions are permitted
conviction
Qualified Tuition and required enrollment fees. Tuition and required enrollment fees, including amounts required to be paid to the
expenses Course-related books, supplies, and institution for course-related books, supplies, and equipment. Additional expenses
equipment do not need to be purchased allowed for students in Midwestern disaster areas.
from the institution in order to qualify.
Payments for Payments made in 2009 for academic periods beginning in 2009 and in the first 3 months of 2010
academic periods
* You can claim the Hope credit only if at least one eligible student is attending an eligible educational institution in a Midwestern disaster area (see Table 4-2
in chapter 4 of Publication 970 for a list of qualifying disaster areas).
There are a number of factors, such as • American opportunity credit: Qualified ed- only) helps the student acquire or improve
your filing status, your MAGI, and ucation expenses include amounts spent job skills.
whether you are subject to the alterna- on books, supplies, and equipment
TIP • Nonacademic fees, such as student activ-tive minimum tax, that will affect the amount of needed for a course of study, whether or ity fees, athletic fees, insurance expenses,any education credit you are eligible to claim. not the materials are purchased from the
or other expenses unrelated to the aca-When you figure your taxes, you may want to educational institution as a condition of en-
demic course of instruction.compare the different education credits in order rollment or attendance.
to choose the method(s) that gives you the low- • Hope and lifetime learning credits: Quali- But see Special Rules for Students in Mid-est tax liability. If you qualify, you may find that a fied education expenses include only western Disaster Areas, later, for certain excep-combination of credit(s) and other education amounts for books, supplies, and equip-benefit(s) gives you the lowest tax. See Publica- tions.ment required to be paid to the institutiontion 970 for information on other benefits. as a condition of enrollment or attendance.
Paid with borrowed funds. You can claim anQualified education expenses do not include education credit for qualified education ex-amounts paid for: penses paid with the proceeds of a loan. Use theQualified Education • Room and board, insurance, medical ex- expenses to figure the credit for the year in
penses (including student health fees), which the expenses are paid, not the year inExpenses transportation, or other similar personal, which the loan is repaid. Treat loan payments
living, or family expenses. sent directly to the educational institution as paidGenerally, qualified education expenses are
on the date the institution credits the student's• Any course or other education involvingamounts paid in 2009 for tuition and fees re-
sports, games, or hobbies, or any non- account.quired for the student's enrollment or attend-
credit course, unless such course or otherance at an eligible educational institution. It does
education is part of the student's degreenot matter whether the expenses were paid in
Student withdraws from class(es). You canprogram or (for the lifetime learning creditcash, by check, by credit card, or with borrowed
claim an education credit for qualified educationfunds.
expenses not refunded when a student with- Only certain expenses for course-related
draws.books, supplies, and equipment qualify.
Chapter 35 Education Credits Page 239

Page 242 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
EPS File Name: 10311G10 Size: Width = 44.0 picas, Depth = PAGE
Figure 35-A. Can You Claim an Education Credit for 2009?
Yes/H17074
Did you* pay qualified education expenses in 2009 for an eligible student?
/H17074
No
Did the academic period for which you paid qualified education
expenses begin in 2009 or the first 3 months of 2010?
Is the eligible student you, your spouse (if married filing jointly), or your
dependent for whom you claim an exemption on your tax return?
Are you listed as a dependent on another person’s tax return?
Is your filing status married filing separately?
For any part of 2009, were you (or your spouse) a nonresident alien for
any part of 2009 who did not elect to be treated as a resident alien for
tax purposes?
Is your modified adjusted gross income (MAGI) less than $60,000
($120,000 if married filing jointly) for the Hope and lifetime learning credit
or less than $90,000 ($180,000 if married filing jointly) for the American
opportunity credit?
Did you use the same expenses to claim a deduction, or to figure
the tax-free portion of a Coverdell ESA or QTP distribution?**
Were the same expenses paid with tax-free scholarship, fellowship,
grant, or employer-provided educational assistance?
Did you, or someone else who paid these expenses on behalf of a
student, receive a refund of all the expenses?
/H17074
No
Yes
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
/H17074
No
/H17074
No
Yes
/H17074
/H17074
No
/H17074
No
/H17074
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
You cannot
claim an education
credit for 2009
You can claim
an education credit
for 2009***
You cannot use the same expenses to claim more than 1 education credit.**
Qualified education expenses paid by a dependent for whom you claim an exemption, or by a third party for that dependent, are considered paid by you.*
Did you claim a tuition and fees deduction for the same student?
/H17074
No
Yes
/H17075
Your education credits may be limited to your tax liability minus certain credits. See Form 8863 for more details.***
Page 240 Chapter 35 Education Credits

Page 243 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Amounts that do not reduce qualified educa-No Double Benefit Allowed tion expenses. Do not reduce qualified edu- Special Rules forcation expenses by amounts paid with funds the You cannot do any of the following. student receives as: Students in• Deduct higher education expenses on • Payment for services, such as wages,your income tax return (as, for example, a Midwestern Disasterbusiness expense) and also claim an edu- • A loan,
cation credit based on those same ex- Areas• A gift,penses.
• An inheritance, or• Claim an education credit in the same The following rules apply only to students at-
tending an eligible educational institution in ayear you are claiming a tuition and fees • A withdrawal from the student's personal
Midwestern disaster area in the states of Arkan-deduction for the same student. savings.
sas, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Missouri, Nebraska,• Claim more than 1 education credit based and Wisconsin. For a list of the eligible counties,Do not reduce the qualified education ex-on the same qualified education ex- see Table 4-2 in Publication 970, chapter 4.penses by any scholarship or fellowship re-penses. All of the other rules for claiming a Hope orported as income on the student's tax return in
lifetime learning credit (as modified by these• Claim an education credit based on the the following situations.
rules) must still be met.same expenses used to figure the tax-free • The use of the money is restricted to costs The Hope credit for students in Midwesternportion of a distribution from a Coverdell of attendance (such as room and board) disaster areas is 100% of the first $2,400 ofeducation savings account (ESA) or quali- other than qualified education expenses. qualified education expenses and 50% of thefied tuition program (QTP).
next $2,400 of qualified education expenses for• The use of the money is not restricted and• Claim an education credit based on quali- a maximum credit of $3,600 per student. Theis used to pay education expenses thatfied education expenses paid with educa- maximum lifetime learning credit for students inare not qualified (such as room andtional assistance, such as a tax-free Midwestern disaster areas is $4,000 per return.board).scholarship, grant, or employer-provided There are no increases for the American oppor-educational assistance. See Adjustments tunity credit when claimed for students in Mid-For examples, see chapter 2 in Publicationto Qualified Education Expenses, next. western disaster areas.970.
The definition of qualified education ex-
penses is expanded for students in MidwesternAdjustments to Qualified disaster areas. In addition to tuition and fees
required for enrollment or attendance at an eligi-Education Expenses When Must the ble educational institution, qualified education
If you pay qualified education expenses with expenses for students in Midwestern disasterCredit Be Repaidcertain tax-free funds, you cannot claim an edu- areas include the following.
cation credit for those amounts. You must re- (Recaptured) 1. Books, supplies, and equipment requiredduce the qualified education expenses by the
for enrollment or attendance at an eligibleamount of any tax-free educational assistance If, after you file your 2009 tax return, you or educational institution.and refund(s) you received. someone else receives tax-free educational as-
2. For a special needs student, expenses thatsistance for, or a refund of, an expense you usedTax-free educational assistance. This in- are necessary for that person's enrollmentto figure an education credit on that return, youcludes: or attendance at an eligible educational in-may have to repay all or part of the credit. You
stitution.• Tax-free parts of scholarships and fellow- must refigure your education credit(s) for 2009
ships (see chapter 12 of this publication as if the assistance or refund was received in 3. For a student who is at least a half-time2009. Subtract the amount of the refigured creditand chapter 1 of Publication 970), student, the reasonable costs of room andfrom the amount of the credit you claimed. The board, but only to the extent that the costs• Pell grants (see chapter 1 of Publication result is the amount you must repay. Add the are not more than the greater of the follow-970), repayment (recapture) to your tax liability for the ing two amounts.• Employer-provided educational assistance year in which you receive the assistance or
refund. See the instructions for your tax return(see chapter 12 of Publication 970), a. The allowance for room and board, as
for that year to find out how to report the recap- determined by the eligible educational• Veterans' educational assistance (see ture amount. Your original 2009 tax return does institution, included in the cost of at-chapter 1 of Publication 970), and not change. tendance (for federal financial aid pur-
• Any other nontaxable (tax-free) payments poses) for a particular academic period
(other than gifts or inheritances) received and living arrangement of the student.
as educational assistance. b. The actual amount charged if the stu-
dent is residing in housing owned or
Refunds. Qualified education expenses do operated by the eligible educational in-
not include expenses for which you, or someone stitution.
else who paid qualified education expenses on
behalf of a student, receive a refund. For more You will need to contact the eligible educa-
information, see Refunds in chapters 2, 3, and 4 tional institution for qualified room and board
of Publication 970. costs.
Chapter 35 Education Credits Page 241

Page 244 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Advance payment of the earned income ❏ 8862 Information To Claim Earned
Income Credit After Disallowancecredit in your paycheck. If you expect to
qualify for the earned income credit in 2010, you
36. may be able to receive part of it in each
paycheck throughout the year. See Advance
Earned Income Credit , later, for more informa-
Do You Qualify for thetion.
Earned Income
Online help. You can use the EITC Assistant Credit?
at www.irs.gov/eitc to find out if you are eligible
Credit (EIC) for the credit. The EITC Assistant is available in To qualify to claim the EIC, you must first meet
English and Spanish. all of the rules explained in Part A, Rules for
Everyone. Then you must meet the rules in PartEIC questioned by IRS. The IRS may ask you B, Rules If You Have a Qualifying Child, or Partto provide documents to prove you are entitledWhat's New C, Rules If You Do Not Have a Qualifying Child.to claim the EIC. We will tell you what docu- There is one final rule you must meet in Part D,ments to send us. These may include: birthEarned income amount is more. The EIC Figuring and Claiming the EIC . You qualify forcertificates, school records, medical records,has increased for people with three or more the credit if you meet all the rules in each partetc. We will also send you a letter with the name,children and for many married couples filing that applies to you.address, and telephone number of the IRS em-jointly. Also, the maximum amount of income
• If you have a qualifying child, the rules inployee assigned to your case. The process ofyou can earn and still get the credit has in-
Parts A, B, and D apply to you.establishing your eligibility will delay your re-creased. You may be able to take the credit if:
fund. • If you do not have a qualifying child, the• You have three or more qualifying children
rules in Parts A, C, and D apply to you.and you earned less than $43,279
($48,279 if married filing jointly),
Table 36-1, Earned Income Credit in a Nut-• You have two qualifying children and you Introduction shell. Use Table 36-1 as a guide to Parts A, B,earned less than $40,295 ($45,295 if mar-
C, and D. The table is a summary of all the rulesThe earned income credit (EIC) is a tax credit forried filing jointly),
in each part.certain people who work and have less than• You have one qualifying child and you $48,279 of earned income. A tax credit usuallyearned less than $35,463 ($40,463 if mar- Do you have a qualifying child? You have ameans more money in your pocket. It reducesried filing jointly), or qualifying child only if you have a child whothe amount of tax you owe. The EIC may also
meets the three tests described in Rule 8 andgive you a refund.• You do not have a qualifying child and you
illustrated in Figure 36-1.earned less than $13,440 ($18,440 if mar-
ried filing jointly). How do you get the earned income credit?
To claim the EIC, you must: If Improper Claim Your adjusted gross income also must be less
than the amount in the above list that applies to Made in Prior Year1. Qualify by meeting certain rules, andyou. For details, see Rules 1 and 15.
2. File a tax return, even if you: If your EIC for any year after 1996 was denied orDefinition of qualifying child changed. For reduced for any reason other than a math ora. Do not owe any tax,2009, the following changes have been made to clerical error, you must attach a completed Formthe definition of a qualifying child. b. Did not earn enough money to file a 8862 to your next tax return to claim the EIC.
return, or You must also qualify to claim the EIC by meet-• To be your qualifying child, a child must be
ing all the rules described in this chapter.younger than you unless the child is per- c. Did not have income taxes withheldmanently and totally disabled. However, if your EIC was denied or reducedfrom your pay.
as a result of a math or clerical error, do not• A child cannot be your qualifying child if he attach Form 8862 to your next tax return. ForWhen you complete your return, you canor she files a joint return, unless the return example, if your arithmetic is incorrect, the IRSfigure your EIC by using a worksheet in thewas filed only as a claim for refund. can correct it. If you do not provide a correctinstructions for Form 1040, Form 1040A, or• If the parents of a child can claim the child social security number, the IRS can deny theForm 1040EZ. Or, if you prefer, you can let theas a qualifying child but no parent so EIC. These kinds of errors are called math orIRS figure the credit for you.claims the child, no one else can claim the clerical errors.
child as a qualifying child unless that per- If your EIC for any year after 1996 was de-How will this chapter help you? This chapterson's adjusted gross income (AGI) is nied and it was determined that your error waswill explain the following.higher than the highest AGI of any of the due to reckless or intentional disregard of thechild's parents who can claim the child. • The rules you must meet to qualify for the EIC rules, then you cannot claim the EIC for the
EIC. next 2 years. If your error was due to fraud, then
Investment income amount is more. The you cannot claim the EIC for the next 10 years.• How to figure the EIC.maximum amount of investment income you can
• How to get advance payment of the EIC inhave and still get the credit has increased to More information. See chapter 5 in Publica-your paycheck.$3,100. See Rule 6. tion 596 for more detailed information about the
disallowance period and Form 8862.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Reminders Part A. Rules forPublication
Increased EIC on certain joint returns. A
❏ 596 Earned Income Credit (EIC) Everyonemarried person filing a joint return may get more
EIC than someone with the same income but a
Form (and Instructions) This part of the chapter discusses Rules 1different filing status. As a result, the EIC table
through 7 . You must meet all seven rules tohas different columns for married persons filing ❏ Schedule EIC Earned Income Credit qualify for the earned income credit. If you do notjointly than for everyone else. When you look up (Qualifying Child Information) meet all seven rules, you cannot get the credityour EIC in the EIC Table, be sure to use the
❏ W-5 Earned Income Credit Advance and you do not need to read the rest of thecorrect column for your filing status and the
chapter.Payment Certificatenumber of children you have.
Page 242 Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit (EIC)

Page 245 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 36-1. Earned Income Credit in a Nutshell
First, you must meet all the rules in this column. Second, you must meet all the rules in one of Third, you must meet the
these columns, whichever applies. rule in this column.
Part A. Part B. Part C. Part D.
Rules for Everyone Rules If You Have a Rules If You Do Not Figuring and Claiming the
Qualifying Child Have a Qualifying EIC
Child
1. Your adjusted gross 2. You must have a valid 8. Your child must meet 11. You must be at 15. Your earned income must
income (AGI) must be social security number. the relationship, age, least age 25 but under be less than:
less than: 3. Your filing status residency, and joint return age 65. • $43,279 ($48,279 for
• $43,279 ($48,279 for cannot be ªMarried filing tests. 12. You cannot be the married filing jointly) if you
married filing jointly) if separately.º 9. Your qualifying child dependent of another have three or more qualifying
you have three or more 4. You must be a U.S. cannot be used by more person. children,
qualifying children, citizen or resident alien than one person to claim 13. You cannot be a
all year. the EIC. qualifying child of • $40,295 ($45,295 for
• $40,295 ($45,295 for 5. You cannot file Form 10. You cannot be a another person. married filing jointly) if you
married filing jointly) if 2555 or Form 2555-EZ qualifying child of another 14. You must have have two qualifying children,
you have two qualifying (relating to foreign person. lived in the United
children, earned income). States more than half • $35,463 ($40,463 for
6. Your investment of the year. married filing jointly) if you
• $35,463 ($40,463 for income must be $3,100 have one qualifying child, or 
married filing jointly) if or less. 
you have one qualifying 7. You must have earned • $13,440 ($18,440 for
child, or income. married filing jointly) if you do
not have a qualifying child.
• $13,440 ($18,440 for
married filing jointly) if
you do not have a
qualifying child.
If you meet all seven rules in this part, then (Form 1040A), or line 9a (Form 1040EZ). YouRule 2. You Must Have a cannot claim the EIC.read either Part B or Part C (whichever applies)
Valid Social Securityfor more rules you must meet. Getting an SSN. If you (or your spouse if
Number (SSN) filing a joint return) do not have an SSN, you can
apply for one by filing Form SS-5, Application forRule 1. Your AGI Must Be To claim the EIC, you (and your spouse if filing a a Social Security Card, with the SSA. You canLess Than: joint return) must have a valid SSN issued by the get Form SS-5 online at www.socialsecurity.
Social Security Administration (SSA). Any quali- gov, from your local SSA office, or by calling the
fying child listed on Schedule EIC also must• $43,279 ($48,279 for married filing jointly) SSA at 1-800-772-1213.
have a valid SSN. (See Rule 8  if you have aif you have three or more qualifying chil- Filing deadline approaching and still noqualifying child.)dren, SSN. If the filing deadline is approaching andIf your social security card (or your spouse's
you still do not have an SSN, you have two• $40,295 ($45,295 for married filing jointly) if filing a joint return) says ªNot valid for employ-
choices.if you have two qualifying children, mentº and your SSN was issued so that you (or
your spouse) could get a federally funded bene-• $35,463 ($40,463 for married filing jointly) 1. Request an automatic 6-month extensionfit, you cannot get the EIC. An example of aif you have one qualifying child, or of time to file your return. You can get thisfederally funded benefit is Medicaid. extension by filing Form 4868, Application• $13,440 ($18,440 for married filing jointly) If you have a card with the legend ªNot valid for Automatic Extension of Time to Fileif you do not have a qualifying child. for employmentº and your immigration status U.S. Individual Income Tax Return. Forhas changed so that you are now a U.S. citizen more information, see chapter 1.or permanent resident, ask the SSA for a newAdjusted gross income (AGI). AGI is the 2. File the return on time without claiming thesocial security card without the legend.amount on line 38 (Form 1040), line 22 (Form EIC. After receiving the SSN, file an1040A), or line 4 (Form 1040EZ). If your AGI is U. S. citizen. If you were a U. S. citizen when amended return (Form 1040X, Amendedequal to or more than the applicable limit listed you received your SSN, you have a valid SSN. U.S. Individual Income Tax Return) claim-above, you cannot claim the EIC. ing the EIC. Attach a filled-in Schedule EICValid for work only with INS or DHS authori-
if you have a qualifying child.zation. If your social security card reads ªValidExample. Your AGI is $35,550, you are sin- for work only with INS authorization,º or ªValidgle, and you have one qualifying child. You can- for work only with DHS authorization,º you havenot claim the EIC because your AGI is not less Rule 3. Your Filing Statusa valid SSN.than $35,463. However, if your filing status was Cannot Be Married FilingSSN missing or incorrect. If an SSN for youmarried filing jointly, you might be able to claim
or your spouse is missing from your tax return orthe EIC because your AGI is less than $40,463. Separately
is incorrect, you may not get the EIC.Community property. If you are married, If you are married, you usually must file a jointOther taxpayer identification number. Youbut qualify to file as head of household under return to claim the EIC. Your filing status cannotcannot get the EIC if, instead of an SSN, you (orspecial rules for married taxpayers living apart be ªMarried filing separately.ºyour spouse if filing a joint return) have an indi-(see Rule 3), and live in a state that has commu-
vidual taxpayer identification number (ITIN).nity property laws, your AGI includes that portion Spouse did not live with you. If you are mar-ITINs are issued by the Internal Revenue Serv-of both your and your spouse's wages that you ried and your spouse did not live in your home atice to noncitizens who cannot get an SSN.are required to include in gross income. This is any time during the last 6 months of the year,
different from the community property rules that No SSN. If you do not have a valid SSN, put you may be able to file as head of household,
apply under Rule 7. ªNoº next to line 64a (Form 1040), line 41a instead of married filing separately. In that case,
Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit (EIC) Page 243

Page 246 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you may be able to claim the EIC. For detailed • You are a member of a qualified joint ven- Ministers, Members of Religious Orders
ture that is a passive activity reporting on and Christian Science Practitioners, orinformation about filing as head of household,
Schedule C or C-EZ (Form 1040) rentalsee chapter 2. • Form 4029, Application for Exemptionreal estate income not subject to From Social Security and Medicare Taxesself-employment tax, and Waiver of Benefits.Rule 4. You Must Be a 
U.S. Citizen or Resident Each approved form exempts certain incomesee Rule 6 in chapter 1 of Publication 596.
from social security taxes. Each form is dis-Alien All Year
cussed in this section in terms of what is or is notRule 7. You Must HaveIf you (or your spouse, if married) were a nonres- earned income for purposes of the EIC.
ident alien for any part of the year, you cannot Earned Income Form 4361. Even if you have an approvedclaim the earned income credit unless your filing Form 4361, amounts you received for perform-This credit is called the ªearned incomeº creditstatus is married filing jointly. You can use that ing ministerial duties as an employee count asbecause, to qualify, you must work and havefiling status only if one spouse is a U.S. citizen or earned income. This includes wages, salaries,earned income. If you are married and file a jointresident alien and you choose to treat the non- tips, and other taxable employee compensation.return, you meet this rule if at least one spouseresident spouse as a U.S. resident. If you make A nontaxable housing allowance or the nontax-works and has earned income. If you are anthis choice, you and your spouse are taxed on able rental value of a home is not earned in-employee, earned income includes all the tax-your worldwide income. If you (or your spouse, if come. Also, amounts you received forable income you get from your employer. If youmarried) were a nonresident alien for any part of performing ministerial duties, but not as an em-are self-employed or a statutory employee, youthe year and your filing status is not married ployee, do not count as earned income. Exam-will figure your earned income on EIC Work-filing jointly, enter ªNoº on the dotted line next to ples include fees for performing marriages andsheet B in the instructions for Form 1040.line 64a (Form 1040) or in the space to the left of honoraria for delivering speeches.line 41a (Form 1040A). If you need more infor-
mation on making this choice, get Publication Form 4029. Even if you have an approvedEarned Income519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens. Form 4029, all wages, salaries, tips, and other
taxable employee compensation count asEarned income includes all of the following earned income. However, amounts you re-types of income.Rule 5. You Cannot File ceived as a self-employed individual do not
Form 2555 or Form count as earned income. Also, in figuring earned1. Wages, salaries, tips, and other taxable
income, do not subtract losses on Schedule C,employee pay. Employee pay is earned2555-EZ C-EZ, or F from wages on line 7 of Form 1040. income only if it is taxable. Nontaxable em-
ployee pay, such as certain dependentYou cannot claim the earned income credit if you
care benefits and adoption benefits, is notfile Form 2555, Foreign Earned Income, or Form
Disability Benefitsearned income. But there is an exception2555-EZ, Foreign Earned Income Exclusion.
for nontaxable combat pay, which you canYou file these forms to exclude income earned in If you retired on disability, taxable benefits youchoose to include in earned income, asforeign countries from your gross income, or to receive under your employer's disability retire-explained below.deduct or exclude a foreign housing amount. ment plan are considered earned income untilU.S. possessions are not foreign countries. See 2. Net earnings from self-employment. you reach minimum retirement age. MinimumPublication 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and retirement age generally is the earliest age at3. Gross income received as a statutory em-Resident Aliens Abroad, for more detailed infor- which you could have received a pension orployee.mation. annuity if you were not disabled. You must re-
port your taxable disability payments on line 7 ofWages, salaries, and tips. Wages, salaries, either Form 1040 or Form 1040A until you reachRule 6. Your Investment and tips you receive for working are reported to minimum retirement age.you on Form W-2, in box 1. You should reportIncome Must Be $3,100 or Beginning on the day after you reach mini-these on line 1 (Form 1040EZ) or line 7 (Forms mum retirement age, payments you receive areLess 1040A and 1040). taxable as a pension and are not considered
You cannot claim the earned income credit un- earned income. Report taxable pension pay-Nontaxable combat pay election. You can
less your investment income is $3,100 or less. If ments on Form 1040, lines 16a and 16b (orelect to include your nontaxable combat pay in
your investment income is more than $3,100, Form 1040A, lines 12a and 12b). earned income for the earned income credit.
you cannot claim the credit. For most people, Electing to include nontaxable combat pay in Disability insurance payments. Paymentsinvestment income is the total of the following earned income may increase or decrease your you received from a disability insurance policyamounts. EIC. Figure the credit with and without your that you paid the premiums for are not earnednontaxable combat pay before making the elec-• Taxable interest (line 8a of Form 1040 or income. It does not matter whether you havetion. If you make the election, you must include1040A). reached minimum retirement age. If this policy isin earned income all nontaxable combat pay you through your employer, the amount may be• Tax-exempt interest (line 8b of Form 1040 received. If you are filing a joint return and both shown in box 12 of your Form W-2 with code ªJ.ºor 1040A). you and your spouse received nontaxable com-
bat pay, you can each make your own election.• Dividend income (line 9a of Form 1040 or The amount of your nontaxable combat pay1040A). Income That Is Not Earned Incomeshould be shown in box 12 of your Form W-2
• Capital gain net income (line 13 of Form with code ªQº. Examples of items that are not earned income1040, if more than zero, or line 10 of Form include interest and dividends, pensions andSelf-employed persons and statutory em-1040A). annuities, social security and railroad retirementployees. If you are self-employed or received
benefits (including disability benefits), alimonyIf you file Form 1040EZ, your investment income income as a statutory employee, you must use
and child support, welfare benefits, workers'is the total of the amount of line 2 and the the Form 1040 instructions to see if you qualify
compensation benefits, unemployment com-amount of any tax-exempt interest you wrote to to get the EIC.
pensation (insurance), nontaxable foster carethe right of the words ªForm 1040EZº on line 2.
payments, and veterans' benefits, including VAHowever, if: rehabilitation payments. Do not include any ofApproved Form 4361 or Form 4029 these items in your earned income.• You are filing Schedule E (Form 1040),
Form 4797, or Form 8814, This section is for persons who have an ap- Earnings while an inmate. Amounts receivedproved:• You are reporting income from the rental for work performed while an inmate in a penal
of personal property on Form 1040, line • Form 4361, Application for Exemption institution are not earned income when figuring
21, or From Self-Employment Tax for Use by the earned income credit. This includes
Page 244 Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit (EIC)

Page 247 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
amounts for work performed while in a work because, at the end of the year, he was notRule 8. Your Child Must under age 19.release program or while in a halfway house.
Meet the Relationship,
Example 2. Your 23-year-old brother, whoAge, Residency, and JointWorkfare payments. Nontaxable workfare is a full-time student and unmarried, lives with
Return Testspayments are not earned income for the EIC. you and your spouse. He is not disabled. Both
you and your spouse are 21 years old and youThese are cash payments certain people re- Your child is a qualifying child if your child meets file a joint return. Your brother is not your qualify-ceive from a state or local agency that adminis- four tests. The four tests are: ing child because he is not younger than you orters public assistance programs funded under
your spouse.the federal Temporary Assistance for Needy 1. Relationship, 
Families (TANF) program in return for certain 2. Age, Example 3. The facts are the same as inwork activities such as (1) work experience ac- Example 2 except that your spouse is 25 years3. Residency, andtivities (including remodeling or repairing public old. Because your brother is younger than yourhousing) if sufficient private sector employment 4. Joint Return. spouse, he is your qualifying child even though
is not available, or (2) community service pro- he is not younger than you.The four tests are illustrated in Figure 36-1.gram activities. The paragraphs that follow contain more infor- Student defined. To qualify as a student, your
mation about each test. child must be, during some part of each of any 5
Community property. If you are married, but calendar months during the calendar year:
qualify to file as head of household under special 1. A full-time student at a school that has aRelationship Testrules for married taxpayers living apart (see regular teaching staff, course of study, andRule 3), and live in a state that has community To be your qualifying child, a child must be your: regular student body at the school, orproperty laws, your earned income for the EIC
• Son, daughter, stepchild, foster child, or a 2. A student taking a full-time, on-farm train-does not include any amount earned by your descendant of any of them (for example, ing course given by a school described inspouse that is treated as belonging to you under your grandchild), or (1), or a state, county, or local government.those laws. That amount is not earned income
• Brother, sister, half brother, half sister,for the EIC, even though you must include it in The 5 calendar months need not be consecu-
stepbrother, stepsister, or a descendant of tive.your gross income on your income tax return.
any of them (for example, your niece or A full-time student is a student who is en-Your earned income includes the entire amount
nephew). rolled for the number of hours or courses theyou earned, even if part of it is treated as belong-
school considers to be full-time attendance.ing to your spouse under your state's community The following definitions clarify the relationship
test.property laws. Special rules may apply for people who
had to relocate because of the Mid-
Adopted child. An adopted child is always western storms, tornadoes, or flooding.
TIP
Nontaxable military pay. Nontaxable pay for treated as your own child. The term ªadopted For details, see Publication 4492-B.
members of the Armed Forces is not considered childº includes a child who was lawfully placed
School defined. A school can be an ele-earned income for the EIC. Examples of nontax- with you for legal adoption.
mentary school, junior or senior high school,able military pay are combat pay, the Basic
Foster child. For the EIC, a person is your college, university, or technical, trade, orAllowance for Housing (BAH), and the Basic foster child if the child is placed with you by an mechanical school. However, on-the-job train-Allowance for Subsistence (BAS). See Publica- authorized placement agency or by judgement, ing courses, correspondence schools, andtion 3, Armed Forces' Tax Guide, for more infor- decree, or other order of any court of competent schools offering courses only through the In-mation. jurisdiction. An authorized placement agency in- ternet do not count as schools for the EIC.
cludes a state or local government agency. ItCombat pay. You can elect to include Vocational high school students. Stu-also includes a tax-exempt organization li-your nontaxable combat pay in earned dents who work in co-op jobs in private industrycensed by a state. In addition, it includes anincome for the EIC. See Nontaxable
TIP as a part of a school's regular course of class-Indian tribal government or an organization au-combat pay election, earlier. room and practical training are consideredthorized by an Indian tribal government to place full-time students.Indian children.
Permanently and totally disabled. Your
Example. Debbie, who is 12 years old, was child is permanently and totally disabled if both
placed in your care 2 years ago by an authorizedPart B. Rules of the following apply.
agency responsible for placing children in foster
1. He or she cannot engage in any substan-homes. Debbie is your foster child.If You Have a tial gainful activity because of a physical or
mental condition.Qualifying Child Age Test 2. A doctor determines the condition has
If you have met all of the rules in Part A, read lasted or can be expected to last continu-Your child must be:Part B to see if you have a qualifying child. ously for at least a year or can lead to
death.1. Under age 19 at the end of 2009 andPart B  discusses Rules 8  through  10 . You younger than you (or your spouse, if filingmust meet all three of these rules, in addition to jointly),the rules in Parts A  and D, to qualify for the
Residency Test2. Under age 24 at the end of 2009, a stu-earned income credit with a qualifying child.
dent, and younger than you (or your Your child must have lived with you in the Unitedspouse, if filing jointly), orYou must file Form 1040 or Form 1040A to States for more than half of 2009. The followingclaim the EIC with a qualifying child. (You cannot 3. Permanently and totally disabled at any definitions clarify the residency test.file Form 1040EZ.) You also must complete time during 2009, regardless of age.
Schedule EIC and attach it to your return. If you United States. This means the 50 states and
the District of Columbia. It does not includemeet all the rules in Part A and this part, read The following examples and definitions clarify Puerto Rico or U.S. possessions such as Guam.Part D to find out what to do next. the age test.
If you do not meet Rule 8, you do not Homeless shelter. Your home can be any
have a qualifying child. Read Part C to Example 1. Your son turned 19 on Decem- location where you regularly live. You do not
find out if you can get the earned in- ber 10. Unless he was permanently and totally need a traditional home. For example, if your
CAUTION
!
come credit without a qualifying child. disabled or a student, he is not a qualifying child child lived with you for more than half the year in
Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit (EIC) Page 245

Page 248 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
EPS File Name: 10311g97 Size: Width = 33.0 picas, Depth = 30.4 picas
AND
AND
A qualifying child is a child who is your . . .
Son, daughter, stepchild, foster child, or a descendant of
any of them (for example, your grandchild)
 
was . . . 
Under age 19 at the end of 2009 and younger than you
                  (or your spouse, if filing jointly) 
OR
Under age 24 at the end of 2009, a student, and younger than you 
                             (or your spouse, if filing jointly) 
Permanently and totally disabled at any time during the year,
regardless of age 
Who lived with you in the United States for more than
half of 2009.
OR
Relationship
Age
Residency
Brother, sister, half brother, half sister, stepbrother,
stepsister, or a descendant of any of them (for example, your
niece or nephew)
OR
AND
Who is not filing a joint return for 2009 (or is filing a 
joint return for 2009 only as a claim for refund) 
Joint Return
Figure 36-1. Tests for Qualifying Child
Page 246 Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit (EIC)

Page 249 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
one or more homeless shelters, your child Married child. Even if your child does not file a person cannot take any of these tax benefits
meets the residency test. unless he or she has a different qualifying child.joint return, if your child was married at the end
The tiebreaker rules explained next explainof the year, he or she cannot be your qualifying
Military personnel stationed outside the who, if anyone, can claim the EIC when morechild unless:
United States.  U.S. military personnel sta- than one person has the same qualifying child.
1. You can claim an exemption for the child,tioned outside the United States on extended However, the tiebreaker rules do not apply if the
oractive duty are considered to live in the United other person is your spouse and you file a joint
States during that duty period for purposes of return.2. The reason you cannot claim an exemp-the EIC. tion for the child is that you let the child's Tiebreaker rules. To determine which personExtended active duty. Extended active other parent claim the exemption under the can treat the child as a qualifying child to claimduty means you are called or ordered to duty for Special rule for divorced or separated par- the six tax benefits just listed, the followingan indefinite period or for a period of more than ents or parents who live apart, described tiebreaker rules apply.90 days. Once you begin serving your extended later.
• If only one of the persons is the child'sactive duty, you are still considered to have been
parent, the child is treated as the qualify-on extended active duty even if you do not serve
Social security number. Your qualifying child ing child of the parent.more than 90 days.
must have a valid social security number (SSN) • If the parents do not file a joint return to-unless the child was born and died in 2009 andBirth or death of a child. A child who was gether but both parents claim the child asyou attach to your return a copy of the child'sborn or died in 2009 is treated as having lived a qualifying child, the IRS will treat thebirth certificate, death certificate, or hospital rec-with you for all of 2009 if your home was the child as the qualifying child of the parentchild's home the entire time he or she was alive ords showing a live birth. You cannot claim the with whom the child lived for the longerin 2009. EIC on the basis of a qualifying child if: period of time during the year. If the child
lived with each parent for the same1. Your qualifying child's SSN is missing fromTemporary absences. Count time that you or amount of time, the IRS will treat the childyour tax return or is incorrect,your child is away from home on a temporary as the qualifying child of the parent whoabsence due to a special circumstance as time 2. Your qualifying child's social security card had the higher adjusted gross incomethe child lived with you. Examples of a special says ªNot valid for employmentº and was (AGI) for the year.circumstance include illness, school attend- issued for use in getting a federally fundedance, business, vacation, military service, and • If no parent can claim the child as a quali-benefit, ordetention in a juvenile facility. fying child, the child is treated as the quali-
3. Instead of an SSN, your qualifying child fying child of the person who had the
Kidnapped child. A kidnapped child is treated has: highest AGI for the year.
as living with you for more than half of the year if • If a parent can claim the child as a qualify-a. An individual taxpayer identificationthe child lived with you for more than half the ing child but no parent does so claim thenumber (ITIN), which is issued to apart of the year before the date of the kidnap- child, the child is treated as the qualifyingnoncitizen who cannot get an SSN, orping. The child must be presumed by law en- child of the person who had the highestforcement authorities to have been kidnapped b. An adoption taxpayer identification AGI for the year, but only if that person'sby someone who is not a member of your family number (ATIN), which is issued to AGI is higher than the highest AGI of anyor your child's family. This treatment applies for adopting parents who cannot get an of the child's parents who can claim theall years until the child is returned. However, the SSN for the child being adopted until child. If the child's parents file a joint returnlast year this treatment can apply is the earlier the adoption is final. with each other, this rule can be appliedof: by treating the parents' total AGI as di-
If you have more than one qualifying child vided evenly between them. See Example1. The year there is a determination that the
and only one has a valid SSN, you can claim the 8.child is dead, or
EIC only on the basis of that child. For more2. The year the child would have reached information about SSNs, see Rule 2. Subject to these tiebreaker rules, you and theage 18. other person may be able to choose which of
you claims the child as a qualifying child. SeeIf your qualifying child has been kidnapped Rule 9. Your Qualifying Examples 1 through 13.and meets these requirements, enter ªKC,º in-
Child Cannot Be Used By If you cannot claim the EIC because yourstead of a number, on line 6 of Schedule EIC.
qualifying child is treated under the tiebreakerMore Than One Person To rules as the qualifying child of another person for
Claim the EIC 2009, you may be able to take the EIC using aJoint Return Test
different qualifying child, but you cannot take the
Sometimes a child meets the tests to be a quali-To meet this test, the child cannot file a joint EIC using the rules in Part C for people who do
fying child of more than one person. Althoughreturn for the year. not have a qualifying child.
the child meets the tests to be a qualifying child
If the other person cannot claim the EIC. IfExample. You supported your 18-year-old of each of these persons, only one person can
you and someone else have the same qualifyingdaughter, and she lived with you all year while actually treat the child as a qualifying child. Only
child but the other person cannot claim the EICher husband was in the Armed Forces. The that person can use the child as a qualifying
because he or she is not eligible or his or hercouple files a joint return. Because your daugh- child to take all of the following tax benefits
earned income or AGI is too high, you may beter filed a joint return, she is not your qualifying (provided the person is eligible for each benefit).
able to treat the child as a qualifying child. Seechild.
1. The exemption for the child. Examples 6 and 7. But you cannot treat the child
Exception. The joint return test does not apply as a qualifying child to claim the EIC if the other2. The child tax credit.if your child and his or her spouse file a joint person uses the child to claim any of the other
3. Head of household filing status.return only as a claim for refund. six tax benefits listed earlier.
Examples. The following examples may4. The credit for child and dependent careExample. Your 18-year-old son and his help you in determining whether you can claimexpenses.17-year-old wife had $800 of interest income the EIC when you and someone else have the
5. The exclusion for dependent care benefits.and no earned income. Neither is required to file same qualifying child.
a tax return. Taxes were taken out of their inter- 6. The EIC.est income due to backup withholding, so they Example 1. You and your 2-year-old son
The other person cannot take any of thesefiled a joint return only to get a refund. The lived with your mother all year. You are 25 years
benefits based on this qualifying child. In otherexception to the joint return test applies, so your old, unmarried, and your AGI is $9,000. Your
words, you and the other person cannot agree toson may be your qualifying child if all the other only income was $9,000 from a part-time job.
divide these tax benefits between you. The othertests are met. Your mother's only income was $20,000 from
Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit (EIC) Page 247

Page 250 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
her job, and her AGI is $20,000. Your son's joint return. If you and your husband do not claim Example 13. You and your 7-year-old
father did not live with you or your son. The niece, your sister's child, lived with your motheryour son as a qualifying child for the EIC or any
special rule explained later for divorced or sepa- all year. You are 25 years old, and your AGI isof the other tax benefits listed earlier, your
rated parents or parents who live apart does not $9,300. Your only income was from a part-timemother can claim him instead. Even though the
apply. Your son is a qualifying child of both you job. Your mother's AGI is $15,000. Her onlyAGI on your joint return, $30,000, is more than
and your mother because he meets the relation- income was from her job. Your niece's parentsyour mother's AGI of $20,000, for this purpose
ship, age, residency, and joint return tests for file jointly, have an AGI of less than $9,000, andhalf of the joint AGI can be treated as yours and
both you and your mother. However, only one of do not live with you or their child. Your niece is ahalf as your husband's. In other words, each
you can treat him as a qualifying child to claim qualifying child of both you and your motherparent's AGI can be treated as $15,000.
the EIC (and the other tax benefits listed earlier because she meets the relationship, age, resi-
for which that person qualifies). He is not a dency, and joint return tests for both you andExample 9. You, your husband, and your
qualifying child of anyone else, including his your mother. However, only your mother can10-year-old son lived together until August 1,
father. If you do not claim your son as a qualify- treat her as a qualifying child. This is because2009, when your husband moved out of theing child for the EIC or any of the other tax your mother's AGI, $15,000, is more than yourhousehold. In August and September, your sonbenefits listed earlier, your mother can treat your AGI, $9,300.lived with you. For the rest of the year, your sonson as a qualifying child to claim the EIC (and lived with your husband, the boy's father. Your Special rule for divorced or separated par-any other tax benefits listed earlier for which she son is a qualifying child of both you and your ents or parents who live apart. A child will bequalifies). husband because your son lived with each of treated as the qualifying child of his or her non-
you for more than half the year and because he custodial parent (for purposes of claiming anExample 2. The facts are the same as in met the relationship, age, and joint return tests exemption and the child tax credit, but not for theExample 1 except your AGI is $25,000. Because for both of you. At the end of the year, you and EIC) if all of the following apply.your mother's AGI is not higher than yours, she your husband still were not divorced, legallycannot claim your son as a qualifying child. Only 1. The parents:separated, or separated under a written separa-you can claim him. tion agreement, so the special rule for divorced a. Are divorced or legally separated underor separated parents or parents who apart doesExample 3. The facts are the same as in a decree of divorce or separate mainte-not apply.Example 1 except that you and your mother both nance,
You and your husband will file separate re-claim your son as a qualifying child. In this case, b. Are separated under a written separa-turns. Your husband agrees to let you treat youryou as the child's parent will be the only one tion agreement, orson as a qualifying child. This means, if yourallowed to claim your son as a qualifying child for
the EIC and the other tax benefits listed earlier husband does not claim your son as a qualifying c. Lived apart at all times during the last 6
for which you qualify. The IRS will disallow your child for any of the tax benefits listed earlier, you months of 2009, whether or not they are
mother's claim to the EIC and any other tax can claim him as a qualifying child for any tax or were married.
benefits listed earlier unless she has another benefit listed for which you qualify. However,
qualifying child. 2. The child received over half of his or heryour filing status is married filing separately, so
support for the year from the parents.you cannot claim the EIC or the credit for child
Example 4. The facts are the same as in and dependent care expenses. See Rule 3. 3. The child is in the custody of one or bothExample 1 except that you also have two other parents for more than half of 2009.young children who are qualifying children of Example 10. The facts are the same as in
both you and your mother. Only one of you can 4. Either of the following statements is true.Example 9 except that you and your husband
claim each child. However, if your mother's AGI both claim your son as a qualifying child. In this a. The custodial parent signs Form 8332is higher than yours, you can allow your mother case, only your husband will be allowed to treat or a substantially similar statement thatto claim one or more of the children. For exam- your son as a qualifying child. This is because, he or she will not claim the child as aple, if you claim one child, your mother can claim during 2009, the boy lived with him longer than dependent for the year, and the non-the other two. with you. You cannot claim the EIC (either with custodial parent attaches the form oror without a qualifying child). However, your statement to his or her return. If theExample 5. The facts are the same as in husband's filing status is married filing sepa- divorce decree or separation agreementExample 1 except that you are only 18 years old. rately, so he cannot claim the EIC or the credit went into effect after 1984 and beforeThis means you are a qualifying child of your for child and dependent care expenses. See 2009, the noncustodial parent may bemother. Because of Rule 10 discussed next, you Rule 3. able to attach certain pages from thecannot claim the EIC and cannot claim your son
decree or agreement instead of Formas a qualifying child. Only your mother may be Example 11. You, your 5-year-old son, and 8332.able to treat your son as a qualifying child to your son's father lived together all year. You andclaim the EIC. If your mother meets all the other b. A pre-1985 decree of divorce or sepa-your son's father are not married. Your son is arequirements for claiming the EIC and you do rate maintenance or written separationqualifying child of both you and his father be-not claim your son as a qualifying child for any of agreement that applies to 2009 pro-cause he meets the relationship, age, residency,the other tax benefits listed earlier, your mother vides that the noncustodial parent canand joint return tests for both you and his father.can claim both you and your son as qualifying claim the child as a dependent, and theYour earned income and AGI are $12,000, andchildren for the EIC. noncustodial parent provides at leastyour son's father's earned income and AGI are $600 for support of the child during$14,000. Neither of you had any other income.Example 6. The facts are the same as in 2009.Your son's father agrees to let you treat the childExample 1  except that your mother earned
as a qualifying child. This means, if your son's$50,000 from her job. Because your mother's
father does not claim your son as a qualifyingearned income is too high for her to claim the For details, see chapter 3. Also see Applyingchild for the EIC or any of the other tax benefitsEIC, only you can claim the EIC using your son. Rule 9 to divorced or separated parents or par-listed earlier, you can claim him as a qualifying ents who live apart, next.child for the EIC and any other tax benefits listedExample 7. The facts are the same as in
for which you qualify. Applying Rule 9 to divorced or separatedExample 1 except that you earned $50,000 from
parents or parents who live apart. If a childyour job and your AGI is $50,500. Your earned
Example 12. The facts are the same as in is treated as the qualifying child of the noncus-income is too high for you to claim the EIC. But
Example 11  except that you and your son's todial parent under the special rule just de-your mother cannot claim the EIC either, be-
father both claim your son as a qualifying child. scribed for children of divorced or separatedcause her AGI is not higher than yours.
In this case, only your son's father will be al- parents or parents who live apart, only the non-
lowed to treat your son as a qualifying child. ThisExample 8. The facts are the same as in custodial parent can claim an exemption and the
is because his AGI, $14,000, is more than yourExample 1 except that you and your son's father child tax credit for the child. However, the custo-
AGI, $12,000. You cannot claim the EIC (eitherare married to each other, live with your son and dial parent, if eligible, or another eligible tax-
with or without a qualifying child).your mother, and have an AGI of $30,000 on a payer, can claim the child as a qualifying child
Page 248 Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit (EIC)

Page 251 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
for the EIC and other tax benefits listed earlier. If 4. You are not filing a joint return for the year age 27. You meet the age test because your
(or are filing a joint return only as a claim spouse is at least age 25 but under age 65.the child is the qualifying child of more than one
for refund).person for these benefits, then the tiebreaker
Example 3. You are married and filing arules determine which person can treat the child For more details about the tests to be a qualify- joint return with your spouse who died in Augustas a qualifying child. ing child, see Rule 8. 2009. You are age 67. Your spouse would haveIf you (or your spouse, if filing a joint return) been age 65 in November 2009. Because yourExample 1. You and your 5-year-old son are a qualifying child of another person, you spouse was under age 65 when she died, youlived all year with your mother, who paid the cannot claim the EIC. This is true even if the meet the age test.entire cost of keeping up the home. Your AGI is person for whom you are a qualifying child does
$10,000. Your mother's AGI is $25,000. Your not claim the EIC or meet all of the rules to claim
son's father did not live with you or your son. the EIC. Put ªNoº beside line 64a (Form 1040) or Rule 12. You Cannot BeUnder the special rule for children of divorced or line 41a (Form 1040A). the Dependent of Anotherseparated parents or parents who live apart,
your son is treated as the qualifying child of his Example. You and your daughter lived with Person
father, who can claim an exemption and the your mother all year. You are 22 years old,
child tax credit for the child. However, your son's If you are not filing a joint return, you meet thisunmarried, and attended a trade school full time.
father cannot claim your son as a qualifying child rule if:You had a part-time job and earned $5,700. You
for head of household filing status, the credit for had no other income. Because you meet the • You checked box 6a on Form 1040 orrelationship, age, residency, and joint returnchild and dependent care expenses, the exclu- 1040A, ortests, you are a qualifying child of your mother.sion for dependent care benefits, or the EIC.
• You did not check the ªYouº box on line 5She can claim the EIC if she meets all the otherYou and your mother did not have any child care
of Form 1040EZ, and you entered $9,350requirements. Because you are your mother'sexpenses or dependent care benefits. If you do
on that line.qualifying child, you cannot claim the EIC. Thisnot claim your son as a qualifying child, your
is so even if your mother cannot or does notmother can claim him as a qualifying child for the
If you are filing a joint return, you meet thisclaim the EIC.EIC and head of household filing status, if she
rule if:qualifies for these tax benefits.
• You checked both box 6a and box 6b onExample 2. The facts are the same as in Form 1040 or 1040A, orExample 1 except that your AGI is $25,000 and Part C. Rules • You and your spouse did not check eitheryour mother's AGI is $21,000. Your mother can-
the ªYouº box or the ªSpouseº box on linenot claim your son as a qualifying child for any If You Do Not Have 5 of Form 1040EZ, and you enteredpurpose because her AGI is not higher than
$18,700 on that line.yours. a Qualifying Child
If you are not sure whether someone else canExample 3. The facts are the same as in Read this part if you:
claim you (or your spouse if filing a joint return)Example 1 except that you and your mother both
as a dependent, read the rules for claiming a1. Do not have a qualifying child, andclaim your son as a qualifying child for the EIC.
dependent in chapter 3.Your mother also claims him as a qualifying child 2. Have met all the rules in Part A. If someone else can claim you (or yourfor head of household filing status. You as the
spouse if filing a joint return) as a dependent onchild's parent will be the only one allowed to
Part C discusses Rules 11 through 14. You must his or her return, but does not, you still cannotclaim your son as a qualifying child for the EIC. meet all four of these rules, in addition to the claim the credit.The IRS will disallow your mother's claim to the rules in Parts A and D, to qualify for the earnedEIC and head of household filing status unless income credit without a qualifying child. Example 1. In 2009, you were age 25, sin-she has another qualifying child.
gle, and living at home with your parents. YouIf you have a qualifying child, the rules
worked and were not a student. You earnedin this part do not apply to you. You canRule 10. You Cannot Be a $7,500. Your parents cannot claim you as aclaim the credit only if you meet all the
CAUTION
!
dependent. When you file your return, you claimQualifying Child of rules in Parts A, B, and D. See Rule 8 to find out
an exemption for yourself by not checking theif you have a qualifying child.Another Person ªYouº box on line 5 of your Form 1040EZ and by
entering $9,350 on that line. You meet this rule.You are a qualifying child of another person Rule 11. You Must Be at(your parent, guardian, foster parent, etc.) if all Example 2. The facts are the same as inLeast Age 25 but Under of the following statements are true. Example 1, except that you earned $2,000. Your
Age 65 parents can claim you as a dependent but de-1. You are that person's son, daughter,
cide not to. You do not meet this rule. Youstepchild, grandchild, or foster child. Or, You must be at least age 25 but under age 65 at cannot claim the credit because your parentsyou are that person's brother, sister, half the end of 2009. If you are married filing a joint could have claimed you as a dependent.brother, half sister, stepbrother, or stepsis- return, either you or your spouse must be atter (or the child or grandchild of that per- least age 25 but under age 65 at the end ofson's brother, sister, half brother, half Rule 13. You Cannot Be a2009. It does not matter which spouse meets thesister, stepbrother, or stepsister). age test, as long as one of the spouses does. Qualifying Child of
If neither you nor your spouse meets the age2. You were: Another Persontest, you cannot claim the EIC. Put ªNoº next to
a. Under age 19 at the end of the year and line 64a (Form 1040), line 41a (Form 1040A), or You are a qualifying child of another personyounger than that person (or that per- line 9a (Form 1040EZ). (your parent, guardian, foster parent, etc.) if allson's spouse, if the person files jointly),
of the following statements are true.Death of spouse. If you are filing a joint returnb. Under age 24 at the end of the year, a with your spouse who died in 2009, you meet thestudent, and younger than that person 1. You are that person's son, daughter,age test if your spouse was at least age 25 but(or that person's spouse, if the person stepchild, grandchild, or foster child. Or,under age 65 at the time of death. you are that person's brother, sister, halffiles jointly), or
brother, half sister, stepbrother, or stepsis-c. Permanently and totally disabled, re- Example 1. You are age 28 and unmarried. ter (or the child or grandchild of that per-gardless of age. You meet the age test. son's brother, sister, half brother, half
sister, stepbrother, or stepsister).3. You lived with that person in the United Example 2. You are married and filing a
States for more than half of the year. joint return. You are age 23 and your spouse is 2. You were:
Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit (EIC) Page 249

Page 252 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
a. Under age 19 at the end of the year and • Inmates. Amounts received for work per-
younger than that person (or that per- formed while an inmate in a penal institu-Part D. Figuring andson's spouse, if the person files jointly), tion are not earned income for the earned
income credit. This includes amounts re-b. Under age 24 at the end of the year, a Claiming the EIC ceived for work performed while in a workstudent (as defined in Rule 8), and
release program or while in a halfwayyounger than that person (or that per- Read this part if you have met all the rules in
house. If you received any amount forParts A and B, or all the rules in Parts A and C.son's spouse, if the person files jointly),
work done while an inmate in a penal insti-or Part D  discusses Rule 15.  You must meet tution and that amount is included in thethis rule, in addition to the rules in Parts A andB,c. Permanently and totally disabled, re- total on line 7 (Form 1040 or Form 1040A)or Parts A and C, to qualify for the earned in-gardless of age. or line 1 (Form 1040EZ), put ªPRIº and thecome credit.
amount on the dotted line next to line 73. You lived with that person in the United This part of the chapter also explains how to (Form 1040), in the space to the left of theStates for more than half of the year. figure the amount of your credit. You have two
entry space for line 7 (Form 1040A), or inchoices.4. You are not filing a joint return for the year the space to the left of line 1 (Form(or are filing a joint return only as a claim 1. Have the IRS figure the EIC for you. If you 1040EZ).for refund). want to do this, see IRS Will Figure the • Deferred compensation plans. A pen-EIC for You.For more details about the tests to be a sion or annuity from a nonqualified de-qualifying child, see Rule 8. 2. Figure the EIC yourself. If you want to do ferred compensation plan or athis, see How To Figure the EIC Yourself.If you (or your spouse if filing a joint return) nongovernmental section 457 plan is not
are a qualifying child of another person, you considered earned income for the earnedcannot claim the EIC. This is true even if the income credit. If you received such anRule 15. Your Earnedperson for whom you are a qualifying child does amount and it was included in the total onnot claim the EIC or meet all of the rules to claim Income Must Be Less line 7 (Form 1040 or Form 1040A) or linethe EIC. Put ªNoº next to line 64a (Form 1040), Than: 1 (Form 1040EZ), put ªDFCº and theline 41a (Form 1040A), or line 9a (Form amount on the dotted line next to line 71040EZ). (Form 1040), in the space to the left of the• $43,279 ($48,279 for married filing jointly)
if you have three or more qualifying chil- entry space for line 7 (Form 1040A), or inExample. You lived with your mother all dren, the space to the left of line 1 (Formyear. You are age 26, unmarried, and perma-
1040EZ). This amount may be reported innently and totally disabled. Your only income • $40,295 ($45,295 for married filing jointly)
box 11 of your Form W-2. If you receivedif you have two qualifying children,was from a community center where you went
such an amount but box 11 is blank, con-three days a week to answer telephones. You • $35,463 ($40,463 for married filing jointly) tact your employer for the amount re-earned $5,000 for the year and provided more if you have one qualifying child, or ceived as a pension or annuity.than half of your own support. Because you
• $13,440 ($18,440 for married filing jointly)meet the relationship, age, residency, and joint
if you do not have a qualifying child. Clergy. If you are a member of the clergyreturn tests, you are a qualifying child of your
who files Schedule SE and the amount on line 2mother for the EIC. She can claim the EIC if she Earned income generally means wages, sala- of that schedule includes an amount that wasmeets all the other requirements. Because you ries, tips, other taxable employee pay, and net also reported on line 7 (Form 1040), subtractare a qualifying child of your mother, you cannot earnings from self-employment. Employee pay that amount from the amount on line 7 (Formclaim the EIC. This is so even if your mother is earned income only if it is taxable. Nontaxable 1040) and enter the result in the first space ofcannot or does not claim the EIC. employee pay, such as certain dependent care
the worksheet in Step 5  of the Form 1040 in-benefits and adoption benefits, is not earned
structions for lines 64a and 64b. Put ªClergyº onincome. But there is an exception for nontaxableRule 14. You Must Have
the dotted line next to line 64a (Form 1040).combat pay, which you can choose to include inLived in the United States earned income. Earned income is explained in Church employees.  A church employeedetail in Rule 7.More Than Half of the Year means an employee (other than a minister or
member of a religious order) of a church orYour home (and your spouse's, if filing a joint Figuring earned income. If you are qualified church-controlled organization that isreturn) must have been in the United States for self-employed, a statutory employee, or a mem- exempt from employer social security and Medi-more than half the year. ber of the clergy or a church employee who files care taxes. If you received wages as a churchIf it was not, put ªNoº next to line 64a (Form Schedule SE (Form 1040), you will figure your employee and included any amount on both line1040), line 41a (Form 1040A), or line 9a (Form earned income when you fill out Part 4 of EIC 5a of Schedule SE and line 7 (Form 1040),1040EZ). Worksheet B in the Form 1040 instructions. subtract that amount from the amount on line 7
Otherwise, figure your earned income by us- (Form 1040) and enter the result in the first
ing the worksheet in Step 5 of the Form 1040United States. This means the 50 states and space of the worksheet in Step 5 of the Forminstructions for lines 64a and 64b or the Formthe District of Columbia. It does not include 1040 instructions for lines 64a and 64b.1040A instructions for lines 41a and 41b, or thePuerto Rico or U.S. possessions such as Guam.
worksheet in Step 2 of the Form 1040EZ instruc-
IRS Will Figuretions for lines 9a and 9b.
Homeless shelter. Your home can be any When using one of those worksheets to fig- the EIC for Youlocation where you regularly live. You do not ure your earned income, you will start with theneed a traditional home. If you lived in one or The IRS will figure your EIC for you if you followamount on line 7 (Form 1040 or Form 1040A) ormore homeless shelters in the United States for line 1 (Form 1040EZ). You will then reduce that the steps explained in this section.more than half the year, you meet this rule. amount by any amount included on that line and Do not ask the IRS to figure your EICdescribed in the following list. unless you are eligible for it. Read theMilitary personnel stationed outside the • Scholarship or fellowship grants not re- rules in Parts A, B, C, and D to see if
CAUTION
!
United States. U.S. military personnel sta- ported on a Form W-2. A scholarship or you qualify.
tioned outside the United States on extended fellowship grant that was not reported to
If you want the IRS to also figure theactive duty (defined in Rule 8), are considered to you on a Form W-2 is not considered
amount of your income tax, see chap-live in the United States during that duty period earned income for the earned income
ter 30.for purposes of the EIC. credit.
TIP
Page 250 Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit (EIC)

Page 253 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3. Complete all other parts of your return that 1. Go to your form instruction booklet andForm 1040
apply to you, but do not fill in lines 10, 12a, turn to the instructions for lines 9a and 9b
If you file Form 1040 and want the IRS to figure or 13. and look for the EIC Worksheet.
your credit for you, follow these steps. 2. Complete the EIC Worksheet according to
its instructions. Find the amount of your1. Put ªEICº on the dotted line next to line How To Figure the credit in the EIC Table in your form instruc-64a. Then, if you have any of the types of EIC Yourself tion booklet.income described earlier under Inmates,
Deferred compensation plans, or Clergy, 3. Enter the amount of your earned incomeTo figure the EIC yourself, use the EIC Work-
follow the instructions given there. credit from line 6 of the EIC Worksheet onsheet in the instructions for the form you are
Form 1040EZ, line 9a.using (Form 1040, Form 1040A, or Form2. If you received nontaxable combat pay and
1040EZ).are electing to include it in your earned 4. Keep the EIC Worksheet for your records.
Do not attach it to your income tax return.income for the EIC, enter the amount on Form 1040 and EIC Worksheet. If you file
line 64b. For details, see Nontaxable com- Form 1040 and want to figure the credit yourself,
bat pay election in Rule 7. follow these steps.
3. Complete all other parts of your return that 1. Go to your form instruction booklet and
apply to you (including line 59), but do not turn to the instructions for lines 64a and Examples
fill in lines 71, 72, 73a, and 75. If you do 64b, and look for Worksheet A or Work-
not have a qualifying child, stop here. sheet B. The following two comprehensive examples
(complete with filled-in forms) may be helpful.4. If you have a qualifying child, complete 2. Complete the EIC Worksheet that applies
Schedule EIC according to its instructions. to your situation according to its instruc- 1. John and Janet Smith, a married couple
tions. Complete Worksheet B if you wereBe sure to enter the child's social security with one qualifying child and using Formself-employed at anytime in 2009, a mem-number on line 2 of that schedule. If you 1040A.ber of the clergy or a church employeedo not, your credit may be reduced or dis- 2. Kelly Green, age 30, a student, with nowho files Schedule SE, or a statutory em-allowed. Attach Schedule EIC to your re- qualifying child and using Form 1040EZ.ployee filing Schedule C or C-EZ. Find theturn. amount of your credit in the EIC Table in
your instruction booklet.
Example 1. John and Janet3. Enter the amount of your earned incomeForm 1040A Smith (Form 1040A)credit from Worksheet A or B on Form
1040, line 64a.If you file Form 1040A and want the IRS to figure John and Janet Smith are married and will file ayour credit for you, follow these steps. 4. Keep the EIC Worksheet for your records. joint return. They have one child, Amy, who is 3
Do not attach it to your income tax return. years old. Amy lived with John and Janet for all1. Put ªEICº to the left of the entry space for If you do not have a qualifying child, stop of 2009. John worked and earned $9,500. Janetline 41a. Then, if you have any of the types here. worked part of the year and earned $1,500.of income described earlier under Inmates Their earned income and AGI are $11,000. John5. If you have a qualifying child, completeor Deferred compensation plans, follow the and Janet qualify for the earned income creditSchedule EIC according to its instructions.instructions given there. and fill out the EIC Worksheet and ScheduleBe sure to enter the child's social security
2. If you received nontaxable combat pay and EIC. The Smiths will attach Schedule EIC tonumber on line 2 of that schedule. If you
Form 1040A when they send their completedare electing to include it in your earned do not, your credit may be reduced or dis-
return to the IRS.income for the EIC, enter the amount on allowed. Attach Schedule EIC to your re-
turn.line 41b. For details, see Nontaxable com- They took the following steps to complete
Schedule EIC and the EIC Worksheet.bat pay election in Rule 7.
Form 1040A and EIC Worksheet. If you file3. Complete all other parts of your return that Form 1040A and want to figure the credit your-apply to you (including line 36), but do not self, follow these steps. Completing Schedule EICfill in lines 44, 45, 46a, and 48. If you do
not have a qualifying child, stop here. 1. Go to your form instruction booklet and The Smiths complete Schedule EIC because
turn to the instructions for lines 41a and they have a qualifying child. They enter ªJohn4. If you have a qualifying child, complete 41b, and look for the EIC Worksheet. and Janet Smithº and John's SSN (the SSN thatSchedule EIC according to its instructions. appears first on their Form 1040A) on the line at2. Complete the EIC Worksheet according toBe sure to enter the child's social security the top of Schedule EIC. The Smiths then fill outits instructions. Find the amount of yournumber on line 2 of that schedule. If you Qualifying Child Information (lines 1 ± 6).credit in the EIC Table in your form instruc-do not, your credit may be reduced or dis-
tion booklet. Line 1. The Smiths enter Amy's first nameallowed. Attach Schedule EIC to your re-
and last name in the column ªChild 1.ºturn. 3. Enter the amount of your earned income
credit from line 6 of the EIC Worksheet on Line 2. They enter Amy's SSN.
Form 1040A, line 41a. Line 3. They enter Amy's year of birth
4. Keep the EIC Worksheet for your records.Form 1040EZ (2006).
Do not attach it to your income tax return. Lines 4a and 4b. The Smiths skip lines 4aIf you file Form 1040EZ and want the IRS to If you do not have a qualifying child, stop
and 4b because Amy was born after 1990.figure your credit for you, follow these steps. here.
Line 5. The Smiths enter ªDaughter.º This5. If you have a qualifying child, complete1. Put ªEICº in the space to the left of line 9a. line shows Amy's relationship to John and Ja-Schedule EIC according to its instructions.Then if you have any of the types of in- net.Be sure to enter the child's social securitycome described earlier under Inmates or
number on line 2 of that schedule. If you Line 6. The Smiths enter ª12.º This is howDeferred compensation plans, follow the
do not, your credit may be reduced or dis- many months Amy lived with them in 2009.instructions given there. allowed. Attach Schedule EIC to your re-
2. If you received nontaxable combat pay and turn.
are electing to include it in your earned Completing the EIC Worksheetincome for the EIC, enter the amount on Form 1040EZ and EIC Worksheet. If you file
line 9b. For details, see Nontaxable com- Next, the Smiths will complete the EIC Work-Form 1040EZ and want to figure the credit your-
bat pay election in Rule 7. self, follow these steps. sheet to figure their earned income credit.
Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit (EIC) Page 251

Page 254 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Line 1. The Smiths enter $11,000 (their More than one employer. If you have more
earned income). than one employer, give a certificate to only oneAdvance Earned of them. If you are married and both you andLine 2. The Smiths go to the Earned Income your spouse are employed and expect to qualifyCredit Table in the Form 1040A instructions. Income Credit for the credit, you may give a Form W-5 to yourThe Smiths find their income of $11,000 within
employer and your spouse may give one to histhe range of $11,000 to $11,050. They follow Do you expect to be eligible for the EIC this year
or her employer.this line across to the column that describes their (2010) and to have a qualifying child? If so, you
filing status and number of children and find If you receive advance payments of EIC incan choose to get payments of the EIC in your
$3,043. They enter $3,043 on line 2. 2010, you must file a 2010 tax return (even if youpaycheck now instead of waiting to get your EIC
would not otherwise have to file) to report theall at once in 2011 when you file your tax returnLine 3. The Smiths enter their AGI of
payments and claim any additional EIC. Box 9 offor the year 2010. These payments are called$11,000.
your Form W-2 will show the amount you re-advance EIC payments. This part of the chapterLine 4. The Smiths check the ªYesº box ceived. See the instructions for Form 1040 orexplains how you may be able to get them thisbecause lines 1 and 3 are the same ($11,000). Form 1040A for the line number on which youyear and how to report them on your tax return.They skip line 5 and enter the amount from line 2 report advance payments of EIC.(3,043) on line 6. Who can get the advance payment of the
Line 6. The Smiths' EIC is $3,043. earned income credit? To get part of the Receipt of advance payments you do not
earned income credit paid to you throughout the qualify for. If you receive advance payments
year in your paycheck, you must meet all theExample 2. Kelly Green of EIC in 2010, and later find out that you are not
following rules. eligible for some or all of them, you still must(Form 1040EZ)
report them on your tax return.1. You must expect that your earned incomeKelly Green is age 30 and a full-time student. and AGI will each be less than $35,535 You cannot use Form 1040EZ to reportShe lived with her parents in the United States your advance payments. You must file($40,545 if you expect to file married filingfor all of 2009. She had a part-time job and Form 1040 or Form 1040A.jointly).
CAUTION
!earned $6,240. She earned $20 interest on a
2. You must expect to have a qualifying child.savings account. She is not eligible to be
claimed as a dependent on her parents' return. 3. You must expect to meet all the rules in When to give your employer a new Form W-5.Although she lived with her parents, she is not Parts A, B, and D of this chapter or in the The 2010 Form W-5 you give to your employer istheir qualifying child because she does not meet instructions for Form W-5. valid until December 31, 2010. If you expect tothe age test. She does not have any children.
be eligible for EIC in 2011 and you want toKelly qualifies for the earned income credit. The rules in Parts A, B, and D are receive advance payments, you must give yourKelly will file Form 1040EZ and complete the expected to be basically the same for employer a new Form W-5 in 2011. Do this eachEIC Worksheet. 2010, except that you will be allowed to
CAUTION
! year you expect to be eligible for the EIC.
have more earned income and more adjusted If you no longer want to get advance pay-gross income.Completing the EIC Worksheet ments or if your situation changes and you no
longer qualify for the earned income credit, youKelly figures the amount of her earned income Persons who are not entitled to receive ad- must give your employer a new Form W-5.credit on the EIC Worksheet as follows. vance payments. Under certain circum- Check the ªNoº box on line 1 of the new form.
stances, even if you meet these rules, you mayLine 1. She enters $6,240 (her earned in- If your spouse files a Form W-5 with his ornot be entitled to get advance EIC. If your wagescome). her employer, you must file a new Form W-5are not subject to federal income tax, social with your employer. Check the ªYesº box on lineLine 2. Kelly goes to the Earned Income security tax, or Medicare tax withholding, youCredit Table in the forms instruction booklet. 3.cannot get the advance payment of the earnedShe finds her earned income of $6,240 in the income credit. If you are a farm worker paid on arange of $6,200 to $6,250. Kelly follows this line Advance Payments daily basis, your employer is not required to payacross to the column that describes her filing you the advance amount of the credit.status and finds $457. She enters $457 on line Received in 2009
2.
If you received advance payments of EIC inHow To Get Advance Line 3. Kelly enters $6,260 (her AGI). 2009, you must file Form 1040 or Form 1040A to
Payments for 2010 report the payments. Your Form W-2, box 9, willLine 4. Kelly checks the ªNoº box because
lines 1 and 3 are not the same. show the amount you received. Report theIf you meet the rules under Who can get the amount on line 59 (Form 1040) or line 36 (FormLine 5. Kelly checks the ªYesº box because advance payment of the earned income credit , 1040A).the amount on line 3 ($6,260) is less than give your employer a Form W-5, Earned Income
$7,500. She leaves line 5 blank and enters the You cannot use Form 1040EZ to reportCredit Advance Payment Certificate, for 2010.
amount from line 2, $457, on line 6. your advance payments.After you have read the instructions and
CAUTION
!
completed Form W-5, give the lower part of theLine 6. She enters $457 here and on Form
form to your employer. Keep the top part for your1040EZ, line 9a. Kelly's earned income credit is
records.$457.
Page 252 Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit (EIC)

Page 255 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
SCHEDULE EIC  
(Form 1040A or 1040) 
Department of the Treasury  
Internal Revenue Service (99) 
Earned Income Credit
Qualifying Child Information
Complete and attach to Form 1040A or 1040   
                  only if you have a qualifying child. 
1040A 
. . . . . . . . . . 
1040 
EIC 
`
OMB No. 1545-0074
2009
Attachment   
Sequence No. 43
Name(s) shown on return Your social security number 
Before you begin: 
F!
CAUTION
• See the instructions for Form 1040A, lines 41a and 41b, or Form 1040, lines 64a and 64b, to make 
sure that (a) you can take the EIC, and (b) you have a qualifying child. 
• Be sure the child’s name on line 1 and social security number (SSN) on line 2 agree with the child’s social security card. 
Otherwise, at the time we process your return, we may reduce or disallow your EIC. If the name or SSN on the child’s 
social security card is not correct, call the Social Security Administration at 1-800-772-1213.  
• If you take the EIC even though you are not eligible, you may not be allowed to take the credit for up to 10 years. See back of schedule 
for details. 
• It will take us longer to process your return and issue your refund if you do not fill in all lines that apply for each qualifying child. 
Qualifying Child Information Child 1 Child 2 Child 3
1   Child’s name 
If you have more than three qualifying 
children, you only have to list three to get 
the maximum credit. 
First name Last name First name Last name First name Last name 
2   Child’s SSN 
The child must have an SSN as defined on 
page 45 of the Form 1040A instructions or 
page 51 of the Form 1040 instructions 
unless the child was born and died in 
2009. If your child was born and died in 
2009 and did not have an SSN, enter 
“Died” on this line and attach a copy of 
the child’s birth certificate, death 
certificate, or hospital medical records. 
3   Child’s year of birth 
Year 
If born after 1990 and the child was younger than you 
(or your spouse, if filing jointly), skip lines 4a and 4b; 
go to line 5. 
Year 
If born after 1990 and the child was younger than you 
(or your spouse, if filing jointly), skip lines 4a and 4b; 
go to line 5. 
Year 
If born after 1990 and the child was younger than you 
(or your spouse, if filing jointly), skip lines 4a and 4b; 
go to line 5. 
4 a Was the child under age 24 at the end of 
2009, a student, and younger than you (or 
your spouse, if filing jointly)? 
Yes.
Go to line 5. 
No.
Continue. 
Yes.
Go to line 5. 
No.
Continue. 
Yes.
Go to line 5. 
No.
Continue. 
b Was the child permanently and totally 
disabled during any part of 2009? 
Yes.
Continue. 
No.
The child is not a  
qualifying child. 
Yes.
Continue. 
No.
The child is not a  
qualifying child. 
Yes.
Continue. 
No.
The child is not a  
qualifying child. 
5   Child’s relationship to you 
(for example, son, daughter, grandchild,  
niece, nephew, foster child, etc.) 
6   Number of months child lived 
with you in the United States 
during 2009 
• If the child lived with you for more than 
half of  2009 but less than 7 months,  
enter “7.” 
• If the child was born or died in 2009 and 
your  home was the child’s home for the 
entire time he or she was alive during  
2009, enter “12.” 
months 
Do not enter more than 12 
months. 
months 
Do not enter more than 12 
months. 
months 
Do not enter more than 12 
months. 
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see Form 1040A   
or 1040 instructions. 
Cat. No. 13339M Schedule EIC (Form 1040A or 1040) 2009 
John and Janet Smith 222-00-2222
Amy Smith
000-00-2223
200 6
daughter
12
Size: Width = 44.0 picas, Depth = 46.0
Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit (EIC) Page 253

Page 256 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
EPS File Name: 10311G69 Size: Width = 44.0 picas, Depth = page
11,000
3,043
11,000
3,043
EIC Worksheet _ line 41 Cat. 12088U07
Earned Income Credit (EIC) Worksheet—Lines 41a and 41b
1040A
Skip line 5; enter the amount from line 2 on line 6.Yes.
STOP
Keep for Your Records
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
1Enter your earned income from Step 5 on
page 44.
Look up the amount on line 1 in the EIC Table on pages 47–63 to
find the credit. Be sure you use the correct column for your filing
status and the number of children you have. Enter the credit here.
Enter the amount from Form 1040A, line 22.
Are the amounts on lines 3 and 1 the same?
Go to line 5.No.
If you have:
Leave line 5 blank; enter the amount from line 2 on line 6.Yes.
No. Look up the amount on line 3 in the EIC Table on
pages 47–63 to find the credit. Be sure you use the correct
column for your filing status and the number of children you
have. Enter the credit here.
Enter this amount on
Form 1040A, line 41a.
3
6Part 3
Part 1
Part 2
All Filers
Filers Who
Answered
“No” on
Line 4
Your Earned
Income Credit
2
Enter “No” to the left of the entry space for line 41a.
If line 2 is zero, You cannot take the credit.
● No qualifying children, is the amount on line 3 less than $7,500
($12,500 if married filing jointly)?
● 1 or more qualifying children, is the amount on line 3 less than $16,450
($21,450 if married filing jointly)?
Look at the amounts on lines 5 and 2.
Then, enter the smaller amount on line 6.
5
6. This is your earned income credit.
Reminder—
If you have a qualifying child, complete and attach
Schedule EIC.
If your EIC for a year after 1996 was reduced or disallowed, see
page 44 to find out if you must file Form 8862 to take the credit
for 2009.
/H12011
/H17076
/H17076
EIC
1040A
CAUTION
/H12011
Page 254 Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit (EIC)

STOP
CAUTION
!
Page 257 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Earned Income Credit (EIC) WorksheetÐLines 9a and 9b Keep for Your Records
1. Enter your earned income from Step 2 on page 13 ......................... . 1. 6,240
2. Look up the amount on line 1 above in the EIC Table on page 16 to find the credit. Be sure you use the correct
column for your filing status (Single or Married filing jointly).
Enter the credit here ................................................................ . 2. 457
If line 2 is zero, 
STOP You cannot take the credit. Enter ªNoº in the space to the left of line 9a.
3. Enter the amount from Form 1040EZ, line 4 .............................. . 3. 6,260
4. Are the amounts on lines 3 and 1 the same?
Yes.  Skip line 5; enter the amount from line 2 on line 6.
ú No. Go to line 5.
5. Is the amount on line 3 less than $7,500 ($12,500 if married filing jointly)?
ú Yes.  Leave line 5 blank; enter the amount from line 2 on line 6.
No. Look up the amount on line 3 in the EIC Table on page 16 to find the credit. Be sure you use the correct
column for your filing status (Single or Married filing jointly).
Enter the credit here ........................................................ . 5.
Look at the amounts on lines 5 and 2. Then, enter the smaller amount on line 6.
6. Earned income credit. Enter this amount on Form 1040EZ, line 9a ............................... . 6. 457
If your EIC for a year after 1996 was reduced or disallowed, see above to find out if you must file Form
8862 to take the credit for 2009.
CAUTION
!
Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit (EIC) Page 255

Page 258 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
EIC Eligibility Checklist Keep for Your Records
You may claim the EIC if you answer ªYesº to all the following questions.*
Yes No
1. Is your AGI less than: M M
• $13,440 ($18,440 for married filing jointly) if you do not have a qualifying child,
• $35,463 ($40,463 for married filing jointly) if you have one qualifying child,
• $40,295 ($45,295 for married filing jointly) if you have two qualifying children, or
• $43,279 ($48,279 for married filing jointly) if you have more than two qualifying children?
(See Rule 1.)
2. Do you, your spouse, and your qualifying child each have a valid SSN? (See Rule 2.) M M
3. Is your filing status married filing jointly, head of household, qualifying widow(er), or single? M M
(See Rule 3.)
Caution: If you or your spouse is a nonresident alien, answer ªYesº only if your filing status is married
filing jointly. (See Rule 4.)
4. Answer ªYesº if you are not filing Form 2555 or Form 2555-EZ. Otherwise, answer ªNo.º M M
(See Rule 5.)
5. Is your investment income $3,100 or less? (See Rule 6.) M M
6. Is your total earned income at least $1 but less than: M M
• $13,440 ($18,440 for married filing jointly) if you do not have a qualifying child,
• $35,463 ($40,463 for married filing jointly) if you have one qualifying child,
• $40,295 ($45,295 for married filing jointly) if you have two qualifying children, or
• $43,279 ($48,279 for married filing jointly) if you have more than two qualifying children?
(See Rules 7 and 15.)
7. Answer ªYesº if you (and your spouse if filing a joint return) are not a qualifying child of another person. M M
Otherwise, answer ªNo.º (See Rules 10 and 13.)
STOP: If you have a qualifying child, answer questions 8 and 9 and skip 10 ± 12. If you do not
have a qualifying child, skip questions 8 and 9 and answer 10 ± 12.*
8. Does your child meet the relationship, age, residency, and joint return tests for a qualifying child? M M
(See Rule 8.)
9. Is your child a qualifying child only for you? Answer ªYesº if (a) your qualifying child does not meet the M M
tests to be a qualifying child of any other person or (b) your qualifying child meets the tests to be a
qualifying child of another person but you are the person entitled to treat the child as a qualifying child
under the tiebreaker rules explained in Rule 9. Answer ªNoº if the other person is the one entitled to treat
the child as a qualifying child under the tiebreaker rules.
10. Were you (or your spouse if filing a joint return) at least age 25 but under 65 at the end of 2009? M M
(See Rule 11.)
11. Answer ªYesº if you (and your spouse if filing a joint return) cannot be claimed as a dependent on anyone M M
else's return. Answer ªNoº if you (or your spouse if filing a joint return) can be claimed as a dependent on
someone else's return. (See Rule 12.)
12. Was your main home (and your spouse's if filing a joint return) in the United States for more than half the M M
year? (See Rule 14.)
* PERSONS WITH A QUALIFYING CHILD: If you answered ªYesº to questions 1 through 9, you can claim the EIC.
Remember to fill out Schedule EIC and attach it to your Form 1040 or Form 1040A. You cannot use Form 1040EZ. If you
answered ªYesº to questions 1 through 7 and ªNoº to question 8, answer questions 10 through 12 to see if you can claim
the EIC without a qualifying child.
PERSONS WITHOUT A QUALIFYING CHILD: If you answered ªYesº to questions 1 through 7, and 10 through 12, you
can claim the EIC.
If you answered ªNoº to any question that applies to you: You cannot claim the EIC.
Page 256 Chapter 36 Earned Income Credit (EIC)

Page 259 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
maximum wages subject to these taxes in- credits that are treated as payments and are
refundable to you. These credits are added tocreased to $106,800 in 2009. The withholding
the federal income tax withheld and any esti-rate of tier 2 RRTA is 3.9% of wages in 2009.
37. mated tax payments you made. If this total isThe maximum wages subject to this tax in-
more than your total tax, the excess will becreased to $79,200 in 2009. If you had too much
refunded to you.social security or RRTA tax withheld during
2009, you may be entitled to a credit of theOther Credits excess withholding. For more information about Useful Items
the credit, see Credit for Excess Social Security You may want to see:Tax or Railroad Retirement Tax Withheld under
Refundable Credits, later. PublicationWhat's New
❏ 502 Medical and Dental Expenses
Making work pay credit. You may be able to (Including the Health Coverage Tax
take this credit if you have earned income from Credit)
Introductionwork. The credit can be as much as $400 ($800
❏ 514 Foreign Tax Credit for if married filing jointly). See Making Work Pay This chapter discusses the following nonrefund- IndividualsCredit for more information. able credits.
❏ 530 Tax Information for First-TimeGovernment retiree credit. You may be able • Adoption credit. Homeownersto take this credit if you received a government • Alternative motor vehicle credit. ❏ 590 Individual Retirement Arrangementspension or annuity payment in 2009. However,
(IRAs)the amount of this credit reduces any making • Alternative fuel vehicle refueling property
work pay credit. See Government Retiree Credit credit.
Form (and Instructions)for more information. • Credit to holders of tax credit bonds.
❏ 1116 Foreign Tax Credit (Individual,Adoption credit. The maximum adoption • Foreign tax credit. Estate, or Trust)credit increases to $12,150. See Adoption
• Mortgage interest credit.Credit for more information. ❏ 2439 Notice to Shareholder of
Undistributed Long-Term Capital• Nonrefundable credit for prior year mini-First-time homebuyer credit. The credit in- Gainsmum tax.creases to a maximum of $8,000 ($4,000 if mar-
❏ 5405 First-Time Homebuyer Creditried filing separately) for homes bought after • Plug-in electric drive motor vehicle credit.
2008 and before May 1, 2010 (before July 1, ❏ 5695 Residential Energy Credits• Plug-in electric vehicle credit.2010, if you entered into a written binding con-
❏ 8396 Mortgage Interest Credittract before May 1, 2010). If you bought the • Residential energy credits.
home after November 6, 2009, you may be able ❏ 8801 Credit For Prior Year Minimum Tax• Retirement savings contributions credit.to claim the credit even if you already owned a Ð Individuals, Estates, and Trustshome but, in that case, the maximum credit is This chapter also discusses the following re- ❏ 8828 Recapture of Federal Mortgage$6,500 ($3,250 if married filing separately). You fundable credits. Subsidycan choose to claim the credit on your 2009
return for a main home you bought in 2010 that • Credit for tax on undistributed capital gain. ❏ 8834 Qualified Plug-in Electric andqualifies for the credit. You will not have to repay Electric Vehicle Credit• First-time homebuyer credit.the credit for a home you bought in 2009 or 2010
❏ 8839 Qualified Adoption Expensesif you use it as your main home for the entire • Health coverage tax credit.
36-month period beginning on the purchase ❏ 8880 Credit for Qualified Retirement• Making work pay credit.date. But you generally must repay any credit Savings Contributionsyou claimed for a home you bought in 2008 and • Government retiree credit.
❏ 8885 Health Coverage Tax Creditsold in 2009. See First-Time Homebuyer Credit • Refundable credit for prior year minimumfor more information. ❏ 8910 Alternative Motor Vehicle Credittax.
Residential energy credits. The nonbusi- ❏ 8911 Alternative Fuel Vehicle Refueling• Credit for excess social security tax or rail-ness energy property credit has been reinstated Property Creditroad retirement tax withheld.for qualified property placed in service in 2009.
❏ 8912 Credit to Holders of Tax CreditThe credit is limited to $1,500. See Residential Several other credits are discussed in other BondsEnergy Credits for more information. chapters in this publication.
❏ 8936 Qualified Plug-in Electric DriveElectric vehicle credits. You may be able to • Child and dependent care credit (chapter Motor Vehicle Credittake a credit for: 32).
• A plug-in electric drive motor vehicle • Credit for the elderly or the disabled
placed in service in 2009. See Plug-in (chapter 33).
Electric Drive Motor Vehicle Credit for • Child tax credit (chapter 34). Nonrefundable Creditsmore information.
• Education credits (chapter 35).• A plug-in electric vehicle bought after Feb- The credits discussed in this part of the chapterruary 17, 2009. See Plug-in Electric Vehi- • Earned income credit (chapter 36). can reduce your tax. However, if the total ofcle Credit for more information. these credits is more than your tax, the excess is
not refunded to you.• Conversion of a vehicle to a plug-in elec- Nonrefundable credits. The first part of this
tric drive motor vehicle placed in service chapter, Nonrefundable Credits, covers eleven
after February 17, 2009. See Alternative credits that you subtract from your tax. These Adoption CreditMotor Vehicle Credit for more information. credits may reduce your tax to zero. If these
credits are more than your tax, the excess is not You may be able to take a tax credit of up to
refunded to you.Excess withholding of social security tax $12,150 for qualified expenses paid to adopt an
and railroad retirement tax. Social security eligible child. The credit may be allowed for the
Refundable credits. The second part of thistax and tier 1 railroad retirement (RRTA) tax are adoption of a child with special needs even if you
chapter, Refundable Credits, covers sevenboth withheld at a rate of 6.2% of wages. The do not have any qualified expenses.
Chapter 37 Other Credits Page 257

Page 260 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If your modified adjusted gross income (AGI) When to take the credit. Generally, until the How to take the credit. To take the credit, you
adoption becomes final, you take the credit in must complete Form 8910 and attach it to youris more than $182,180, your credit is reduced. If
the year after your qualified expenses were paid Form 1040. Include the credit in your total foryour modified AGI is $222,180 or more, you
or incurred. If the adoption becomes final, you Form 1040, line 53. Check box c and entercannot take the credit.
take the credit in the year your expenses were ª8910º on the line next to box c.
paid or incurred. See the instructions for FormQualified adoption expenses. Qualified More information. For more information on8839 for more specific information on when toadoption expenses are reasonable and neces- the credit, see the instructions for Form 8910.take the credit.sary expenses directly related to, and whose
principal purpose is for, the legal adoption of an Foreign child. If the child is not a U.S. citi-
Alternative Fuel Vehicleeligible child. These expenses include: zen or resident at the time the adoption process
began, you cannot take the credit unless the Refueling Property Credit• Adoption fees, adoption becomes final. You treat all adoption
• Court costs, expenses paid or incurred in years before the You may be able to take a credit if you place
adoption becomes final as paid or incurred in the qualified alternative fuel vehicle refueling prop-• Attorney fees, year it becomes final. erty in service in 2009.
• Travel expenses (including amounts spent
How to take the credit. To take the credit, youfor meals and lodging) while away from Qualified alternative fuel vehicle refueling
must complete Form 8839 and attach it to your property. Qualified alternative fuel vehicle re-home, and
Form 1040. Include the credit in your total for fueling property is any property (other than a• Re-adoption expenses to adopt a foreign Form 1040, line 52, and check box b on that line. building or its structural components) used tochild. store or dispense alternative fuel into the fuel
tank of a motor vehicle propelled by the fuel, but. Alternative Motor Vehicle
only if the storage or dispensing is at the pointNonqualified expenses. Qualified adop- Credit where the fuel is delivered into the tank.tion expenses do not include expenses: The following are alternative fuels.You may be able to take a credit if you place an• That violate state or federal law, • Any fuel at least 85% of the volume ofalternative motor vehicle in service in 2009.
which consists of one or more of the fol-• For carrying out any surrogate parenting
Alternative motor vehicle. An alternative lowing: ethanol, natural gas, compressedarrangement,
motor vehicle is a new vehicle that qualifies as natural gas, liquefied natural gas, liquefied• For the adoption of your spouse's child, one of the following four types of vehicles. petroleum gas, or hydrogen.
• For which you received funds under any • Qualified hybrid vehicle. • Any mixture which consists of two or more
federal, state, or local program, of the following: biodiesel, diesel fuel, or• Advanced lean burn technology vehicle. kerosene, and at least 20% of the volume• Allowed as a credit or deduction under any
• Qualified alternative fuel vehicle. of which consists of biodiesel determinedother federal income tax rule,
without regard to any kerosene.• Qualified fuel cell vehicle.• Paid or reimbursed by your employer or
• Electricity.any other person or organization, or The credit is also allowed for the cost of con-
verting a vehicle to a qualified plug-in electric• Paid before 1997. drive vehicle placed in service after February 17, Amount of the credit. For personal use prop-
2009. erty, the credit is generally the smaller of 50% of
Eligible child. The term ªeligible childº means the property's cost or $2,000. For business use
any individual: Amount of credit. Generally, you can rely on property, the credit is generally the smaller of
the manufacturer's (or, in the case of a foreign 50% of the property's cost or $50,000. The• Under 18 years old, or manufacturer, its domestic distributor's) certifi- amounts are different for hydrogen refueling
• Physically or mentally incapable of caring cation that a specific make, model, and model property.
for himself or herself. year vehicle qualifies for the credit and the maxi-
How to take the credit. To take the credit, youmum amount of the credit for which it qualifies.
must complete Form 8911 and attach it to yourChild with special needs. An eligible child Ordinarily the amount of the credit is 100% of
Form 1040. Include the credit in your total foris a child with special needs if all three of the the manufacturer's (or domestic distributor's)
Form 1040, line 53. Check box c and entercertification of the maximum credit allowable.following apply.
ª8911º on the line next to box c.However, the credit for converting a vehicle to a
1. The child was a citizen or resident of the qualified plug-in electric drive vehicle is the
More information. For more information onUnited States (including U.S. possessions) smaller of (a) $4,000, or (b) 10% of the cost of
the credit, see the instructions for Form 8911.at the time the adoption process began. the conversion.
If you purchased a qualified hybrid vehicle2. A state (including the District of Columbia) weighing 8,500 pounds or less or an advanced Credit to Holders of Taxhas determined that the child cannot or lean burn technology vehicle from a manufac-should not be returned to his or her par- Credit Bondsturer who previously sold at least 60,000 ofents' home. these vehicles, the amount of your credit may be You may be able to take a credit if you are areduced. Your manufacturer should give you the3. The state has determined that the child will holder of a tax credit bond. Tax credit bondsinformation you need to figure your phaseoutnot be adopted unless assistance is pro- include:percentage. Also see the Form 8910 instruc-vided to the adoptive parents. Factors
tions. • Clean renewable energy bonds,used by states to make this determination
include: No 2009 credit is allowed for Toyota, • Gulf tax credit bonds,
Lexus, and Honda advanced lean burna. The child's ethnic background, • Qualified energy conservation bonds,technology vehicles and hybrid vehi-
CAUTION
!
b. The child's age, cles weighing 8,500 pounds or less. For certain • Midwestern tax credit bonds,
other vehicles the credit is reduced. See thec. Whether the child is a member of a mi- • Qualified forestry conservation bonds,Form 8910 instructions.nority or sibling group, and • Qualified school construction bonds,
d. Whether the child has a medical condi- Recapture of credit. If the vehicle no longer • Qualified zone academy bonds, andtion or a physical, mental, or emotional qualifies for the credit, you may have to recap-
handicap. ture part or all of the credit. • Build America bonds.
Page 258 Chapter 37 Other Credits

Page 261 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The issuers do not pay interest on these types qualify, you can take the credit each year for part loan. See Publication 523, Selling Your Home,
of bonds (except build America bonds). Instead of the home mortgage interest you pay. for more information.
of receiving interest, the bondholders qualify to Who qualifies. You may be eligible for theclaim a tax credit. Nonrefundable Credit forcredit if you were issued a qualified mortgage
credit certificate (MCC)  from your state or localInterest income. The amount of any tax credit Prior Year Minimum Taxgovernment. Generally, an MCC is issued onlyallowed (figured before applying tax liability lim-
in connection with a new mortgage for the The tax laws give special treatment to someits) must be included as interest income on your
purchase of your main home. kinds of income and allow special deductionstax return.
and credits for some kinds of expenses. If youAmount of credit. Figure your credit on FormHow to take the credit. Complete Form 8912 benefit from these laws, you may have to pay at8396. If your mortgage loan amount is equal toand attach it to your Form 1040. Include the least a minimum amount of tax in addition to any(or smaller than) the certified indebtednesscredit in your total for Form 1040, line 53. Check other tax on these items. This is called the alter-(loan) amount shown on your MCC, enter onbox c, and enter ª8912º on the line next to box c. native minimum tax.Form 8396, line 1, all the interest you paid on The special treatment of some items of in-your mortgage during the year.More information. For more information, see come and expenses only allows you to postponeIf your mortgage loan amount is larger thanthe instructions for Form 8912. paying tax until a later year. If in prior years youthe certified indebtedness amount shown on paid alternative minimum tax because of theseyour MCC, you can figure the credit on only part tax postponement items, you may be able toForeign Tax Credit of the interest you paid. To find the amount to take a credit for prior year minimum tax againstenter on line 1, multiply the total interest you your current year's regular tax.You generally can choose to take income taxes paid during the year on your mortgage by the You may be able to take a credit against youryou paid or accrued during the year to a foreign following fraction. regular tax if for 2008 you had:country or U.S. possession as a credit against
your U.S. income tax. Or, you can deduct them • An alternative minimum tax liability andas an itemized deduction (see chapter 22). Certified indebtedness adjustments or preferences other than ex-You cannot take a credit (or deduction) for amount on your MCC clusion items,foreign income taxes paid on income that you
Original amount of your • A minimum tax credit that you are carryingexclude from U.S. tax under any of the following.
mortgage forward to 2009, or
1. Foreign earned income exclusion.
• An unallowed qualified electric vehicleLimit based on credit rate. If the certificate2. Foreign housing exclusion. credit.credit rate is more than 20%, the credit you are
3. Income from Puerto Rico exempt from allowed cannot be more than $2,000. If two or
U.S. tax. more persons (other than a married couple filing Refundable credit. If you have any unused
a joint return) hold an interest in the home to minimum tax credit carryforward from 2006 or4. Possession exclusion. which the MCC relates, this $2,000 limit must be earlier years, you may qualify for a refund of that
divided based on the interest held by each per- credit amount. For more information, see Re-Limit on the credit. Unless you can elect not son. See Publication 530 for more information. fundable Credit for Prior Year Minimum Tax ,to file Form 1116 (see Exception, later), your later.Carryforward. Your credit (after applying theforeign tax credit cannot be more than your U.S.
limit based on the credit rate) is also subject to atax liability (Form 1040, line 44), multiplied by a How to take the credit. Figure your 2009
limit based on your tax that is figured using Formfraction. The numerator of the fraction is your nonrefundable credit (if any), and any carryfor-
8396. If your allowable credit is reduced be-taxable income from sources outside the United ward to 2010 on Form 8801, and attach it to your
cause of this tax liability limit, you can carryStates. The denominator is your total taxable Form 1040. Include the credit in your total for
forward the unused portion of the credit to theincome from U.S. and foreign sources. See Pub- Form 1040, line 53, and check box b. You can
next 3 years or until used, whichever comes first.lication 514 for more information. carry forward any unused credit for prior year
If you are subject to the $2,000 limit because minimum tax to later years until it is completely
How to take the credit. Complete Form 1116 your certificate credit rate is more than 20%, you used.
and attach it to your Form 1040. Enter the credit cannot carry forward any amount more than
on Form 1040, line 47. $2,000 (or your share of the $2,000 if you must More information. For more information
divide the credit). about the credit, see the instructions for FormException. You do not have to complete 8801.Form 1116 to take the credit if all of the following How to take the credit. Figure your 2009
apply. credit and any carryforward to 2010 on Form
Plug-in Electric Drive8396, and attach it to your Form 1040. Be sure• All of your foreign source gross income to include any credit carryforward from 2006, Motor Vehicle Creditwas passive income, which generally in- 2007, and 2008.cludes interest and dividends. Include the credit in your total for Form 1040, You may be able to take this credit if you placed• All of your foreign source gross income line 52, and check box a. in service for business or personal use a quali-and the foreign tax paid on it were re- fied plug-in electric drive motor vehicle in 2009.Reduced home mortgage interest deduction.ported to you on a qualified payee state-
If you itemize your deductions on Schedule Ament, which includes Form 1099-INT and Amount of credit. The amount of the credit(Form 1040), you must reduce your home mort-Form 1099-DIV. varies depending on the battery capacity andgage interest deduction by the amount of the vehicle weight limitations and ranges from• The total of your creditable foreign taxes mortgage interest credit shown on Form 8396, $2,500 to $15,000.was not more than $300 ($600 if married line 3. You must do this even if part of that
filing jointly). amount is to be carried forward to 2010. For Qualified vehicle. A qualified plug-in electric
more information about the home mortgage in- drive motor vehicle is a new vehicle that:• You elect this procedure for the tax year.
terest deduction, see chapter 23. • Draws propulsion using a traction batteryFor more details on these requirements, see Recapture of federal mortgage subsidy. If with at least 4 kilowatts of capacity, andthe instructions for Form 1116. you received an MCC with your mortgage loan, • Uses an offboard source of energy toyou may have to recapture (pay back) all or part recharge the battery.of the benefit you received from that program.Mortgage Interest Credit
The recapture may be required if you sell or
The mortgage interest credit is intended to help dispose of your home at a gain during the first 9 How to take the credit. To take the credit, you
lower-income individuals own a home. If you years after the date you closed your mortgage must complete Form 8936 and attach it to your
Chapter 37 Other Credits Page 259

Page 262 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form 1040. Include the credit in your total for The credit is limited to a total of $1,500 for However, you cannot take the credit if either of
Form 1040, line 53. Check box c and enter the following applies.2009 and 2010.
ª8936º on the line next to box c. Qualified energy efficiency improvements 1. The amount on Form 1040, line 38, orare the following improvements that are new, Form 1040A, line 22, is more than $27,750can be expected to remain in use at least 5Plug-in Electric Vehicle ($41,625 if head of household; $55,500 ifyears, and meet certain requirements for energy married filing jointly).Credit efficiency.
2. The person(s) who made the qualified con-• Any insulation material or system that isYou may be able to take this credit if you ac- tribution or elective deferral (a) was bornspecifically and primarily designed to re-quired a qualified plug-in electric vehicle after after January 1, 1992, (b) is claimed as aduce heat loss or gain of a home.February 17, 2009. A qualified vehicle can have dependent on someone else's 2009 tax re-2, 3, or 4 wheels. A vehicle with 4 wheels must • Exterior windows (including skylights). turn, or (c) was a student (defined next).be a low speed vehicle.
• Exterior doors.
Student. You were a student if during any partAmount of credit. The credit is 10% of the • Any metal or asphalt roof that has appro- of 5 calendar months of 2009 you:cost of the vehicle, limited to $2,500 per vehicle. priate pigmented coatings or cooling gran-
• Were enrolled as a full-time student at aules specifically and primarily designed toQualified vehicle. A qualified plug-in electric school, orreduce heat gain of the home.vehicle is a motor vehicle the original use of
which starts with you and that: • Took a full-time, on-farm training courseResidential energy property is any of the fol- given by a school or a state, county, orlowing.1. Is acquired for your use or lease and not local government agency.for resale, • Certain heat pump water heaters; electric
School. A school includes a technical,heat pumps; central air conditioners; natu-2. Is made by a manufacturer,
trade, or mechanical school. It does not includeral gas, propane, or oil water heaters; and3. Is manufactured primarily for use on public an on-the-job training course, correspondencestoves that use biomass fuel.streets, roads, and highways, school, or school offering courses only through• Qualified natural gas, propane, or oil fur- the Internet.4. Has a gross vehicle weight rating of less naces; and qualified natural gas, propane,than 3,000 pounds if it has 4 wheels and or oil hot water boilers. How to take the credit. Figure the credit onless than 14,000 pounds if it has 2 or 3
Form 8880. Enter the credit on your Form 1040,• Certain advanced main air circulating fanswheels,
line 50, or your Form 1040A, line 32, and attachused in natural gas, propane, or oil fur-5. Is a low speed vehicle if it has 4 wheels, Form 8880 to your return.naces.and
6. Is propelled to a significant extent by an Residential energy efficient property credit.electric motor that draws electricity from a You may be able to take a credit of 30% of yourbattery that: Refundable Creditscosts of qualified solar electric property, solar
water heating property, fuel cell property, smalla. Has a capacity of at least 4 kilowatt The credits discussed in this part of the chapterwind energy property, and geothermal heathours (2.5 kilowatt hours in the case of are treated as payments of tax. If the total ofpump property. The credit amount for costs paida vehicle with 2 or 3 wheels), and these credits, withheld federal income tax, andfor qualified fuel cell property is limited to $500
estimated tax payments is more than your totalb. Is capable of being recharged from an for each one-half kilowatt of capacity of the prop-
tax, the excess can be refunded to you.external source of electricity. erty.
Basis reduction. You must reduce the basis Credit for Tax onHow to take the credit. To take the credit, you of your home by the amount of any credit al-must complete Form 8834 and attach it to your Undistributed Capital Gainlowed.Form 1040. Include the credit in your total for
You must include in your income any amountsForm 1040, line 53. Check box c and enter How to take the credit. Complete Form 5695 that regulated investment companies (com-ª8834º on the line next to box c. and attach it to your Form 1040. Enter the credit monly called mutual funds) or real estate invest-
on Form 1040, line 52, and check box c. ment trusts (REITs) allocated to you as capitalResidential Energy Credits gain distributions, even if you did not actually
More information. For more information on receive them. If the mutual fund or REIT paid aYou may be able to take one or both of the this credit, see the instructions for Form 5695. tax on the capital gain, you are allowed a creditfollowing credits if you made energy saving im- for the tax since it is considered paid by you. Theprovements to your home located in the United mutual fund or REIT will send you Form 2439,States in 2009. Retirement Savings Notice to Shareholder of Undistributed
• Nonbusiness energy property credit. Contributions Credit Long-Term Capital Gains, showing your share
of the undistributed capital gains and the tax(Saver's Credit)• Residential energy efficient property paid, if any. Take the credit for the tax paid bycredit. entering the amount on Form 1040, line 70, andYou may be able to take this credit if you, or your
checking box a. Attach Copy B of Form 2439 tospouse if filing jointly, made:If you are a member of a condominium man- your return. See Capital Gain Distributions  inagement association for a condominium you • Contributions (other than rollover contribu- chapter 8 for more information on undistributedown or a tenant-stockholder in a cooperative tions) to a traditional or Roth IRA, capital gains. housing corporation, you are treated as having
• Elective deferrals to a 401(k) or 403(b)paid your proportionate share of any costs of the
plan (including designated Roth contribu-association or corporation for purposes of these First-Time Homebuyer
tions) or to a governmental 457, SEP, orcredits. CreditSIMPLE plan,
Nonbusiness energy property credit. You • Voluntary employee contributions to a In general, you can claim this credit if:may be able to take a credit of 30% of the costs qualified retirement plan (including the fed-paid or incurred in 2009 for any qualified energy • You bought your main home in the Unitederal Thrift Savings Plan), orefficiency improvements and any residential en- States after 2008 and before May 1, 2010
• Contributions to a 501(c)(18)(D) plan.ergy property. (before July 1, 2010, if you entered into a
Page 260 Chapter 37 Other Credits

Page 263 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
written binding contract before May 1, 7. You acquired your home from a related Repayment of credit. If you bought the home
2010), and person. A related person includes: in 2009 or 2010, you generally must repay the
credit if you dispose of the home or the home• You (and your spouse, if married) did not a. Your spouse, ancestors (parents, stops being your main home within theown any other main home during the grandparents, etc.), or lineal descend- 36-month period beginning on the purchase3-year period ending on the date of ants (children, grandchildren, etc.). date. This includes situations where you sell thepurchase.
b. Your spouse's ancestors or lineal de- home, you convert it to business or rental prop-No credit is allowed for a home bought after April scendants if you are married and erty, the home is destroyed, condemned, or dis-30, 2010 (after June 30, 2010, if you entered into bought your home after November 6, posed of under threat of condemnation, or thea written binding contract before May 1, 2010). 2009. lender forecloses on the mortgage. You repay
the credit by including it as additional tax on thec. A corporation in which you directly orSpecial rule for long-time residents of same
return for the year the home stops being yourmain home. Even if you are not a first-time indirectly own more than 50% in value
main home. If the home continues to be yourhomebuyer, you may be able to claim the credit of the outstanding stock of the corpora-
main home for at least 36 months beginning onif: tion.
the purchase date, you do not have to repay anyd. A partnership in which you directly or1. You buy a main home in the United States of the credit.indirectly own more than 50% of theafter November 6, 2009, and before May If you and your spouse claim the credit on acapital interest or profits interest.1, 2010 (before July 1, 2010, if you entered joint return, each spouse is treated as havinginto a written binding contract before May
been allowed half of the credit for purposes ofFor more information about related persons,1, 2010), and
repaying the credit.see Nondeductible Loss in chapter 2 of Publi-2. You (and your spouse, if married) owned cation 544, Sales and Other Dispositions of Exceptions. The following are exceptionsand used the same home as your main Assets. to the repayment rule.home for any period of 5 consecutive
years during the 8-year period ending on • If you sell the home to someone who isAmount of the credit. Generally, the credit isthe date of purchase of the home de- not related to you, the repayment in thethe smaller of:scribed in (1). year of sale is limited to the amount of
• $8,000 ($4,000 if married filing sepa- gain on the sale. (See item 7 earlier under
rately), orHome bought in 2010. You can choose to Who cannot claim the credit for the defini-
claim the credit on your 2009 return for a main tion of a related person.) When figuring• 10% of the purchase price of the home.home you bought in 2010 before May 1 (before the gain, reduce the adjusted basis of theHowever, if the Special rule for long-time re-July 1, 2010, if you entered into a written binding home by the amount of the credit.sidents of same main home described earliercontract before May 1, 2010).
• If the home is destroyed, condemned, orapplies, the credit can be no more than $6,500
Main home. Your main home is the one you disposed of under threat of condemnation,($3,250 if married filing separately).
live in most of the time. It can be a house, and you acquire a new main home withinIf you bought the home before November 7,houseboat, mobile home, cooperative apart- 2 years of the event, you do not have to2009, you are allowed the full amount of thement, or condominium. repay the credit.credit if your modified adjusted gross income
(MAGI) is $75,000 or less ($150,000 or less if • If, as part of a divorce settlement, theHome constructed by you. If you con-
married filing jointly). The credit is reduced ifstructed your main home, you are treated as home is transferred to a spouse or former
MAGI is more than $75,000 ($150,000 if marriedhaving bought it on the date you first occupied it. spouse, the spouse who receives the
filing jointly). The credit is completely eliminated home is responsible for repaying the credit
Who cannot claim the credit. You cannot if MAGI is $95,000 ($170,000 if married filing if required.claim the credit if any of the following apply. jointly) or more. • If you die, repayment of the credit is notIf you bought the home after November 6,1. You are a nonresident alien. required. If you file a joint return and then2009, you are allowed the full amount of the you die, your surviving spouse must repay2. Your home is located outside the United credit if your MAGI is $125,000 or less his or her half of the credit if required.States. ($225,000 or less if married filing jointly). The
credit is reduced if MAGI is more than $125,0003. You sell the home, or it stops being your Home bought in 2008. You generally must($225,000 if married filing jointly). The credit ismain home, before the end of 2009. repay any credit you claimed for a home youcompletely eliminated if MAGI is $145,000 bought in 2008 and sold in 2009.4. You acquired your home by gift or inheri- ($245,000 if married filing jointly) or more.tance. In some cases, there is an exception forModified adjusted gross income (MAGI). members of the uniformed services or Foreign5. You bought your home before November Your MAGI is the amount from Form 1040, line Service and for intelligence community employ-7, 2009, and your modified adjusted gross 38, increased by the total of any: ees.income (MAGI) is $95,000 or more
• Exclusion of income from Puerto Rico, and($170,000 or more if married filing jointly),
or you bought your home after November • Amount from Form 2555, line 45 and line How to take the credit. To take the credit,6, 2009, and your MAGI is $145,000 or 50; Form 2555-EZ, line 18; and Form complete Form 5405 and attach it to your Formmore ($245,000 or more if married filing 4563, line 15. 1040. Enter your credit on Form 1040, line 67.jointly). See Modified adjusted gross in-
come (MAGI) later.
Credit claimed on 2008 return. How to repay the credit. If you are required to6. You bought your home after November 6, The maximum credit was originally repay the credit, complete Parts III and IV of2009, and: $7,500 ($3,750 if married filing sepa-
TIP Form 5405. Attach the form to your Form 1040.rately). So if you made the election to claim thea. Your purchase price is more than Include the repayment on Form 1040, line 60.credit on your 2008 return for a home you$800,000, On the dotted line to the left of line 60, enter thebought in 2009 and you did not use the February amount of repayment and ªFTHCR.ºb. You can be claimed as a dependent on 2009 revision of Form 5405, you now may besomeone else's return, or able to claim a larger credit, not to exceed a total
More information. For more information, in-credit of $8,000, on an amended 2008 return.c. You (and your spouse, if married) were
cluding special rules for members of the ArmedSee Amended Returns and Claims for Refund inyounger than 18 when you bought the
Forces, see  Form 5405 and its instructions.chapter 1.home.
Chapter 37 Other Credits Page 261

Page 264 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
reimbursed from any federal funds) to • Your modified AGI is more than $75,000Health Coverage Tax which you were entitled (or would be enti- ($150,000 if married filing jointly),
Credit tled if you applied). • You take the government retiree credit dis-
cussed next, orYou may be able to take this credit for any month Example. You received a trade adjustmentin which all the following statements were true • You received a $250 economic recoveryallowance for January 2009. You were an eligi-on the first day of the month. payment during 2009. You may have re-ble TAA recipient on the first day of January and ceived an economic recovery payment if• You were an eligible trade adjustment as- February.
you received social security benefits, sup-sistance (TAA) recipient, alternative TAA
plemental security income (SSI) benefits,(ATAA) recipient, reemployment TAA Alternative TAA recipient. You were an eligi- railroad retirement benefits, or veterans(RTAA) recipient, or Pension Benefit ble alternative TAA recipient on the first day of
Guaranty Corporation (PBGC) pension re- disability compensation or pension bene-the month if, for that month or the prior month,
cipient (defined later). fits.you received benefits under an alternative trade
adjustment assistance program for older work-• You were covered by a qualified health
ers established by the Department of Labor.insurance plan for which you paid the pre- How to take the credit. To take the credit,
miums, or your portion of the premiums, complete Schedule M (Form 1040A or 1040)
Example. You received benefits under andirectly to your health plan. and attach it to your Form 1040 or 1040A. In-alternative trade adjustment assistance pro- clude your credit on Form 1040, line 63, or Form• You were not entitled to Medicare Part A gram for older workers for October 2009. The 1040A, line 40. If you are filing Form 1040-EZ,or enrolled in Medicare Part B. program was established by the Department of you can take the credit on line 8 of that form andLabor. You were an eligible alternative TAA re-• You were not enrolled in Medicaid or the do not have to file Schedule M.cipient on the first day of October and Novem-State Children's Health Insurance Pro-
ber.gram (SCHIP).
Government Retiree Credit• You were not enrolled in the Federal Em- RTAA recipient. You were an eligible RTAAployees Health Benefits program (FEHBP) You can take this credit if you received a pen-recipient on the first day of the month if, for thator eligible to receive benefits under the sion or annuity payment in 2009 for servicemonth or the prior month, you received benefitsU.S. military health system (TRICARE). performed for the U.S. Government or any U.S.under a reemployment trade adjustment assis-
state or local government (or any agency of onetance program for older workers established by• You were not covered by any em-
or more of these) and the service was not cov-the Department of Labor.ployer-sponsored health insurance plan
ered by social security.(including any employer-sponsored health
insurance plan of your spouse). The credit is $250 ($500 if married filingPBGC pension recipient. You were an eligi-
ble PBGC pension recipient on the first day of jointly and both you and your spouse received a• You were not imprisoned under federal, the month, if both of the following apply. qualifying pension or annuity). However, youstate, or local authority. cannot take the credit if you received a $2501. You were age 55 or older on the first dayBut, you cannot take the credit if you can be economic recovery payment during 2009. Youof the month.claimed as a dependent on someone else's may have received an economic recovery pay-
2009 tax return. If you meet all of these condi- ment if you received social security benefits, SSI2. You received a benefit for that month thattions, you may be able to take a credit of up to was paid by the PBGC under title IV of the benefits, railroad retirement benefits, or veter-65% (80% effective May 1, 2009) of the amount Employee Retirement Income Security Act ans disability compensation or pension benefits.you paid for qualified health insurance coverage of 1974 (ERISA). No government retiree credit is allowed if (a) youfor you and any qualifying family members. You file a joint return, (b) both you and your spouseIf you received a lump-sum payment from thecannot take the credit for insurance premiums received a qualifying pension or annuity, and (c)PBGC after August 5, 2002, you meet item (2)on coverage that was partially paid for with a both of you received an economic recovery pay-above for any month that you would have re-National Emergency Grant. The amount you ment; if only one of you received an economicceived a PBGC benefit if you had not receivedpaid for qualified health insurance coverage recovery payment, the credit is $250.the lump-sum payment.must be reduced by any Archer MSA and health
savings account distributions used to pay for the
How to take the credit. To take the credit,How to take the credit. To take the credit,coverage.
complete Schedule M (Form 1040A or 1040)complete Form 8885 and attach it to your FormYou can take this credit on your tax return or and attach it to your Form 1040 or 1040A. In-1040. Include your credit in the total for Formhave it paid on your behalf in advance to your clude your credit on Form 1040, line 63, or Form1040, line 70, and check box d.insurance company. If the credit is paid on your 1040A, line 40.You must attach invoices and proof of pay-behalf in advance, that amount will reduce the ment for any amounts you include on Formamount of the credit you can take on your tax 8885, line 2. For details, see Publication 502 or Refundable Credit for Priorreturn. Form 8885.
For definitions and special rules, including Year Minimum Tax
those relating to qualified health insurance Making Work Pay Creditplans, qualifying family members, and em- If you paid the alternative minimum tax for 2008
ployer-sponsored health insurance plans, see or you had a minimum tax credit carryforward toYou may be able to take this credit if you havePublication 502 and the instructions for Form 2009, you may be able to take a credit for priorearned income from work. Even if your federal8885. year minimum tax. For information about theincome tax withholding was reduced during nonrefundable credit for prior year minimum tax2009 because of the credit, you must complete you may be able to take, see NonrefundableSchedule M (Form 1040A or 1040) and claim theTAA recipient. You were an eligible TAA re-
Credit for Prior Year Minimum Tax, earlier. How-credit on your return to benefit from it. You can-cipient on the first day of the month if, for any day
ever, for 2009, you may qualify for a refundablenot take the credit if your modified adjustedin that month or the prior month, you:
credit for prior year minimum tax if you have anygross income (AGI) is $95,000 ($190,000 if mar-• Received a trade readjustment allowance, unused minimum tax credit carryforward fromried fiing jointly) or more, you are a nonresidentor 2006 or earlier years, even if the total amount ofalien, or you can be claimed as a dependent on
your current year credit is more than your total• Would have been entitled to receive such someone else's return.
tax liability. To figure the amount of any 2009an allowance except that you had not ex- The credit is 6.2% of your earned income but
refundable credit, complete Part IV of Formhausted all rights to any unemployment cannot be more than $400 ($800 if married filing
8801. Include any refundable credit on Forminsurance (except additional compensa- jointly).
1040, line 70, and check box c.tion that is funded by a state and is not  The credit is reduced if:
Page 262 Chapter 37 Other Credits

Page 265 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
withheld from your spouse's wages to the 3. Add lines 1 and 2. If $6,621.60 orCredit for Excess Social amount withheld from your wages. Figure the less, stop here. You cannot take the
Security Tax or Railroad withholding separately for you and your spouse credit .................. . 7,130.00
to determine if either of you has excess with-Retirement Tax Withheld 4. Social security tax limit ....... . 6,621.60holding.
5. Credit. Subtract line 4 from line 3.Most employers must withhold social security How to figure the credit if you did not work Enter the result here and on Formtax from your wages. If you work for a railroad for a railroad. If you did not work for a railroad 1040, line 69 (or Form 1040A, line
employer, that employer must withhold tier 1 44) ................... . $508.40during 2009, figure the credit as follows:
railroad retirement (RRTA) tax and tier 2 RRTA
tax. How to figure the credit if you worked for a1. Add all social security tax withheldIf you worked for two or more employers in railroad. If you were a railroad employee at(but not more than $6,621.60 for2009, you may have had too much social secur- any time during 2009, figure the credit as fol-each employer). Enter the total 
ity or tier 1 RRTA tax withheld from your pay. lows:here ................... .
You can claim the excess social security or tier 1 2. Enter any uncollected socialRRTA tax as a credit against your income tax. 1. Add all social security and tier 1security tax on tips or group-termThe following table shows the maximum amount RRTA tax withheld (but not morelife insurance included in the totalof wages subject to tax and the maximum than $6,621.60 for each employer).on Form 1040, line 60 ....... .
amount of tax that should have been withheld for Enter the total here ......... .3. Add lines 1 and 2. If $6,621.60 or2009. 2. Enter any uncollected socialless, stop here. You cannot take 
security and tier 1 RRTA tax on tipsthe credit ................ .Maximum tax or group-term life insuranceMaximum that should 4. Social security tax limit ....... . 6,621.60 included in the total on Form 1040,wages have been
line 60 ................. .5. Credit. Subtract line 4 from line 3.Type of tax subject to tax withheld
Enter the result here and on Form 3. Add lines 1 and 2. If $6,621.60 orSocial security or 1040, line 69 (or Form 1040A, line less, stop here. You cannot take RRTA tier 1 $106,800 $6,621.60 44) ................... . the credit ................ .RRTA tier 2 $79,200 $3,088.80
4. Social security and tier 1 RRTA Example. You are married and file a joint tax limit ................. . 6,621.60All wages are subject to Medicare tax return with your spouse who had no gross in-
withholding. 5. Credit. Subtract line 4 from line 3.come in 2009. During 2009, you worked for the
Enter the result here and on Form
CAUTION
!Brown Technology Company and earned
1040, line 69 (or Form 1040A, line$60,000 in wages. Social security tax of $3,720
44) ................... .Use Form 843, Claim for Refund and was withheld. You also worked for another em-
Request for Abatement, to claim a re- ployer in 2009 and earned $55,000 in wages. How to take the credit. Enter the credit onfund of excess tier 2 RRTA tax. Be sure
TIP $3,410 of social security tax was withheld from Form 1040, line 69, or include it in the total forto attach a copy of all of your W-2 forms. See the these wages. Because you worked for more Form 1040A, line 44.worksheet in Publication 505, Tax Withholding than one employer and your total wages were
and Estimated Tax, to help you figure the excess more than $106,800, you can take a credit of
amount. $508.40 for the excess social security tax with-
held.Employer's error. If any one employer with-
held too much social security or tier 1 RRTA tax,
1. Add all social security tax withheldyou cannot take the excess as a credit against
(but not more than $6,621.60 foryour income tax. The employer should adjust each employer). Enter the total the tax for you. If the employer does not adjust here ................... . $7,130.00the overcollection, you can file a claim for refund
2. Enter any uncollected socialusing Form 843.
security tax on tips or group-term
Joint return. If you are filing a joint return, you life insurance included in the total
on Form 1040, line 60 ....... . -0-cannot add the social security or tier 1 RRTA tax
Chapter 37 Other Credits Page 263

Page 266 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
See the instructions for line 44 that begin on page
2009 37 to see if you must use the Tax Table below to
figure your tax.
CAUTION
!
Tax Table Example. Mr. and Mrs. Brown are filing a joint return. Their
taxable income on Form 1040, line 43, is $25,300. First, they
find the $25,300±25,350 taxable income line. Next, they find
the column for married filing jointly and read down the column.
The amount shown where the taxable income line and filing
status column meet is $2,964. This is the tax amount they
should enter on Form 1040, line 44.
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married
filing
jointly
*
Married
filing
sepa-
rately
Head
of a
house-
hold
Your tax is—
25,200
25,250
25,300
25,350
3,366
3,374
3,381
3,389
Sample Table
25,250
25,300
25,350
25,400
2,949
2,956
2,964
2,971
3,366
3,374
3,381
3,389
3,186
3,194
3,201
3,209
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð
income) is Ð income) is Ð income) is Ð
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð
2,700 2,725 271 271 271 2710 5 0 0 0 0 1,300 1,325 131 131 131 131
2,725 2,750 274 274 274 2745 15 1 1 1 1 1,325 1,350 134 134 134 134
2,750 2,775 276 276 276 2761,350 1,375 136 136 136 13615 25 2 2 2 2 2,775 2,800 279 279 279 2791,375 1,400 139 139 139 13925 50 4 4 4 4 2,800 2,825 281 281 281 2811,400 1,425 141 141 141 14150 75 6 6 6 6 2,825 2,850 284 284 284 2841,425 1,450 144 144 144 14475 100 9 9 9 9 2,850 2,875 286 286 286 2861,450 1,475 146 146 146 146100 125 11 11 11 11 2,875 2,900 289 289 289 2891,475 1,500 149 149 149 149125 150 14 14 14 14 2,900 2,925 291 291 291 2911,500 1,525 151 151 151 151150 175 16 16 16 16 2,925 2,950 294 294 294 2941,525 1,550 154 154 154 154175 200 19 19 19 19 2,950 2,975 296 296 296 2961,550 1,575 156 156 156 156200 225 21 21 21 21 2,975 3,000 299 299 299 2991,575 1,600 159 159 159 159225 250 24 24 24 24 1,600 1,625 161 161 161 161250 275 26 26 26 26 3,0001,625 1,650 164 164 164 164275 300 29 29 29 29 1,650 1,675 166 166 166 166 3,000 3,050 303 303 303 303300 325 31 31 31 31 1,675 1,700 169 169 169 169 3,050 3,100 308 308 308 308325 350 34 34 34 34 1,700 1,725 171 171 171 171 3,100 3,150 313 313 313 313350 375 36 36 36 36 1,725 1,750 174 174 174 174 3,150 3,200 318 318 318 318375 400 39 39 39 39 1,750 1,775 176 176 176 176 3,200 3,250 323 323 323 323400 425 41 41 41 41 1,775 1,800 179 179 179 179 3,250 3,300 328 328 328 328425 450 44 44 44 44 1,800 1,825 181 181 181 181 3,300 3,350 333 333 333 333450 475 46 46 46 46 1,825 1,850 184 184 184 184 3,350 3,400 338 338 338 338475 500 49 49 49 49 1,850 1,875 186 186 186 186 3,400 3,450 343 343 343 343500 525 51 51 51 51 1,875 1,900 189 189 189 189 3,450 3,500 348 348 348 348525 550 54 54 54 54 1,900 1,925 191 191 191 191 3,500 3,550 353 353 353 353550 575 56 56 56 56 1,925 1,950 194 194 194 194 3,550 3,600 358 358 358 358575 600 59 59 59 59 1,950 1,975 196 196 196 196 3,600 3,650 363 363 363 3631,975 2,000 199 199 199 199600 625 61 61 61 61 3,650 3,700 368 368 368 368625 650 64 64 64 64 3,700 3,750 373 373 373 373650 675 66 66 66 66 2,000 3,750 3,800 378 378 378 378675 700 69 69 69 69 3,800 3,850 383 383 383 3832,000 2,025 201 201 201 201700 725 71 71 71 71 3,850 3,900 388 388 388 3882,025 2,050 204 204 204 204725 750 74 74 74 74 3,900 3,950 393 393 393 3932,050 2,075 206 206 206 206750 775 76 76 76 76 3,950 4,000 398 398 398 3982,075 2,100 209 209 209 209775 800 79 79 79 79 2,100 2,125 211 211 211 211800 825 81 81 81 81 4,0002,125 2,150 214 214 214 214825 850 84 84 84 84 2,150 2,175 216 216 216 216850 875 86 86 86 86 4,000 4,050 403 403 403 4032,175 2,200 219 219 219 219875 900 89 89 89 89 4,050 4,100 408 408 408 4082,200 2,225 221 221 221 221 4,100 4,150 413 413 413 413900 925 91 91 91 91 2,225 2,250 224 224 224 224 4,150 4,200 418 418 418 418925 950 94 94 94 94 2,250 2,275 226 226 226 226 4,200 4,250 423 423 423 423950 975 96 96 96 96 2,275 2,300 229 229 229 229 4,250 4,300 428 428 428 428975 1,000 99 99 99 99 2,300 2,325 231 231 231 231 4,300 4,350 433 433 433 4332,325 2,350 234 234 234 234 4,350 4,400 438 438 438 4381,000 2,350 2,375 236 236 236 236 4,400 4,450 443 443 443 4432,375 2,400 239 239 239 2391,000 1,025 101 101 101 101 4,450 4,500 448 448 448 4482,400 2,425 241 241 241 2411,025 1,050 104 104 104 104 4,500 4,550 453 453 453 4532,425 2,450 244 244 244 2441,050 1,075 106 106 106 106 4,550 4,600 458 458 458 4582,450 2,475 246 246 246 2461,075 1,100 109 109 109 109 4,600 4,650 463 463 463 4632,475 2,500 249 249 249 2491,100 1,125 111 111 111 111 4,650 4,700 468 468 468 4682,500 2,525 251 251 251 2511,125 1,150 114 114 114 114 4,700 4,750 473 473 473 4732,525 2,550 254 254 254 2541,150 1,175 116 116 116 116 4,750 4,800 478 478 478 4782,550 2,575 256 256 256 2561,175 1,200 119 119 119 119 4,800 4,850 483 483 483 4832,575 2,600 259 259 259 2591,200 1,225 121 121 121 121 4,850 4,900 488 488 488 4882,600 2,625 261 261 261 2611,225 1,250 124 124 124 124 4,900 4,950 493 493 493 4932,625 2,650 264 264 264 2641,250 1,275 126 126 126 126 4,950 5,000 498 498 498 4982,650 2,675 266 266 266 2661,275 1,300 129 129 129 129 2,675 2,700 269 269 269 269
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on page 265)
- 264 -

Page 267 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2009 Tax Table±Continued
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð
income) is Ð income) is Ð income) is Ð
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð
5,000 8,000 11,000
5,000 5,050 503 503 503 503 8,000 8,050 803 803 803 803 11,000 11,050 1,236 1,103 1,236 1,103
5,050 5,100 508 508 508 508 8,050 8,100 808 808 808 808 11,050 11,100 1,244 1,108 1,244 1,108
5,100 5,150 513 513 513 513 8,100 8,150 813 813 813 813 11,100 11,150 1,251 1,113 1,251 1,113
5,150 5,200 518 518 518 518 8,150 8,200 818 818 818 818 11,150 11,200 1,259 1,118 1,259 1,118
5,200 5,250 523 523 523 523 8,200 8,250 823 823 823 823 11,200 11,250 1,266 1,123 1,266 1,123
5,250 5,300 528 528 528 528 8,250 8,300 828 828 828 828 11,250 11,300 1,274 1,128 1,274 1,128
5,300 5,350 533 533 533 533 8,300 8,350 833 833 833 833 11,300 11,350 1,281 1,133 1,281 1,133
5,350 5,400 538 538 538 538 8,350 8,400 839 838 839 838 11,350 11,400 1,289 1,138 1,289 1,138
5,400 5,450 543 543 543 543 8,400 8,450 846 843 846 843 11,400 11,450 1,296 1,143 1,296 1,143
5,450 5,500 548 548 548 548 8,450 8,500 854 848 854 848 11,450 11,500 1,304 1,148 1,304 1,148
5,500 5,550 553 553 553 553 8,500 8,550 861 853 861 853 11,500 11,550 1,311 1,153 1,311 1,153
5,550 5,600 558 558 558 558 8,550 8,600 869 858 869 858 11,550 11,600 1,319 1,158 1,319 1,158
5,600 5,650 563 563 563 563 8,600 8,650 876 863 876 863 11,600 11,650 1,326 1,163 1,326 1,163
5,650 5,700 568 568 568 568 8,650 8,700 884 868 884 868 11,650 11,700 1,334 1,168 1,334 1,168
5,700 5,750 573 573 573 573 8,700 8,750 891 873 891 873 11,700 11,750 1,341 1,173 1,341 1,173
5,750 5,800 578 578 578 578 8,750 8,800 899 878 899 878 11,750 11,800 1,349 1,178 1,349 1,178
5,800 5,850 583 583 583 583 8,800 8,850 906 883 906 883 11,800 11,850 1,356 1,183 1,356 1,183
5,850 5,900 588 588 588 588 8,850 8,900 914 888 914 888 11,850 11,900 1,364 1,188 1,364 1,188
5,900 5,950 593 593 593 593 8,900 8,950 921 893 921 893 11,900 11,950 1,371 1,193 1,371 1,193
5,950 6,000 598 598 598 598 8,950 9,000 929 898 929 898 11,950 12,000 1,379 1,198 1,379 1,199
6,000 9,000 12,000
6,000 6,050 603 603 603 603 9,000 9,050 936 903 936 903 12,000 12,050 1,386 1,203 1,386 1,206
6,050 6,100 608 608 608 608 9,050 9,100 944 908 944 908 12,050 12,100 1,394 1,208 1,394 1,214
6,100 6,150 613 613 613 613 9,100 9,150 951 913 951 913 12,100 12,150 1,401 1,213 1,401 1,221
6,150 6,200 618 618 618 618 9,150 9,200 959 918 959 918 12,150 12,200 1,409 1,218 1,409 1,229
6,200 6,250 623 623 623 623 9,200 9,250 966 923 966 923 12,200 12,250 1,416 1,223 1,416 1,236
6,250 6,300 628 628 628 628 9,250 9,300 974 928 974 928 12,250 12,300 1,424 1,228 1,424 1,244
6,300 6,350 633 633 633 633 9,300 9,350 981 933 981 933 12,300 12,350 1,431 1,233 1,431 1,251
6,350 6,400 638 638 638 638 9,350 9,400 989 938 989 938 12,350 12,400 1,439 1,238 1,439 1,259
6,400 6,450 643 643 643 643 9,400 9,450 996 943 996 943 12,400 12,450 1,446 1,243 1,446 1,266
6,450 6,500 648 648 648 648 9,450 9,500 1,004 948 1,004 948 12,450 12,500 1,454 1,248 1,454 1,274
6,500 6,550 653 653 653 653 9,500 9,550 1,011 953 1,011 953 12,500 12,550 1,461 1,253 1,461 1,281
6,550 6,600 658 658 658 658 9,550 9,600 1,019 958 1,019 958 12,550 12,600 1,469 1,258 1,469 1,289
6,600 6,650 663 663 663 663 9,600 9,650 1,026 963 1,026 963 12,600 12,650 1,476 1,263 1,476 1,296
6,650 6,700 668 668 668 668 9,650 9,700 1,034 968 1,034 968 12,650 12,700 1,484 1,268 1,484 1,304
6,700 6,750 673 673 673 673 9,700 9,750 1,041 973 1,041 973 12,700 12,750 1,491 1,273 1,491 1,311
6,750 6,800 678 678 678 678 9,750 9,800 1,049 978 1,049 978 12,750 12,800 1,499 1,278 1,499 1,319
6,800 6,850 683 683 683 683 9,800 9,850 1,056 983 1,056 983 12,800 12,850 1,506 1,283 1,506 1,326
6,850 6,900 688 688 688 688 9,850 9,900 1,064 988 1,064 988 12,850 12,900 1,514 1,288 1,514 1,334
6,900 6,950 693 693 693 693 9,900 9,950 1,071 993 1,071 993 12,900 12,950 1,521 1,293 1,521 1,341
6,950 7,000 698 698 698 698 9,950 10,000 1,079 998 1,079 998 12,950 13,000 1,529 1,298 1,529 1,349
7,000 10,000 13,000
7,000 7,050 703 703 703 703 10,000 10,050 1,086 1,003 1,086 1,003 13,000 13,050 1,536 1,303 1,536 1,356
7,050 7,100 708 708 708 708 10,050 10,100 1,094 1,008 1,094 1,008 13,050 13,100 1,544 1,308 1,544 1,364
7,100 7,150 713 713 713 713 10,100 10,150 1,101 1,013 1,101 1,013 13,100 13,150 1,551 1,313 1,551 1,371
7,150 7,200 718 718 718 718 10,150 10,200 1,109 1,018 1,109 1,018 13,150 13,200 1,559 1,318 1,559 1,379
7,200 7,250 723 723 723 723 10,200 10,250 1,116 1,023 1,116 1,023 13,200 13,250 1,566 1,323 1,566 1,386
7,250 7,300 728 728 728 728 10,250 10,300 1,124 1,028 1,124 1,028 13,250 13,300 1,574 1,328 1,574 1,394
7,300 7,350 733 733 733 733 10,300 10,350 1,131 1,033 1,131 1,033 13,300 13,350 1,581 1,333 1,581 1,401
7,350 7,400 738 738 738 738 10,350 10,400 1,139 1,038 1,139 1,038 13,350 13,400 1,589 1,338 1,589 1,409
7,400 7,450 743 743 743 743 10,400 10,450 1,146 1,043 1,146 1,043 13,400 13,450 1,596 1,343 1,596 1,416
7,450 7,500 748 748 748 748 10,450 10,500 1,154 1,048 1,154 1,048 13,450 13,500 1,604 1,348 1,604 1,424
7,500 7,550 753 753 753 753 10,500 10,550 1,161 1,053 1,161 1,053 13,500 13,550 1,611 1,353 1,611 1,431
7,550 7,600 758 758 758 758 10,550 10,600 1,169 1,058 1,169 1,058 13,550 13,600 1,619 1,358 1,619 1,439
7,600 7,650 763 763 763 763 10,600 10,650 1,176 1,063 1,176 1,063 13,600 13,650 1,626 1,363 1,626 1,446
7,650 7,700 768 768 768 768 10,650 10,700 1,184 1,068 1,184 1,068 13,650 13,700 1,634 1,368 1,634 1,454
7,700 7,750 773 773 773 773 10,700 10,750 1,191 1,073 1,191 1,073 13,700 13,750 1,641 1,373 1,641 1,461
7,750 7,800 778 778 778 778 10,750 10,800 1,199 1,078 1,199 1,078 13,750 13,800 1,649 1,378 1,649 1,469
7,800 7,850 783 783 783 783 10,800 10,850 1,206 1,083 1,206 1,083 13,800 13,850 1,656 1,383 1,656 1,476
7,850 7,900 788 788 788 788 10,850 10,900 1,214 1,088 1,214 1,088 13,850 13,900 1,664 1,388 1,664 1,484
7,900 7,950 793 793 793 793 10,900 10,950 1,221 1,093 1,221 1,093 13,900 13,950 1,671 1,393 1,671 1,491
7,950 8,000 798 798 798 798 10,950 11,000 1,229 1,098 1,229 1,098 13,950 14,000 1,679 1,398 1,679 1,499
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on page 266)
- 265 -

Page 268 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2009 Tax Table±Continued
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð
income) is Ð income) is Ð income) is Ð
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð
14,000 17,000 20,000
14,000 14,050 1,686 1,403 1,686 1,506 17,000 17,050 2,136 1,719 2,136 1,956 20,000 20,050 2,586 2,169 2,586 2,406
14,050 14,100 1,694 1,408 1,694 1,514 17,050 17,100 2,144 1,726 2,144 1,964 20,050 20,100 2,594 2,176 2,594 2,414
14,100 14,150 1,701 1,413 1,701 1,521 17,100 17,150 2,151 1,734 2,151 1,971 20,100 20,150 2,601 2,184 2,601 2,421
14,150 14,200 1,709 1,418 1,709 1,529 17,150 17,200 2,159 1,741 2,159 1,979 20,150 20,200 2,609 2,191 2,609 2,429
14,200 14,250 1,716 1,423 1,716 1,536 17,200 17,250 2,166 1,749 2,166 1,986 20,200 20,250 2,616 2,199 2,616 2,436
14,250 14,300 1,724 1,428 1,724 1,544 17,250 17,300 2,174 1,756 2,174 1,994 20,250 20,300 2,624 2,206 2,624 2,444
14,300 14,350 1,731 1,433 1,731 1,551 17,300 17,350 2,181 1,764 2,181 2,001 20,300 20,350 2,631 2,214 2,631 2,451
14,350 14,400 1,739 1,438 1,739 1,559 17,350 17,400 2,189 1,771 2,189 2,009 20,350 20,400 2,639 2,221 2,639 2,459
14,400 14,450 1,746 1,443 1,746 1,566 17,400 17,450 2,196 1,779 2,196 2,016 20,400 20,450 2,646 2,229 2,646 2,466
14,450 14,500 1,754 1,448 1,754 1,574 17,450 17,500 2,204 1,786 2,204 2,024 20,450 20,500 2,654 2,236 2,654 2,474
14,500 14,550 1,761 1,453 1,761 1,581 17,500 17,550 2,211 1,794 2,211 2,031 20,500 20,550 2,661 2,244 2,661 2,481
14,550 14,600 1,769 1,458 1,769 1,589 17,550 17,600 2,219 1,801 2,219 2,039 20,550 20,600 2,669 2,251 2,669 2,489
14,600 14,650 1,776 1,463 1,776 1,596 17,600 17,650 2,226 1,809 2,226 2,046 20,600 20,650 2,676 2,259 2,676 2,496
14,650 14,700 1,784 1,468 1,784 1,604 17,650 17,700 2,234 1,816 2,234 2,054 20,650 20,700 2,684 2,266 2,684 2,504
14,700 14,750 1,791 1,473 1,791 1,611 17,700 17,750 2,241 1,824 2,241 2,061 20,700 20,750 2,691 2,274 2,691 2,511
14,750 14,800 1,799 1,478 1,799 1,619 17,750 17,800 2,249 1,831 2,249 2,069 20,750 20,800 2,699 2,281 2,699 2,519
14,800 14,850 1,806 1,483 1,806 1,626 17,800 17,850 2,256 1,839 2,256 2,076 20,800 20,850 2,706 2,289 2,706 2,526
14,850 14,900 1,814 1,488 1,814 1,634 17,850 17,900 2,264 1,846 2,264 2,084 20,850 20,900 2,714 2,296 2,714 2,534
14,900 14,950 1,821 1,493 1,821 1,641 17,900 17,950 2,271 1,854 2,271 2,091 20,900 20,950 2,721 2,304 2,721 2,541
14,950 15,000 1,829 1,498 1,829 1,649 17,950 18,000 2,279 1,861 2,279 2,099 20,950 21,000 2,729 2,311 2,729 2,549
15,000 18,000 21,000
15,000 15,050 1,836 1,503 1,836 1,656 18,000 18,050 2,286 1,869 2,286 2,106 21,000 21,050 2,736 2,319 2,736 2,556
15,050 15,100 1,844 1,508 1,844 1,664 18,050 18,100 2,294 1,876 2,294 2,114 21,050 21,100 2,744 2,326 2,744 2,564
15,100 15,150 1,851 1,513 1,851 1,671 18,100 18,150 2,301 1,884 2,301 2,121 21,100 21,150 2,751 2,334 2,751 2,571
15,150 15,200 1,859 1,518 1,859 1,679 18,150 18,200 2,309 1,891 2,309 2,129 21,150 21,200 2,759 2,341 2,759 2,579
15,200 15,250 1,866 1,523 1,866 1,686 18,200 18,250 2,316 1,899 2,316 2,136 21,200 21,250 2,766 2,349 2,766 2,586
15,250 15,300 1,874 1,528 1,874 1,694 18,250 18,300 2,324 1,906 2,324 2,144 21,250 21,300 2,774 2,356 2,774 2,594
15,300 15,350 1,881 1,533 1,881 1,701 18,300 18,350 2,331 1,914 2,331 2,151 21,300 21,350 2,781 2,364 2,781 2,601
15,350 15,400 1,889 1,538 1,889 1,709 18,350 18,400 2,339 1,921 2,339 2,159 21,350 21,400 2,789 2,371 2,789 2,609
15,400 15,450 1,896 1,543 1,896 1,716 18,400 18,450 2,346 1,929 2,346 2,166 21,400 21,450 2,796 2,379 2,796 2,616
15,450 15,500 1,904 1,548 1,904 1,724 18,450 18,500 2,354 1,936 2,354 2,174 21,450 21,500 2,804 2,386 2,804 2,624
15,500 15,550 1,911 1,553 1,911 1,731 18,500 18,550 2,361 1,944 2,361 2,181 21,500 21,550 2,811 2,394 2,811 2,631
15,550 15,600 1,919 1,558 1,919 1,739 18,550 18,600 2,369 1,951 2,369 2,189 21,550 21,600 2,819 2,401 2,819 2,639
15,600 15,650 1,926 1,563 1,926 1,746 18,600 18,650 2,376 1,959 2,376 2,196 21,600 21,650 2,826 2,409 2,826 2,646
15,650 15,700 1,934 1,568 1,934 1,754 18,650 18,700 2,384 1,966 2,384 2,204 21,650 21,700 2,834 2,416 2,834 2,654
15,700 15,750 1,941 1,573 1,941 1,761 18,700 18,750 2,391 1,974 2,391 2,211 21,700 21,750 2,841 2,424 2,841 2,661
15,750 15,800 1,949 1,578 1,949 1,769 18,750 18,800 2,399 1,981 2,399 2,219 21,750 21,800 2,849 2,431 2,849 2,669
15,800 15,850 1,956 1,583 1,956 1,776 18,800 18,850 2,406 1,989 2,406 2,226 21,800 21,850 2,856 2,439 2,856 2,676
15,850 15,900 1,964 1,588 1,964 1,784 18,850 18,900 2,414 1,996 2,414 2,234 21,850 21,900 2,864 2,446 2,864 2,684
15,900 15,950 1,971 1,593 1,971 1,791 18,900 18,950 2,421 2,004 2,421 2,241 21,900 21,950 2,871 2,454 2,871 2,691
15,950 16,000 1,979 1,598 1,979 1,799 18,950 19,000 2,429 2,011 2,429 2,249 21,950 22,000 2,879 2,461 2,879 2,699
16,000 19,000 22,000
16,000 16,050 1,986 1,603 1,986 1,806 19,000 19,050 2,436 2,019 2,436 2,256 22,000 22,050 2,886 2,469 2,886 2,706
16,050 16,100 1,994 1,608 1,994 1,814 19,050 19,100 2,444 2,026 2,444 2,264 22,050 22,100 2,894 2,476 2,894 2,714
16,100 16,150 2,001 1,613 2,001 1,821 19,100 19,150 2,451 2,034 2,451 2,271 22,100 22,150 2,901 2,484 2,901 2,721
16,150 16,200 2,009 1,618 2,009 1,829 19,150 19,200 2,459 2,041 2,459 2,279 22,150 22,200 2,909 2,491 2,909 2,729
16,200 16,250 2,016 1,623 2,016 1,836 19,200 19,250 2,466 2,049 2,466 2,286 22,200 22,250 2,916 2,499 2,916 2,736
16,250 16,300 2,024 1,628 2,024 1,844 19,250 19,300 2,474 2,056 2,474 2,294 22,250 22,300 2,924 2,506 2,924 2,744
16,300 16,350 2,031 1,633 2,031 1,851 19,300 19,350 2,481 2,064 2,481 2,301 22,300 22,350 2,931 2,514 2,931 2,751
16,350 16,400 2,039 1,638 2,039 1,859 19,350 19,400 2,489 2,071 2,489 2,309 22,350 22,400 2,939 2,521 2,939 2,759
16,400 16,450 2,046 1,643 2,046 1,866 19,400 19,450 2,496 2,079 2,496 2,316 22,400 22,450 2,946 2,529 2,946 2,766
16,450 16,500 2,054 1,648 2,054 1,874 19,450 19,500 2,504 2,086 2,504 2,324 22,450 22,500 2,954 2,536 2,954 2,774
16,500 16,550 2,061 1,653 2,061 1,881 19,500 19,550 2,511 2,094 2,511 2,331 22,500 22,550 2,961 2,544 2,961 2,781
16,550 16,600 2,069 1,658 2,069 1,889 19,550 19,600 2,519 2,101 2,519 2,339 22,550 22,600 2,969 2,551 2,969 2,789
16,600 16,650 2,076 1,663 2,076 1,896 19,600 19,650 2,526 2,109 2,526 2,346 22,600 22,650 2,976 2,559 2,976 2,796
16,650 16,700 2,084 1,668 2,084 1,904 19,650 19,700 2,534 2,116 2,534 2,354 22,650 22,700 2,984 2,566 2,984 2,804
16,700 16,750 2,091 1,674 2,091 1,911 19,700 19,750 2,541 2,124 2,541 2,361 22,700 22,750 2,991 2,574 2,991 2,811
16,750 16,800 2,099 1,681 2,099 1,919 19,750 19,800 2,549 2,131 2,549 2,369 22,750 22,800 2,999 2,581 2,999 2,819
16,800 16,850 2,106 1,689 2,106 1,926 19,800 19,850 2,556 2,139 2,556 2,376 22,800 22,850 3,006 2,589 3,006 2,826
16,850 16,900 2,114 1,696 2,114 1,934 19,850 19,900 2,564 2,146 2,564 2,384 22,850 22,900 3,014 2,596 3,014 2,834
16,900 16,950 2,121 1,704 2,121 1,941 19,900 19,950 2,571 2,154 2,571 2,391 22,900 22,950 3,021 2,604 3,021 2,841
16,950 17,000 2,129 1,711 2,129 1,949 19,950 20,000 2,579 2,161 2,579 2,399 22,950 23,000 3,029 2,611 3,029 2,849
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on page 267)
- 266 -

Page 269 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2009 Tax Table±Continued
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð
income) is Ð income) is Ð income) is Ð
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð
23,000 26,000 29,000
23,000 23,050 3,036 2,619 3,036 2,856 26,000 26,050 3,486 3,069 3,486 3,306 29,000 29,050 3,936 3,519 3,936 3,756
23,050 23,100 3,044 2,626 3,044 2,864 26,050 26,100 3,494 3,076 3,494 3,314 29,050 29,100 3,944 3,526 3,944 3,764
23,100 23,150 3,051 2,634 3,051 2,871 26,100 26,150 3,501 3,084 3,501 3,321 29,100 29,150 3,951 3,534 3,951 3,771
23,150 23,200 3,059 2,641 3,059 2,879 26,150 26,200 3,509 3,091 3,509 3,329 29,150 29,200 3,959 3,541 3,959 3,779
23,200 23,250 3,066 2,649 3,066 2,886 26,200 26,250 3,516 3,099 3,516 3,336 29,200 29,250 3,966 3,549 3,966 3,786
23,250 23,300 3,074 2,656 3,074 2,894 26,250 26,300 3,524 3,106 3,524 3,344 29,250 29,300 3,974 3,556 3,974 3,794
23,300 23,350 3,081 2,664 3,081 2,901 26,300 26,350 3,531 3,114 3,531 3,351 29,300 29,350 3,981 3,564 3,981 3,801
23,350 23,400 3,089 2,671 3,089 2,909 26,350 26,400 3,539 3,121 3,539 3,359 29,350 29,400 3,989 3,571 3,989 3,809
23,400 23,450 3,096 2,679 3,096 2,916 26,400 26,450 3,546 3,129 3,546 3,366 29,400 29,450 3,996 3,579 3,996 3,816
23,450 23,500 3,104 2,686 3,104 2,924 26,450 26,500 3,554 3,136 3,554 3,374 29,450 29,500 4,004 3,586 4,004 3,824
23,500 23,550 3,111 2,694 3,111 2,931 26,500 26,550 3,561 3,144 3,561 3,381 29,500 29,550 4,011 3,594 4,011 3,831
23,550 23,600 3,119 2,701 3,119 2,939 26,550 26,600 3,569 3,151 3,569 3,389 29,550 29,600 4,019 3,601 4,019 3,839
23,600 23,650 3,126 2,709 3,126 2,946 26,600 26,650 3,576 3,159 3,576 3,396 29,600 29,650 4,026 3,609 4,026 3,846
23,650 23,700 3,134 2,716 3,134 2,954 26,650 26,700 3,584 3,166 3,584 3,404 29,650 29,700 4,034 3,616 4,034 3,854
23,700 23,750 3,141 2,724 3,141 2,961 26,700 26,750 3,591 3,174 3,591 3,411 29,700 29,750 4,041 3,624 4,041 3,861
23,750 23,800 3,149 2,731 3,149 2,969 26,750 26,800 3,599 3,181 3,599 3,419 29,750 29,800 4,049 3,631 4,049 3,869
23,800 23,850 3,156 2,739 3,156 2,976 26,800 26,850 3,606 3,189 3,606 3,426 29,800 29,850 4,056 3,639 4,056 3,876
23,850 23,900 3,164 2,746 3,164 2,984 26,850 26,900 3,614 3,196 3,614 3,434 29,850 29,900 4,064 3,646 4,064 3,884
23,900 23,950 3,171 2,754 3,171 2,991 26,900 26,950 3,621 3,204 3,621 3,441 29,900 29,950 4,071 3,654 4,071 3,891
23,950 24,000 3,179 2,761 3,179 2,999 26,950 27,000 3,629 3,211 3,629 3,449 29,950 30,000 4,079 3,661 4,079 3,899
24,000 27,000 30,000
24,000 24,050 3,186 2,769 3,186 3,006 27,000 27,050 3,636 3,219 3,636 3,456 30,000 30,050 4,086 3,669 4,086 3,906
24,050 24,100 3,194 2,776 3,194 3,014 27,050 27,100 3,644 3,226 3,644 3,464 30,050 30,100 4,094 3,676 4,094 3,914
24,100 24,150 3,201 2,784 3,201 3,021 27,100 27,150 3,651 3,234 3,651 3,471 30,100 30,150 4,101 3,684 4,101 3,921
24,150 24,200 3,209 2,791 3,209 3,029 27,150 27,200 3,659 3,241 3,659 3,479 30,150 30,200 4,109 3,691 4,109 3,929
24,200 24,250 3,216 2,799 3,216 3,036 27,200 27,250 3,666 3,249 3,666 3,486 30,200 30,250 4,116 3,699 4,116 3,936
24,250 24,300 3,224 2,806 3,224 3,044 27,250 27,300 3,674 3,256 3,674 3,494 30,250 30,300 4,124 3,706 4,124 3,944
24,300 24,350 3,231 2,814 3,231 3,051 27,300 27,350 3,681 3,264 3,681 3,501 30,300 30,350 4,131 3,714 4,131 3,951
24,350 24,400 3,239 2,821 3,239 3,059 27,350 27,400 3,689 3,271 3,689 3,509 30,350 30,400 4,139 3,721 4,139 3,959
24,400 24,450 3,246 2,829 3,246 3,066 27,400 27,450 3,696 3,279 3,696 3,516 30,400 30,450 4,146 3,729 4,146 3,966
24,450 24,500 3,254 2,836 3,254 3,074 27,450 27,500 3,704 3,286 3,704 3,524 30,450 30,500 4,154 3,736 4,154 3,974
24,500 24,550 3,261 2,844 3,261 3,081 27,500 27,550 3,711 3,294 3,711 3,531 30,500 30,550 4,161 3,744 4,161 3,981
24,550 24,600 3,269 2,851 3,269 3,089 27,550 27,600 3,719 3,301 3,719 3,539 30,550 30,600 4,169 3,751 4,169 3,989
24,600 24,650 3,276 2,859 3,276 3,096 27,600 27,650 3,726 3,309 3,726 3,546 30,600 30,650 4,176 3,759 4,176 3,996
24,650 24,700 3,284 2,866 3,284 3,104 27,650 27,700 3,734 3,316 3,734 3,554 30,650 30,700 4,184 3,766 4,184 4,004
24,700 24,750 3,291 2,874 3,291 3,111 27,700 27,750 3,741 3,324 3,741 3,561 30,700 30,750 4,191 3,774 4,191 4,011
24,750 24,800 3,299 2,881 3,299 3,119 27,750 27,800 3,749 3,331 3,749 3,569 30,750 30,800 4,199 3,781 4,199 4,019
24,800 24,850 3,306 2,889 3,306 3,126 27,800 27,850 3,756 3,339 3,756 3,576 30,800 30,850 4,206 3,789 4,206 4,026
24,850 24,900 3,314 2,896 3,314 3,134 27,850 27,900 3,764 3,346 3,764 3,584 30,850 30,900 4,214 3,796 4,214 4,034
24,900 24,950 3,321 2,904 3,321 3,141 27,900 27,950 3,771 3,354 3,771 3,591 30,900 30,950 4,221 3,804 4,221 4,041
24,950 25,000 3,329 2,911 3,329 3,149 27,950 28,000 3,779 3,361 3,779 3,599 30,950 31,000 4,229 3,811 4,229 4,049
25,000 28,000 31,000
25,000 25,050 3,336 2,919 3,336 3,156 28,000 28,050 3,786 3,369 3,786 3,606 31,000 31,050 4,236 3,819 4,236 4,056
25,050 25,100 3,344 2,926 3,344 3,164 28,050 28,100 3,794 3,376 3,794 3,614 31,050 31,100 4,244 3,826 4,244 4,064
25,100 25,150 3,351 2,934 3,351 3,171 28,100 28,150 3,801 3,384 3,801 3,621 31,100 31,150 4,251 3,834 4,251 4,071
25,150 25,200 3,359 2,941 3,359 3,179 28,150 28,200 3,809 3,391 3,809 3,629 31,150 31,200 4,259 3,841 4,259 4,079
25,200 25,250 3,366 2,949 3,366 3,186 28,200 28,250 3,816 3,399 3,816 3,636 31,200 31,250 4,266 3,849 4,266 4,086
25,250 25,300 3,374 2,956 3,374 3,194 28,250 28,300 3,824 3,406 3,824 3,644 31,250 31,300 4,274 3,856 4,274 4,094
25,300 25,350 3,381 2,964 3,381 3,201 28,300 28,350 3,831 3,414 3,831 3,651 31,300 31,350 4,281 3,864 4,281 4,101
25,350 25,400 3,389 2,971 3,389 3,209 28,350 28,400 3,839 3,421 3,839 3,659 31,350 31,400 4,289 3,871 4,289 4,109
25,400 25,450 3,396 2,979 3,396 3,216 28,400 28,450 3,846 3,429 3,846 3,666 31,400 31,450 4,296 3,879 4,296 4,116
25,450 25,500 3,404 2,986 3,404 3,224 28,450 28,500 3,854 3,436 3,854 3,674 31,450 31,500 4,304 3,886 4,304 4,124
25,500 25,550 3,411 2,994 3,411 3,231 28,500 28,550 3,861 3,444 3,861 3,681 31,500 31,550 4,311 3,894 4,311 4,131
25,550 25,600 3,419 3,001 3,419 3,239 28,550 28,600 3,869 3,451 3,869 3,689 31,550 31,600 4,319 3,901 4,319 4,139
25,600 25,650 3,426 3,009 3,426 3,246 28,600 28,650 3,876 3,459 3,876 3,696 31,600 31,650 4,326 3,909 4,326 4,146
25,650 25,700 3,434 3,016 3,434 3,254 28,650 28,700 3,884 3,466 3,884 3,704 31,650 31,700 4,334 3,916 4,334 4,154
25,700 25,750 3,441 3,024 3,441 3,261 28,700 28,750 3,891 3,474 3,891 3,711 31,700 31,750 4,341 3,924 4,341 4,161
25,750 25,800 3,449 3,031 3,449 3,269 28,750 28,800 3,899 3,481 3,899 3,719 31,750 31,800 4,349 3,931 4,349 4,169
25,800 25,850 3,456 3,039 3,456 3,276 28,800 28,850 3,906 3,489 3,906 3,726 31,800 31,850 4,356 3,939 4,356 4,176
25,850 25,900 3,464 3,046 3,464 3,284 28,850 28,900 3,914 3,496 3,914 3,734 31,850 31,900 4,364 3,946 4,364 4,184
25,900 25,950 3,471 3,054 3,471 3,291 28,900 28,950 3,921 3,504 3,921 3,741 31,900 31,950 4,371 3,954 4,371 4,191
25,950 26,000 3,479 3,061 3,479 3,299 28,950 29,000 3,929 3,511 3,929 3,749 31,950 32,000 4,379 3,961 4,379 4,199
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on page 268)
- 267 -

Page 270 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2009 Tax Table±Continued
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð
income) is Ð income) is Ð income) is Ð
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð
32,000 35,000 38,000
32,000 32,050 4,386 3,969 4,386 4,206 35,000 35,050 4,944 4,419 4,944 4,656 38,000 38,050 5,694 4,869 5,694 5,106
32,050 32,100 4,394 3,976 4,394 4,214 35,050 35,100 4,956 4,426 4,956 4,664 38,050 38,100 5,706 4,876 5,706 5,114
32,100 32,150 4,401 3,984 4,401 4,221 35,100 35,150 4,969 4,434 4,969 4,671 38,100 38,150 5,719 4,884 5,719 5,121
32,150 32,200 4,409 3,991 4,409 4,229 35,150 35,200 4,981 4,441 4,981 4,679 38,150 38,200 5,731 4,891 5,731 5,129
32,200 32,250 4,416 3,999 4,416 4,236 35,200 35,250 4,994 4,449 4,994 4,686 38,200 38,250 5,744 4,899 5,744 5,136
32,250 32,300 4,424 4,006 4,424 4,244 35,250 35,300 5,006 4,456 5,006 4,694 38,250 38,300 5,756 4,906 5,756 5,144
32,300 32,350 4,431 4,014 4,431 4,251 35,300 35,350 5,019 4,464 5,019 4,701 38,300 38,350 5,769 4,914 5,769 5,151
32,350 32,400 4,439 4,021 4,439 4,259 35,350 35,400 5,031 4,471 5,031 4,709 38,350 38,400 5,781 4,921 5,781 5,159
32,400 32,450 4,446 4,029 4,446 4,266 35,400 35,450 5,044 4,479 5,044 4,716 38,400 38,450 5,794 4,929 5,794 5,166
32,450 32,500 4,454 4,036 4,454 4,274 35,450 35,500 5,056 4,486 5,056 4,724 38,450 38,500 5,806 4,936 5,806 5,174
32,500 32,550 4,461 4,044 4,461 4,281 35,500 35,550 5,069 4,494 5,069 4,731 38,500 38,550 5,819 4,944 5,819 5,181
32,550 32,600 4,469 4,051 4,469 4,289 35,550 35,600 5,081 4,501 5,081 4,739 38,550 38,600 5,831 4,951 5,831 5,189
32,600 32,650 4,476 4,059 4,476 4,296 35,600 35,650 5,094 4,509 5,094 4,746 38,600 38,650 5,844 4,959 5,844 5,196
32,650 32,700 4,484 4,066 4,484 4,304 35,650 35,700 5,106 4,516 5,106 4,754 38,650 38,700 5,856 4,966 5,856 5,204
32,700 32,750 4,491 4,074 4,491 4,311 35,700 35,750 5,119 4,524 5,119 4,761 38,700 38,750 5,869 4,974 5,869 5,211
32,750 32,800 4,499 4,081 4,499 4,319 35,750 35,800 5,131 4,531 5,131 4,769 38,750 38,800 5,881 4,981 5,881 5,219
32,800 32,850 4,506 4,089 4,506 4,326 35,800 35,850 5,144 4,539 5,144 4,776 38,800 38,850 5,894 4,989 5,894 5,226
32,850 32,900 4,514 4,096 4,514 4,334 35,850 35,900 5,156 4,546 5,156 4,784 38,850 38,900 5,906 4,996 5,906 5,234
32,900 32,950 4,521 4,104 4,521 4,341 35,900 35,950 5,169 4,554 5,169 4,791 38,900 38,950 5,919 5,004 5,919 5,241
32,950 33,000 4,529 4,111 4,529 4,349 35,950 36,000 5,181 4,561 5,181 4,799 38,950 39,000 5,931 5,011 5,931 5,249
33,000 36,000 39,000
33,000 33,050 4,536 4,119 4,536 4,356 36,000 36,050 5,194 4,569 5,194 4,806 39,000 39,050 5,944 5,019 5,944 5,256
33,050 33,100 4,544 4,126 4,544 4,364 36,050 36,100 5,206 4,576 5,206 4,814 39,050 39,100 5,956 5,026 5,956 5,264
33,100 33,150 4,551 4,134 4,551 4,371 36,100 36,150 5,219 4,584 5,219 4,821 39,100 39,150 5,969 5,034 5,969 5,271
33,150 33,200 4,559 4,141 4,559 4,379 36,150 36,200 5,231 4,591 5,231 4,829 39,150 39,200 5,981 5,041 5,981 5,279
33,200 33,250 4,566 4,149 4,566 4,386 36,200 36,250 5,244 4,599 5,244 4,836 39,200 39,250 5,994 5,049 5,994 5,286
33,250 33,300 4,574 4,156 4,574 4,394 36,250 36,300 5,256 4,606 5,256 4,844 39,250 39,300 6,006 5,056 6,006 5,294
33,300 33,350 4,581 4,164 4,581 4,401 36,300 36,350 5,269 4,614 5,269 4,851 39,300 39,350 6,019 5,064 6,019 5,301
33,350 33,400 4,589 4,171 4,589 4,409 36,350 36,400 5,281 4,621 5,281 4,859 39,350 39,400 6,031 5,071 6,031 5,309
33,400 33,450 4,596 4,179 4,596 4,416 36,400 36,450 5,294 4,629 5,294 4,866 39,400 39,450 6,044 5,079 6,044 5,316
33,450 33,500 4,604 4,186 4,604 4,424 36,450 36,500 5,306 4,636 5,306 4,874 39,450 39,500 6,056 5,086 6,056 5,324
33,500 33,550 4,611 4,194 4,611 4,431 36,500 36,550 5,319 4,644 5,319 4,881 39,500 39,550 6,069 5,094 6,069 5,331
33,550 33,600 4,619 4,201 4,619 4,439 36,550 36,600 5,331 4,651 5,331 4,889 39,550 39,600 6,081 5,101 6,081 5,339
33,600 33,650 4,626 4,209 4,626 4,446 36,600 36,650 5,344 4,659 5,344 4,896 39,600 39,650 6,094 5,109 6,094 5,346
33,650 33,700 4,634 4,216 4,634 4,454 36,650 36,700 5,356 4,666 5,356 4,904 39,650 39,700 6,106 5,116 6,106 5,354
33,700 33,750 4,641 4,224 4,641 4,461 36,700 36,750 5,369 4,674 5,369 4,911 39,700 39,750 6,119 5,124 6,119 5,361
33,750 33,800 4,649 4,231 4,649 4,469 36,750 36,800 5,381 4,681 5,381 4,919 39,750 39,800 6,131 5,131 6,131 5,369
33,800 33,850 4,656 4,239 4,656 4,476 36,800 36,850 5,394 4,689 5,394 4,926 39,800 39,850 6,144 5,139 6,144 5,376
33,850 33,900 4,664 4,246 4,664 4,484 36,850 36,900 5,406 4,696 5,406 4,934 39,850 39,900 6,156 5,146 6,156 5,384
33,900 33,950 4,671 4,254 4,671 4,491 36,900 36,950 5,419 4,704 5,419 4,941 39,900 39,950 6,169 5,154 6,169 5,391
33,950 34,000 4,681 4,261 4,681 4,499 36,950 37,000 5,431 4,711 5,431 4,949 39,950 40,000 6,181 5,161 6,181 5,399
34,000 37,000 40,000
34,000 34,050 4,694 4,269 4,694 4,506 37,000 37,050 5,444 4,719 5,444 4,956 40,000 40,050 6,194 5,169 6,194 5,406
34,050 34,100 4,706 4,276 4,706 4,514 37,050 37,100 5,456 4,726 5,456 4,964 40,050 40,100 6,206 5,176 6,206 5,414
34,100 34,150 4,719 4,284 4,719 4,521 37,100 37,150 5,469 4,734 5,469 4,971 40,100 40,150 6,219 5,184 6,219 5,421
34,150 34,200 4,731 4,291 4,731 4,529 37,150 37,200 5,481 4,741 5,481 4,979 40,150 40,200 6,231 5,191 6,231 5,429
34,200 34,250 4,744 4,299 4,744 4,536 37,200 37,250 5,494 4,749 5,494 4,986 40,200 40,250 6,244 5,199 6,244 5,436
34,250 34,300 4,756 4,306 4,756 4,544 37,250 37,300 5,506 4,756 5,506 4,994 40,250 40,300 6,256 5,206 6,256 5,444
34,300 34,350 4,769 4,314 4,769 4,551 37,300 37,350 5,519 4,764 5,519 5,001 40,300 40,350 6,269 5,214 6,269 5,451
34,350 34,400 4,781 4,321 4,781 4,559 37,350 37,400 5,531 4,771 5,531 5,009 40,350 40,400 6,281 5,221 6,281 5,459
34,400 34,450 4,794 4,329 4,794 4,566 37,400 37,450 5,544 4,779 5,544 5,016 40,400 40,450 6,294 5,229 6,294 5,466
34,450 34,500 4,806 4,336 4,806 4,574 37,450 37,500 5,556 4,786 5,556 5,024 40,450 40,500 6,306 5,236 6,306 5,474
34,500 34,550 4,819 4,344 4,819 4,581 37,500 37,550 5,569 4,794 5,569 5,031 40,500 40,550 6,319 5,244 6,319 5,481
34,550 34,600 4,831 4,351 4,831 4,589 37,550 37,600 5,581 4,801 5,581 5,039 40,550 40,600 6,331 5,251 6,331 5,489
34,600 34,650 4,844 4,359 4,844 4,596 37,600 37,650 5,594 4,809 5,594 5,046 40,600 40,650 6,344 5,259 6,344 5,496
34,650 34,700 4,856 4,366 4,856 4,604 37,650 37,700 5,606 4,816 5,606 5,054 40,650 40,700 6,356 5,266 6,356 5,504
34,700 34,750 4,869 4,374 4,869 4,611 37,700 37,750 5,619 4,824 5,619 5,061 40,700 40,750 6,369 5,274 6,369 5,511
34,750 34,800 4,881 4,381 4,881 4,619 37,750 37,800 5,631 4,831 5,631 5,069 40,750 40,800 6,381 5,281 6,381 5,519
34,800 34,850 4,894 4,389 4,894 4,626 37,800 37,850 5,644 4,839 5,644 5,076 40,800 40,850 6,394 5,289 6,394 5,526
34,850 34,900 4,906 4,396 4,906 4,634 37,850 37,900 5,656 4,846 5,656 5,084 40,850 40,900 6,406 5,296 6,406 5,534
34,900 34,950 4,919 4,404 4,919 4,641 37,900 37,950 5,669 4,854 5,669 5,091 40,900 40,950 6,419 5,304 6,419 5,541
34,950 35,000 4,931 4,411 4,931 4,649 37,950 38,000 5,681 4,861 5,681 5,099 40,950 41,000 6,431 5,311 6,431 5,549
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on page 269)
- 268 -

Page 271 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2009 Tax Table±Continued
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð
income) is Ð income) is Ð income) is Ð
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð
41,000 44,000 47,000
41,000 41,050 6,444 5,319 6,444 5,556 44,000 44,050 7,194 5,769 7,194 6,006 47,000 47,050 7,944 6,219 7,944 6,609
41,050 41,100 6,456 5,326 6,456 5,564 44,050 44,100 7,206 5,776 7,206 6,014 47,050 47,100 7,956 6,226 7,956 6,621
41,100 41,150 6,469 5,334 6,469 5,571 44,100 44,150 7,219 5,784 7,219 6,021 47,100 47,150 7,969 6,234 7,969 6,634
41,150 41,200 6,481 5,341 6,481 5,579 44,150 44,200 7,231 5,791 7,231 6,029 47,150 47,200 7,981 6,241 7,981 6,646
41,200 41,250 6,494 5,349 6,494 5,586 44,200 44,250 7,244 5,799 7,244 6,036 47,200 47,250 7,994 6,249 7,994 6,659
41,250 41,300 6,506 5,356 6,506 5,594 44,250 44,300 7,256 5,806 7,256 6,044 47,250 47,300 8,006 6,256 8,006 6,671
41,300 41,350 6,519 5,364 6,519 5,601 44,300 44,350 7,269 5,814 7,269 6,051 47,300 47,350 8,019 6,264 8,019 6,684
41,350 41,400 6,531 5,371 6,531 5,609 44,350 44,400 7,281 5,821 7,281 6,059 47,350 47,400 8,031 6,271 8,031 6,696
41,400 41,450 6,544 5,379 6,544 5,616 44,400 44,450 7,294 5,829 7,294 6,066 47,400 47,450 8,044 6,279 8,044 6,709
41,450 41,500 6,556 5,386 6,556 5,624 44,450 44,500 7,306 5,836 7,306 6,074 47,450 47,500 8,056 6,286 8,056 6,721
41,500 41,550 6,569 5,394 6,569 5,631 44,500 44,550 7,319 5,844 7,319 6,081 47,500 47,550 8,069 6,294 8,069 6,734
41,550 41,600 6,581 5,401 6,581 5,639 44,550 44,600 7,331 5,851 7,331 6,089 47,550 47,600 8,081 6,301 8,081 6,746
41,600 41,650 6,594 5,409 6,594 5,646 44,600 44,650 7,344 5,859 7,344 6,096 47,600 47,650 8,094 6,309 8,094 6,759
41,650 41,700 6,606 5,416 6,606 5,654 44,650 44,700 7,356 5,866 7,356 6,104 47,650 47,700 8,106 6,316 8,106 6,771
41,700 41,750 6,619 5,424 6,619 5,661 44,700 44,750 7,369 5,874 7,369 6,111 47,700 47,750 8,119 6,324 8,119 6,784
41,750 41,800 6,631 5,431 6,631 5,669 44,750 44,800 7,381 5,881 7,381 6,119 47,750 47,800 8,131 6,331 8,131 6,796
41,800 41,850 6,644 5,439 6,644 5,676 44,800 44,850 7,394 5,889 7,394 6,126 47,800 47,850 8,144 6,339 8,144 6,809
41,850 41,900 6,656 5,446 6,656 5,684 44,850 44,900 7,406 5,896 7,406 6,134 47,850 47,900 8,156 6,346 8,156 6,821
41,900 41,950 6,669 5,454 6,669 5,691 44,900 44,950 7,419 5,904 7,419 6,141 47,900 47,950 8,169 6,354 8,169 6,834
41,950 42,000 6,681 5,461 6,681 5,699 44,950 45,000 7,431 5,911 7,431 6,149 47,950 48,000 8,181 6,361 8,181 6,846
42,000 45,000 48,000
42,000 42,050 6,694 5,469 6,694 5,706 45,000 45,050 7,444 5,919 7,444 6,156 48,000 48,050 8,194 6,369 8,194 6,859
42,050 42,100 6,706 5,476 6,706 5,714 45,050 45,100 7,456 5,926 7,456 6,164 48,050 48,100 8,206 6,376 8,206 6,871
42,100 42,150 6,719 5,484 6,719 5,721 45,100 45,150 7,469 5,934 7,469 6,171 48,100 48,150 8,219 6,384 8,219 6,884
42,150 42,200 6,731 5,491 6,731 5,729 45,150 45,200 7,481 5,941 7,481 6,179 48,150 48,200 8,231 6,391 8,231 6,896
42,200 42,250 6,744 5,499 6,744 5,736 45,200 45,250 7,494 5,949 7,494 6,186 48,200 48,250 8,244 6,399 8,244 6,909
42,250 42,300 6,756 5,506 6,756 5,744 45,250 45,300 7,506 5,956 7,506 6,194 48,250 48,300 8,256 6,406 8,256 6,921
42,300 42,350 6,769 5,514 6,769 5,751 45,300 45,350 7,519 5,964 7,519 6,201 48,300 48,350 8,269 6,414 8,269 6,934
42,350 42,400 6,781 5,521 6,781 5,759 45,350 45,400 7,531 5,971 7,531 6,209 48,350 48,400 8,281 6,421 8,281 6,946
42,400 42,450 6,794 5,529 6,794 5,766 45,400 45,450 7,544 5,979 7,544 6,216 48,400 48,450 8,294 6,429 8,294 6,959
42,450 42,500 6,806 5,536 6,806 5,774 45,450 45,500 7,556 5,986 7,556 6,224 48,450 48,500 8,306 6,436 8,306 6,971
42,500 42,550 6,819 5,544 6,819 5,781 45,500 45,550 7,569 5,994 7,569 6,234 48,500 48,550 8,319 6,444 8,319 6,984
42,550 42,600 6,831 5,551 6,831 5,789 45,550 45,600 7,581 6,001 7,581 6,246 48,550 48,600 8,331 6,451 8,331 6,996
42,600 42,650 6,844 5,559 6,844 5,796 45,600 45,650 7,594 6,009 7,594 6,259 48,600 48,650 8,344 6,459 8,344 7,009
42,650 42,700 6,856 5,566 6,856 5,804 45,650 45,700 7,606 6,016 7,606 6,271 48,650 48,700 8,356 6,466 8,356 7,021
42,700 42,750 6,869 5,574 6,869 5,811 45,700 45,750 7,619 6,024 7,619 6,284 48,700 48,750 8,369 6,474 8,369 7,034
42,750 42,800 6,881 5,581 6,881 5,819 45,750 45,800 7,631 6,031 7,631 6,296 48,750 48,800 8,381 6,481 8,381 7,046
42,800 42,850 6,894 5,589 6,894 5,826 45,800 45,850 7,644 6,039 7,644 6,309 48,800 48,850 8,394 6,489 8,394 7,059
42,850 42,900 6,906 5,596 6,906 5,834 45,850 45,900 7,656 6,046 7,656 6,321 48,850 48,900 8,406 6,496 8,406 7,071
42,900 42,950 6,919 5,604 6,919 5,841 45,900 45,950 7,669 6,054 7,669 6,334 48,900 48,950 8,419 6,504 8,419 7,084
42,950 43,000 6,931 5,611 6,931 5,849 45,950 46,000 7,681 6,061 7,681 6,346 48,950 49,000 8,431 6,511 8,431 7,096
43,000 46,000 49,000
43,000 43,050 6,944 5,619 6,944 5,856 46,000 46,050 7,694 6,069 7,694 6,359 49,000 49,050 8,444 6,519 8,444 7,109
43,050 43,100 6,956 5,626 6,956 5,864 46,050 46,100 7,706 6,076 7,706 6,371 49,050 49,100 8,456 6,526 8,456 7,121
43,100 43,150 6,969 5,634 6,969 5,871 46,100 46,150 7,719 6,084 7,719 6,384 49,100 49,150 8,469 6,534 8,469 7,134
43,150 43,200 6,981 5,641 6,981 5,879 46,150 46,200 7,731 6,091 7,731 6,396 49,150 49,200 8,481 6,541 8,481 7,146
43,200 43,250 6,994 5,649 6,994 5,886 46,200 46,250 7,744 6,099 7,744 6,409 49,200 49,250 8,494 6,549 8,494 7,159
43,250 43,300 7,006 5,656 7,006 5,894 46,250 46,300 7,756 6,106 7,756 6,421 49,250 49,300 8,506 6,556 8,506 7,171
43,300 43,350 7,019 5,664 7,019 5,901 46,300 46,350 7,769 6,114 7,769 6,434 49,300 49,350 8,519 6,564 8,519 7,184
43,350 43,400 7,031 5,671 7,031 5,909 46,350 46,400 7,781 6,121 7,781 6,446 49,350 49,400 8,531 6,571 8,531 7,196
43,400 43,450 7,044 5,679 7,044 5,916 46,400 46,450 7,794 6,129 7,794 6,459 49,400 49,450 8,544 6,579 8,544 7,209
43,450 43,500 7,056 5,686 7,056 5,924 46,450 46,500 7,806 6,136 7,806 6,471 49,450 49,500 8,556 6,586 8,556 7,221
43,500 43,550 7,069 5,694 7,069 5,931 46,500 46,550 7,819 6,144 7,819 6,484 49,500 49,550 8,569 6,594 8,569 7,234
43,550 43,600 7,081 5,701 7,081 5,939 46,550 46,600 7,831 6,151 7,831 6,496 49,550 49,600 8,581 6,601 8,581 7,246
43,600 43,650 7,094 5,709 7,094 5,946 46,600 46,650 7,844 6,159 7,844 6,509 49,600 49,650 8,594 6,609 8,594 7,259
43,650 43,700 7,106 5,716 7,106 5,954 46,650 46,700 7,856 6,166 7,856 6,521 49,650 49,700 8,606 6,616 8,606 7,271
43,700 43,750 7,119 5,724 7,119 5,961 46,700 46,750 7,869 6,174 7,869 6,534 49,700 49,750 8,619 6,624 8,619 7,284
43,750 43,800 7,131 5,731 7,131 5,969 46,750 46,800 7,881 6,181 7,881 6,546 49,750 49,800 8,631 6,631 8,631 7,296
43,800 43,850 7,144 5,739 7,144 5,976 46,800 46,850 7,894 6,189 7,894 6,559 49,800 49,850 8,644 6,639 8,644 7,309
43,850 43,900 7,156 5,746 7,156 5,984 46,850 46,900 7,906 6,196 7,906 6,571 49,850 49,900 8,656 6,646 8,656 7,321
43,900 43,950 7,169 5,754 7,169 5,991 46,900 46,950 7,919 6,204 7,919 6,584 49,900 49,950 8,669 6,654 8,669 7,334
43,950 44,000 7,181 5,761 7,181 5,999 46,950 47,000 7,931 6,211 7,931 6,596 49,950 50,000 8,681 6,661 8,681 7,346
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on page 270)
- 269 -

Page 272 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2009 Tax Table±Continued
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð
income) is Ð income) is Ð income) is Ð
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð
50,000 53,000 56,000
50,000 50,050 8,694 6,669 8,694 7,359 53,000 53,050 9,444 7,119 9,444 8,109 56,000 56,050 10,194 7,569 10,194 8,859
50,050 50,100 8,706 6,676 8,706 7,371 53,050 53,100 9,456 7,126 9,456 8,121 56,050 56,100 10,206 7,576 10,206 8,871
50,100 50,150 8,719 6,684 8,719 7,384 53,100 53,150 9,469 7,134 9,469 8,134 56,100 56,150 10,219 7,584 10,219 8,884
50,150 50,200 8,731 6,691 8,731 7,396 53,150 53,200 9,481 7,141 9,481 8,146 56,150 56,200 10,231 7,591 10,231 8,896
50,200 50,250 8,744 6,699 8,744 7,409 53,200 53,250 9,494 7,149 9,494 8,159 56,200 56,250 10,244 7,599 10,244 8,909
50,250 50,300 8,756 6,706 8,756 7,421 53,250 53,300 9,506 7,156 9,506 8,171 56,250 56,300 10,256 7,606 10,256 8,921
50,300 50,350 8,769 6,714 8,769 7,434 53,300 53,350 9,519 7,164 9,519 8,184 56,300 56,350 10,269 7,614 10,269 8,934
50,350 50,400 8,781 6,721 8,781 7,446 53,350 53,400 9,531 7,171 9,531 8,196 56,350 56,400 10,281 7,621 10,281 8,946
50,400 50,450 8,794 6,729 8,794 7,459 53,400 53,450 9,544 7,179 9,544 8,209 56,400 56,450 10,294 7,629 10,294 8,959
50,450 50,500 8,806 6,736 8,806 7,471 53,450 53,500 9,556 7,186 9,556 8,221 56,450 56,500 10,306 7,636 10,306 8,971
50,500 50,550 8,819 6,744 8,819 7,484 53,500 53,550 9,569 7,194 9,569 8,234 56,500 56,550 10,319 7,644 10,319 8,984
50,550 50,600 8,831 6,751 8,831 7,496 53,550 53,600 9,581 7,201 9,581 8,246 56,550 56,600 10,331 7,651 10,331 8,996
50,600 50,650 8,844 6,759 8,844 7,509 53,600 53,650 9,594 7,209 9,594 8,259 56,600 56,650 10,344 7,659 10,344 9,009
50,650 50,700 8,856 6,766 8,856 7,521 53,650 53,700 9,606 7,216 9,606 8,271 56,650 56,700 10,356 7,666 10,356 9,021
50,700 50,750 8,869 6,774 8,869 7,534 53,700 53,750 9,619 7,224 9,619 8,284 56,700 56,750 10,369 7,674 10,369 9,034
50,750 50,800 8,881 6,781 8,881 7,546 53,750 53,800 9,631 7,231 9,631 8,296 56,750 56,800 10,381 7,681 10,381 9,046
50,800 50,850 8,894 6,789 8,894 7,559 53,800 53,850 9,644 7,239 9,644 8,309 56,800 56,850 10,394 7,689 10,394 9,059
50,850 50,900 8,906 6,796 8,906 7,571 53,850 53,900 9,656 7,246 9,656 8,321 56,850 56,900 10,406 7,696 10,406 9,071
50,900 50,950 8,919 6,804 8,919 7,584 53,900 53,950 9,669 7,254 9,669 8,334 56,900 56,950 10,419 7,704 10,419 9,084
50,950 51,000 8,931 6,811 8,931 7,596 53,950 54,000 9,681 7,261 9,681 8,346 56,950 57,000 10,431 7,711 10,431 9,096
51,000 54,000 57,000
51,000 51,050 8,944 6,819 8,944 7,609 54,000 54,050 9,694 7,269 9,694 8,359 57,000 57,050 10,444 7,719 10,444 9,109
51,050 51,100 8,956 6,826 8,956 7,621 54,050 54,100 9,706 7,276 9,706 8,371 57,050 57,100 10,456 7,726 10,456 9,121
51,100 51,150 8,969 6,834 8,969 7,634 54,100 54,150 9,719 7,284 9,719 8,384 57,100 57,150 10,469 7,734 10,469 9,134
51,150 51,200 8,981 6,841 8,981 7,646 54,150 54,200 9,731 7,291 9,731 8,396 57,150 57,200 10,481 7,741 10,481 9,146
51,200 51,250 8,994 6,849 8,994 7,659 54,200 54,250 9,744 7,299 9,744 8,409 57,200 57,250 10,494 7,749 10,494 9,159
51,250 51,300 9,006 6,856 9,006 7,671 54,250 54,300 9,756 7,306 9,756 8,421 57,250 57,300 10,506 7,756 10,506 9,171
51,300 51,350 9,019 6,864 9,019 7,684 54,300 54,350 9,769 7,314 9,769 8,434 57,300 57,350 10,519 7,764 10,519 9,184
51,350 51,400 9,031 6,871 9,031 7,696 54,350 54,400 9,781 7,321 9,781 8,446 57,350 57,400 10,531 7,771 10,531 9,196
51,400 51,450 9,044 6,879 9,044 7,709 54,400 54,450 9,794 7,329 9,794 8,459 57,400 57,450 10,544 7,779 10,544 9,209
51,450 51,500 9,056 6,886 9,056 7,721 54,450 54,500 9,806 7,336 9,806 8,471 57,450 57,500 10,556 7,786 10,556 9,221
51,500 51,550 9,069 6,894 9,069 7,734 54,500 54,550 9,819 7,344 9,819 8,484 57,500 57,550 10,569 7,794 10,569 9,234
51,550 51,600 9,081 6,901 9,081 7,746 54,550 54,600 9,831 7,351 9,831 8,496 57,550 57,600 10,581 7,801 10,581 9,246
51,600 51,650 9,094 6,909 9,094 7,759 54,600 54,650 9,844 7,359 9,844 8,509 57,600 57,650 10,594 7,809 10,594 9,259
51,650 51,700 9,106 6,916 9,106 7,771 54,650 54,700 9,856 7,366 9,856 8,521 57,650 57,700 10,606 7,816 10,606 9,271
51,700 51,750 9,119 6,924 9,119 7,784 54,700 54,750 9,869 7,374 9,869 8,534 57,700 57,750 10,619 7,824 10,619 9,284
51,750 51,800 9,131 6,931 9,131 7,796 54,750 54,800 9,881 7,381 9,881 8,546 57,750 57,800 10,631 7,831 10,631 9,296
51,800 51,850 9,144 6,939 9,144 7,809 54,800 54,850 9,894 7,389 9,894 8,559 57,800 57,850 10,644 7,839 10,644 9,309
51,850 51,900 9,156 6,946 9,156 7,821 54,850 54,900 9,906 7,396 9,906 8,571 57,850 57,900 10,656 7,846 10,656 9,321
51,900 51,950 9,169 6,954 9,169 7,834 54,900 54,950 9,919 7,404 9,919 8,584 57,900 57,950 10,669 7,854 10,669 9,334
51,950 52,000 9,181 6,961 9,181 7,846 54,950 55,000 9,931 7,411 9,931 8,596 57,950 58,000 10,681 7,861 10,681 9,346
52,000 55,000 58,000
52,000 52,050 9,194 6,969 9,194 7,859 55,000 55,050 9,944 7,419 9,944 8,609 58,000 58,050 10,694 7,869 10,694 9,359
52,050 52,100 9,206 6,976 9,206 7,871 55,050 55,100 9,956 7,426 9,956 8,621 58,050 58,100 10,706 7,876 10,706 9,371
52,100 52,150 9,219 6,984 9,219 7,884 55,100 55,150 9,969 7,434 9,969 8,634 58,100 58,150 10,719 7,884 10,719 9,384
52,150 52,200 9,231 6,991 9,231 7,896 55,150 55,200 9,981 7,441 9,981 8,646 58,150 58,200 10,731 7,891 10,731 9,396
52,200 52,250 9,244 6,999 9,244 7,909 55,200 55,250 9,994 7,449 9,994 8,659 58,200 58,250 10,744 7,899 10,744 9,409
52,250 52,300 9,256 7,006 9,256 7,921 55,250 55,300 10,006 7,456 10,006 8,671 58,250 58,300 10,756 7,906 10,756 9,421
52,300 52,350 9,269 7,014 9,269 7,934 55,300 55,350 10,019 7,464 10,019 8,684 58,300 58,350 10,769 7,914 10,769 9,434
52,350 52,400 9,281 7,021 9,281 7,946 55,350 55,400 10,031 7,471 10,031 8,696 58,350 58,400 10,781 7,921 10,781 9,446
52,400 52,450 9,294 7,029 9,294 7,959 55,400 55,450 10,044 7,479 10,044 8,709 58,400 58,450 10,794 7,929 10,794 9,459
52,450 52,500 9,306 7,036 9,306 7,971 55,450 55,500 10,056 7,486 10,056 8,721 58,450 58,500 10,806 7,936 10,806 9,471
52,500 52,550 9,319 7,044 9,319 7,984 55,500 55,550 10,069 7,494 10,069 8,734 58,500 58,550 10,819 7,944 10,819 9,484
52,550 52,600 9,331 7,051 9,331 7,996 55,550 55,600 10,081 7,501 10,081 8,746 58,550 58,600 10,831 7,951 10,831 9,496
52,600 52,650 9,344 7,059 9,344 8,009 55,600 55,650 10,094 7,509 10,094 8,759 58,600 58,650 10,844 7,959 10,844 9,509
52,650 52,700 9,356 7,066 9,356 8,021 55,650 55,700 10,106 7,516 10,106 8,771 58,650 58,700 10,856 7,966 10,856 9,521
52,700 52,750 9,369 7,074 9,369 8,034 55,700 55,750 10,119 7,524 10,119 8,784 58,700 58,750 10,869 7,974 10,869 9,534
52,750 52,800 9,381 7,081 9,381 8,046 55,750 55,800 10,131 7,531 10,131 8,796 58,750 58,800 10,881 7,981 10,881 9,546
52,800 52,850 9,394 7,089 9,394 8,059 55,800 55,850 10,144 7,539 10,144 8,809 58,800 58,850 10,894 7,989 10,894 9,559
52,850 52,900 9,406 7,096 9,406 8,071 55,850 55,900 10,156 7,546 10,156 8,821 58,850 58,900 10,906 7,996 10,906 9,571
52,900 52,950 9,419 7,104 9,419 8,084 55,900 55,950 10,169 7,554 10,169 8,834 58,900 58,950 10,919 8,004 10,919 9,584
52,950 53,000 9,431 7,111 9,431 8,096 55,950 56,000 10,181 7,561 10,181 8,846 58,950 59,000 10,931 8,011 10,931 9,596
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on page 271)
- 270 -

Page 273 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2009 Tax Table±Continued
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð
income) is Ð income) is Ð income) is Ð
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð
59,000 62,000 65,000
59,000 59,050 10,944 8,019 10,944 9,609 62,000 62,050 11,694 8,469 11,694 10,359 65,000 65,050 12,444 8,919 12,444 11,109
59,050 59,100 10,956 8,026 10,956 9,621 62,050 62,100 11,706 8,476 11,706 10,371 65,050 65,100 12,456 8,926 12,456 11,121
59,100 59,150 10,969 8,034 10,969 9,634 62,100 62,150 11,719 8,484 11,719 10,384 65,100 65,150 12,469 8,934 12,469 11,134
59,150 59,200 10,981 8,041 10,981 9,646 62,150 62,200 11,731 8,491 11,731 10,396 65,150 65,200 12,481 8,941 12,481 11,146
59,200 59,250 10,994 8,049 10,994 9,659 62,200 62,250 11,744 8,499 11,744 10,409 65,200 65,250 12,494 8,949 12,494 11,159
59,250 59,300 11,006 8,056 11,006 9,671 62,250 62,300 11,756 8,506 11,756 10,421 65,250 65,300 12,506 8,956 12,506 11,171
59,300 59,350 11,019 8,064 11,019 9,684 62,300 62,350 11,769 8,514 11,769 10,434 65,300 65,350 12,519 8,964 12,519 11,184
59,350 59,400 11,031 8,071 11,031 9,696 62,350 62,400 11,781 8,521 11,781 10,446 65,350 65,400 12,531 8,971 12,531 11,196
59,400 59,450 11,044 8,079 11,044 9,709 62,400 62,450 11,794 8,529 11,794 10,459 65,400 65,450 12,544 8,979 12,544 11,209
59,450 59,500 11,056 8,086 11,056 9,721 62,450 62,500 11,806 8,536 11,806 10,471 65,450 65,500 12,556 8,986 12,556 11,221
59,500 59,550 11,069 8,094 11,069 9,734 62,500 62,550 11,819 8,544 11,819 10,484 65,500 65,550 12,569 8,994 12,569 11,234
59,550 59,600 11,081 8,101 11,081 9,746 62,550 62,600 11,831 8,551 11,831 10,496 65,550 65,600 12,581 9,001 12,581 11,246
59,600 59,650 11,094 8,109 11,094 9,759 62,600 62,650 11,844 8,559 11,844 10,509 65,600 65,650 12,594 9,009 12,594 11,259
59,650 59,700 11,106 8,116 11,106 9,771 62,650 62,700 11,856 8,566 11,856 10,521 65,650 65,700 12,606 9,016 12,606 11,271
59,700 59,750 11,119 8,124 11,119 9,784 62,700 62,750 11,869 8,574 11,869 10,534 65,700 65,750 12,619 9,024 12,619 11,284
59,750 59,800 11,131 8,131 11,131 9,796 62,750 62,800 11,881 8,581 11,881 10,546 65,750 65,800 12,631 9,031 12,631 11,296
59,800 59,850 11,144 8,139 11,144 9,809 62,800 62,850 11,894 8,589 11,894 10,559 65,800 65,850 12,644 9,039 12,644 11,309
59,850 59,900 11,156 8,146 11,156 9,821 62,850 62,900 11,906 8,596 11,906 10,571 65,850 65,900 12,656 9,046 12,656 11,321
59,900 59,950 11,169 8,154 11,169 9,834 62,900 62,950 11,919 8,604 11,919 10,584 65,900 65,950 12,669 9,054 12,669 11,334
59,950 60,000 11,181 8,161 11,181 9,846 62,950 63,000 11,931 8,611 11,931 10,596 65,950 66,000 12,681 9,061 12,681 11,346
60,000 63,000 66,000
60,000 60,050 11,194 8,169 11,194 9,859 63,000 63,050 11,944 8,619 11,944 10,609 66,000 66,050 12,694 9,069 12,694 11,359
60,050 60,100 11,206 8,176 11,206 9,871 63,050 63,100 11,956 8,626 11,956 10,621 66,050 66,100 12,706 9,076 12,706 11,371
60,100 60,150 11,219 8,184 11,219 9,884 63,100 63,150 11,969 8,634 11,969 10,634 66,100 66,150 12,719 9,084 12,719 11,384
60,150 60,200 11,231 8,191 11,231 9,896 63,150 63,200 11,981 8,641 11,981 10,646 66,150 66,200 12,731 9,091 12,731 11,396
60,200 60,250 11,244 8,199 11,244 9,909 63,200 63,250 11,994 8,649 11,994 10,659 66,200 66,250 12,744 9,099 12,744 11,409
60,250 60,300 11,256 8,206 11,256 9,921 63,250 63,300 12,006 8,656 12,006 10,671 66,250 66,300 12,756 9,106 12,756 11,421
60,300 60,350 11,269 8,214 11,269 9,934 63,300 63,350 12,019 8,664 12,019 10,684 66,300 66,350 12,769 9,114 12,769 11,434
60,350 60,400 11,281 8,221 11,281 9,946 63,350 63,400 12,031 8,671 12,031 10,696 66,350 66,400 12,781 9,121 12,781 11,446
60,400 60,450 11,294 8,229 11,294 9,959 63,400 63,450 12,044 8,679 12,044 10,709 66,400 66,450 12,794 9,129 12,794 11,459
60,450 60,500 11,306 8,236 11,306 9,971 63,450 63,500 12,056 8,686 12,056 10,721 66,450 66,500 12,806 9,136 12,806 11,471
60,500 60,550 11,319 8,244 11,319 9,984 63,500 63,550 12,069 8,694 12,069 10,734 66,500 66,550 12,819 9,144 12,819 11,484
60,550 60,600 11,331 8,251 11,331 9,996 63,550 63,600 12,081 8,701 12,081 10,746 66,550 66,600 12,831 9,151 12,831 11,496
60,600 60,650 11,344 8,259 11,344 10,009 63,600 63,650 12,094 8,709 12,094 10,759 66,600 66,650 12,844 9,159 12,844 11,509
60,650 60,700 11,356 8,266 11,356 10,021 63,650 63,700 12,106 8,716 12,106 10,771 66,650 66,700 12,856 9,166 12,856 11,521
60,700 60,750 11,369 8,274 11,369 10,034 63,700 63,750 12,119 8,724 12,119 10,784 66,700 66,750 12,869 9,174 12,869 11,534
60,750 60,800 11,381 8,281 11,381 10,046 63,750 63,800 12,131 8,731 12,131 10,796 66,750 66,800 12,881 9,181 12,881 11,546
60,800 60,850 11,394 8,289 11,394 10,059 63,800 63,850 12,144 8,739 12,144 10,809 66,800 66,850 12,894 9,189 12,894 11,559
60,850 60,900 11,406 8,296 11,406 10,071 63,850 63,900 12,156 8,746 12,156 10,821 66,850 66,900 12,906 9,196 12,906 11,571
60,900 60,950 11,419 8,304 11,419 10,084 63,900 63,950 12,169 8,754 12,169 10,834 66,900 66,950 12,919 9,204 12,919 11,584
60,950 61,000 11,431 8,311 11,431 10,096 63,950 64,000 12,181 8,761 12,181 10,846 66,950 67,000 12,931 9,211 12,931 11,596
61,000 64,000 67,000
61,000 61,050 11,444 8,319 11,444 10,109 64,000 64,050 12,194 8,769 12,194 10,859 67,000 67,050 12,944 9,219 12,944 11,609
61,050 61,100 11,456 8,326 11,456 10,121 64,050 64,100 12,206 8,776 12,206 10,871 67,050 67,100 12,956 9,226 12,956 11,621
61,100 61,150 11,469 8,334 11,469 10,134 64,100 64,150 12,219 8,784 12,219 10,884 67,100 67,150 12,969 9,234 12,969 11,634
61,150 61,200 11,481 8,341 11,481 10,146 64,150 64,200 12,231 8,791 12,231 10,896 67,150 67,200 12,981 9,241 12,981 11,646
61,200 61,250 11,494 8,349 11,494 10,159 64,200 64,250 12,244 8,799 12,244 10,909 67,200 67,250 12,994 9,249 12,994 11,659
61,250 61,300 11,506 8,356 11,506 10,171 64,250 64,300 12,256 8,806 12,256 10,921 67,250 67,300 13,006 9,256 13,006 11,671
61,300 61,350 11,519 8,364 11,519 10,184 64,300 64,350 12,269 8,814 12,269 10,934 67,300 67,350 13,019 9,264 13,019 11,684
61,350 61,400 11,531 8,371 11,531 10,196 64,350 64,400 12,281 8,821 12,281 10,946 67,350 67,400 13,031 9,271 13,031 11,696
61,400 61,450 11,544 8,379 11,544 10,209 64,400 64,450 12,294 8,829 12,294 10,959 67,400 67,450 13,044 9,279 13,044 11,709
61,450 61,500 11,556 8,386 11,556 10,221 64,450 64,500 12,306 8,836 12,306 10,971 67,450 67,500 13,056 9,286 13,056 11,721
61,500 61,550 11,569 8,394 11,569 10,234 64,500 64,550 12,319 8,844 12,319 10,984 67,500 67,550 13,069 9,294 13,069 11,734
61,550 61,600 11,581 8,401 11,581 10,246 64,550 64,600 12,331 8,851 12,331 10,996 67,550 67,600 13,081 9,301 13,081 11,746
61,600 61,650 11,594 8,409 11,594 10,259 64,600 64,650 12,344 8,859 12,344 11,009 67,600 67,650 13,094 9,309 13,094 11,759
61,650 61,700 11,606 8,416 11,606 10,271 64,650 64,700 12,356 8,866 12,356 11,021 67,650 67,700 13,106 9,316 13,106 11,771
61,700 61,750 11,619 8,424 11,619 10,284 64,700 64,750 12,369 8,874 12,369 11,034 67,700 67,750 13,119 9,324 13,119 11,784
61,750 61,800 11,631 8,431 11,631 10,296 64,750 64,800 12,381 8,881 12,381 11,046 67,750 67,800 13,131 9,331 13,131 11,796
61,800 61,850 11,644 8,439 11,644 10,309 64,800 64,850 12,394 8,889 12,394 11,059 67,800 67,850 13,144 9,339 13,144 11,809
61,850 61,900 11,656 8,446 11,656 10,321 64,850 64,900 12,406 8,896 12,406 11,071 67,850 67,900 13,156 9,346 13,156 11,821
61,900 61,950 11,669 8,454 11,669 10,334 64,900 64,950 12,419 8,904 12,419 11,084 67,900 67,950 13,169 9,356 13,169 11,834
61,950 62,000 11,681 8,461 11,681 10,346 64,950 65,000 12,431 8,911 12,431 11,096 67,950 68,000 13,181 9,369 13,181 11,846
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on page 272)
- 271 -

Page 274 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2009 Tax Table±Continued
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð
income) is Ð income) is Ð income) is Ð
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð
68,000 71,000 74,000
68,000 68,050 13,194 9,381 13,194 11,859 71,000 71,050 13,944 10,131 14,019 12,609 74,000 74,050 14,694 10,881 14,859 13,359
68,050 68,100 13,206 9,394 13,206 11,871 71,050 71,100 13,956 10,144 14,033 12,621 74,050 74,100 14,706 10,894 14,873 13,371
68,100 68,150 13,219 9,406 13,219 11,884 71,100 71,150 13,969 10,156 14,047 12,634 74,100 74,150 14,719 10,906 14,887 13,384
68,150 68,200 13,231 9,419 13,231 11,896 71,150 71,200 13,981 10,169 14,061 12,646 74,150 74,200 14,731 10,919 14,901 13,396
68,200 68,250 13,244 9,431 13,244 11,909 71,200 71,250 13,994 10,181 14,075 12,659 74,200 74,250 14,744 10,931 14,915 13,409
68,250 68,300 13,256 9,444 13,256 11,921 71,250 71,300 14,006 10,194 14,089 12,671 74,250 74,300 14,756 10,944 14,929 13,421
68,300 68,350 13,269 9,456 13,269 11,934 71,300 71,350 14,019 10,206 14,103 12,684 74,300 74,350 14,769 10,956 14,943 13,434
68,350 68,400 13,281 9,469 13,281 11,946 71,350 71,400 14,031 10,219 14,117 12,696 74,350 74,400 14,781 10,969 14,957 13,446
68,400 68,450 13,294 9,481 13,294 11,959 71,400 71,450 14,044 10,231 14,131 12,709 74,400 74,450 14,794 10,981 14,971 13,459
68,450 68,500 13,306 9,494 13,306 11,971 71,450 71,500 14,056 10,244 14,145 12,721 74,450 74,500 14,806 10,994 14,985 13,471
68,500 68,550 13,319 9,506 13,319 11,984 71,500 71,550 14,069 10,256 14,159 12,734 74,500 74,550 14,819 11,006 14,999 13,484
68,550 68,600 13,331 9,519 13,333 11,996 71,550 71,600 14,081 10,269 14,173 12,746 74,550 74,600 14,831 11,019 15,013 13,496
68,600 68,650 13,344 9,531 13,347 12,009 71,600 71,650 14,094 10,281 14,187 12,759 74,600 74,650 14,844 11,031 15,027 13,509
68,650 68,700 13,356 9,544 13,361 12,021 71,650 71,700 14,106 10,294 14,201 12,771 74,650 74,700 14,856 11,044 15,041 13,521
68,700 68,750 13,369 9,556 13,375 12,034 71,700 71,750 14,119 10,306 14,215 12,784 74,700 74,750 14,869 11,056 15,055 13,534
68,750 68,800 13,381 9,569 13,389 12,046 71,750 71,800 14,131 10,319 14,229 12,796 74,750 74,800 14,881 11,069 15,069 13,546
68,800 68,850 13,394 9,581 13,403 12,059 71,800 71,850 14,144 10,331 14,243 12,809 74,800 74,850 14,894 11,081 15,083 13,559
68,850 68,900 13,406 9,594 13,417 12,071 71,850 71,900 14,156 10,344 14,257 12,821 74,850 74,900 14,906 11,094 15,097 13,571
68,900 68,950 13,419 9,606 13,431 12,084 71,900 71,950 14,169 10,356 14,271 12,834 74,900 74,950 14,919 11,106 15,111 13,584
68,950 69,000 13,431 9,619 13,445 12,096 71,950 72,000 14,181 10,369 14,285 12,846 74,950 75,000 14,931 11,119 15,125 13,596
69,000 72,000 75,000
69,000 69,050 13,444 9,631 13,459 12,109 72,000 72,050 14,194 10,381 14,299 12,859 75,000 75,050 14,944 11,131 15,139 13,609
69,050 69,100 13,456 9,644 13,473 12,121 72,050 72,100 14,206 10,394 14,313 12,871 75,050 75,100 14,956 11,144 15,153 13,621
69,100 69,150 13,469 9,656 13,487 12,134 72,100 72,150 14,219 10,406 14,327 12,884 75,100 75,150 14,969 11,156 15,167 13,634
69,150 69,200 13,481 9,669 13,501 12,146 72,150 72,200 14,231 10,419 14,341 12,896 75,150 75,200 14,981 11,169 15,181 13,646
69,200 69,250 13,494 9,681 13,515 12,159 72,200 72,250 14,244 10,431 14,355 12,909 75,200 75,250 14,994 11,181 15,195 13,659
69,250 69,300 13,506 9,694 13,529 12,171 72,250 72,300 14,256 10,444 14,369 12,921 75,250 75,300 15,006 11,194 15,209 13,671
69,300 69,350 13,519 9,706 13,543 12,184 72,300 72,350 14,269 10,456 14,383 12,934 75,300 75,350 15,019 11,206 15,223 13,684
69,350 69,400 13,531 9,719 13,557 12,196 72,350 72,400 14,281 10,469 14,397 12,946 75,350 75,400 15,031 11,219 15,237 13,696
69,400 69,450 13,544 9,731 13,571 12,209 72,400 72,450 14,294 10,481 14,411 12,959 75,400 75,450 15,044 11,231 15,251 13,709
69,450 69,500 13,556 9,744 13,585 12,221 72,450 72,500 14,306 10,494 14,425 12,971 75,450 75,500 15,056 11,244 15,265 13,721
69,500 69,550 13,569 9,756 13,599 12,234 72,500 72,550 14,319 10,506 14,439 12,984 75,500 75,550 15,069 11,256 15,279 13,734
69,550 69,600 13,581 9,769 13,613 12,246 72,550 72,600 14,331 10,519 14,453 12,996 75,550 75,600 15,081 11,269 15,293 13,746
69,600 69,650 13,594 9,781 13,627 12,259 72,600 72,650 14,344 10,531 14,467 13,009 75,600 75,650 15,094 11,281 15,307 13,759
69,650 69,700 13,606 9,794 13,641 12,271 72,650 72,700 14,356 10,544 14,481 13,021 75,650 75,700 15,106 11,294 15,321 13,771
69,700 69,750 13,619 9,806 13,655 12,284 72,700 72,750 14,369 10,556 14,495 13,034 75,700 75,750 15,119 11,306 15,335 13,784
69,750 69,800 13,631 9,819 13,669 12,296 72,750 72,800 14,381 10,569 14,509 13,046 75,750 75,800 15,131 11,319 15,349 13,796
69,800 69,850 13,644 9,831 13,683 12,309 72,800 72,850 14,394 10,581 14,523 13,059 75,800 75,850 15,144 11,331 15,363 13,809
69,850 69,900 13,656 9,844 13,697 12,321 72,850 72,900 14,406 10,594 14,537 13,071 75,850 75,900 15,156 11,344 15,377 13,821
69,900 69,950 13,669 9,856 13,711 12,334 72,900 72,950 14,419 10,606 14,551 13,084 75,900 75,950 15,169 11,356 15,391 13,834
69,950 70,000 13,681 9,869 13,725 12,346 72,950 73,000 14,431 10,619 14,565 13,096 75,950 76,000 15,181 11,369 15,405 13,846
70,000 73,000 76,000
70,000 70,050 13,694 9,881 13,739 12,359 73,000 73,050 14,444 10,631 14,579 13,109 76,000 76,050 15,194 11,381 15,419 13,859
70,050 70,100 13,706 9,894 13,753 12,371 73,050 73,100 14,456 10,644 14,593 13,121 76,050 76,100 15,206 11,394 15,433 13,871
70,100 70,150 13,719 9,906 13,767 12,384 73,100 73,150 14,469 10,656 14,607 13,134 76,100 76,150 15,219 11,406 15,447 13,884
70,150 70,200 13,731 9,919 13,781 12,396 73,150 73,200 14,481 10,669 14,621 13,146 76,150 76,200 15,231 11,419 15,461 13,896
70,200 70,250 13,744 9,931 13,795 12,409 73,200 73,250 14,494 10,681 14,635 13,159 76,200 76,250 15,244 11,431 15,475 13,909
70,250 70,300 13,756 9,944 13,809 12,421 73,250 73,300 14,506 10,694 14,649 13,171 76,250 76,300 15,256 11,444 15,489 13,921
70,300 70,350 13,769 9,956 13,823 12,434 73,300 73,350 14,519 10,706 14,663 13,184 76,300 76,350 15,269 11,456 15,503 13,934
70,350 70,400 13,781 9,969 13,837 12,446 73,350 73,400 14,531 10,719 14,677 13,196 76,350 76,400 15,281 11,469 15,517 13,946
70,400 70,450 13,794 9,981 13,851 12,459 73,400 73,450 14,544 10,731 14,691 13,209 76,400 76,450 15,294 11,481 15,531 13,959
70,450 70,500 13,806 9,994 13,865 12,471 73,450 73,500 14,556 10,744 14,705 13,221 76,450 76,500 15,306 11,494 15,545 13,971
70,500 70,550 13,819 10,006 13,879 12,484 73,500 73,550 14,569 10,756 14,719 13,234 76,500 76,550 15,319 11,506 15,559 13,984
70,550 70,600 13,831 10,019 13,893 12,496 73,550 73,600 14,581 10,769 14,733 13,246 76,550 76,600 15,331 11,519 15,573 13,996
70,600 70,650 13,844 10,031 13,907 12,509 73,600 73,650 14,594 10,781 14,747 13,259 76,600 76,650 15,344 11,531 15,587 14,009
70,650 70,700 13,856 10,044 13,921 12,521 73,650 73,700 14,606 10,794 14,761 13,271 76,650 76,700 15,356 11,544 15,601 14,021
70,700 70,750 13,869 10,056 13,935 12,534 73,700 73,750 14,619 10,806 14,775 13,284 76,700 76,750 15,369 11,556 15,615 14,034
70,750 70,800 13,881 10,069 13,949 12,546 73,750 73,800 14,631 10,819 14,789 13,296 76,750 76,800 15,381 11,569 15,629 14,046
70,800 70,850 13,894 10,081 13,963 12,559 73,800 73,850 14,644 10,831 14,803 13,309 76,800 76,850 15,394 11,581 15,643 14,059
70,850 70,900 13,906 10,094 13,977 12,571 73,850 73,900 14,656 10,844 14,817 13,321 76,850 76,900 15,406 11,594 15,657 14,071
70,900 70,950 13,919 10,106 13,991 12,584 73,900 73,950 14,669 10,856 14,831 13,334 76,900 76,950 15,419 11,606 15,671 14,084
70,950 71,000 13,931 10,119 14,005 12,596 73,950 74,000 14,681 10,869 14,845 13,346 76,950 77,000 15,431 11,619 15,685 14,096
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on page 273)
- 272 -

Page 275 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2009 Tax Table±Continued
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð
income) is Ð income) is Ð income) is Ð
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð
77,000 80,000 83,000
77,000 77,050 15,444 11,631 15,699 14,109 80,000 80,050 16,194 12,381 16,539 14,859 83,000 83,050 16,967 13,131 17,379 15,609
77,050 77,100 15,456 11,644 15,713 14,121 80,050 80,100 16,206 12,394 16,553 14,871 83,050 83,100 16,981 13,144 17,393 15,621
77,100 77,150 15,469 11,656 15,727 14,134 80,100 80,150 16,219 12,406 16,567 14,884 83,100 83,150 16,995 13,156 17,407 15,634
77,150 77,200 15,481 11,669 15,741 14,146 80,150 80,200 16,231 12,419 16,581 14,896 83,150 83,200 17,009 13,169 17,421 15,646
77,200 77,250 15,494 11,681 15,755 14,159 80,200 80,250 16,244 12,431 16,595 14,909 83,200 83,250 17,023 13,181 17,435 15,659
77,250 77,300 15,506 11,694 15,769 14,171 80,250 80,300 16,256 12,444 16,609 14,921 83,250 83,300 17,037 13,194 17,449 15,671
77,300 77,350 15,519 11,706 15,783 14,184 80,300 80,350 16,269 12,456 16,623 14,934 83,300 83,350 17,051 13,206 17,463 15,684
77,350 77,400 15,531 11,719 15,797 14,196 80,350 80,400 16,281 12,469 16,637 14,946 83,350 83,400 17,065 13,219 17,477 15,696
77,400 77,450 15,544 11,731 15,811 14,209 80,400 80,450 16,294 12,481 16,651 14,959 83,400 83,450 17,079 13,231 17,491 15,709
77,450 77,500 15,556 11,744 15,825 14,221 80,450 80,500 16,306 12,494 16,665 14,971 83,450 83,500 17,093 13,244 17,505 15,721
77,500 77,550 15,569 11,756 15,839 14,234 80,500 80,550 16,319 12,506 16,679 14,984 83,500 83,550 17,107 13,256 17,519 15,734
77,550 77,600 15,581 11,769 15,853 14,246 80,550 80,600 16,331 12,519 16,693 14,996 83,550 83,600 17,121 13,269 17,533 15,746
77,600 77,650 15,594 11,781 15,867 14,259 80,600 80,650 16,344 12,531 16,707 15,009 83,600 83,650 17,135 13,281 17,547 15,759
77,650 77,700 15,606 11,794 15,881 14,271 80,650 80,700 16,356 12,544 16,721 15,021 83,650 83,700 17,149 13,294 17,561 15,771
77,700 77,750 15,619 11,806 15,895 14,284 80,700 80,750 16,369 12,556 16,735 15,034 83,700 83,750 17,163 13,306 17,575 15,784
77,750 77,800 15,631 11,819 15,909 14,296 80,750 80,800 16,381 12,569 16,749 15,046 83,750 83,800 17,177 13,319 17,589 15,796
77,800 77,850 15,644 11,831 15,923 14,309 80,800 80,850 16,394 12,581 16,763 15,059 83,800 83,850 17,191 13,331 17,603 15,809
77,850 77,900 15,656 11,844 15,937 14,321 80,850 80,900 16,406 12,594 16,777 15,071 83,850 83,900 17,205 13,344 17,617 15,821
77,900 77,950 15,669 11,856 15,951 14,334 80,900 80,950 16,419 12,606 16,791 15,084 83,900 83,950 17,219 13,356 17,631 15,834
77,950 78,000 15,681 11,869 15,965 14,346 80,950 81,000 16,431 12,619 16,805 15,096 83,950 84,000 17,233 13,369 17,645 15,846
78,000 81,000 84,000
78,000 78,050 15,694 11,881 15,979 14,359 81,000 81,050 16,444 12,631 16,819 15,109 84,000 84,050 17,247 13,381 17,659 15,859
78,050 78,100 15,706 11,894 15,993 14,371 81,050 81,100 16,456 12,644 16,833 15,121 84,050 84,100 17,261 13,394 17,673 15,871
78,100 78,150 15,719 11,906 16,007 14,384 81,100 81,150 16,469 12,656 16,847 15,134 84,100 84,150 17,275 13,406 17,687 15,884
78,150 78,200 15,731 11,919 16,021 14,396 81,150 81,200 16,481 12,669 16,861 15,146 84,150 84,200 17,289 13,419 17,701 15,896
78,200 78,250 15,744 11,931 16,035 14,409 81,200 81,250 16,494 12,681 16,875 15,159 84,200 84,250 17,303 13,431 17,715 15,909
78,250 78,300 15,756 11,944 16,049 14,421 81,250 81,300 16,506 12,694 16,889 15,171 84,250 84,300 17,317 13,444 17,729 15,921
78,300 78,350 15,769 11,956 16,063 14,434 81,300 81,350 16,519 12,706 16,903 15,184 84,300 84,350 17,331 13,456 17,743 15,934
78,350 78,400 15,781 11,969 16,077 14,446 81,350 81,400 16,531 12,719 16,917 15,196 84,350 84,400 17,345 13,469 17,757 15,946
78,400 78,450 15,794 11,981 16,091 14,459 81,400 81,450 16,544 12,731 16,931 15,209 84,400 84,450 17,359 13,481 17,771 15,959
78,450 78,500 15,806 11,994 16,105 14,471 81,450 81,500 16,556 12,744 16,945 15,221 84,450 84,500 17,373 13,494 17,785 15,971
78,500 78,550 15,819 12,006 16,119 14,484 81,500 81,550 16,569 12,756 16,959 15,234 84,500 84,550 17,387 13,506 17,799 15,984
78,550 78,600 15,831 12,019 16,133 14,496 81,550 81,600 16,581 12,769 16,973 15,246 84,550 84,600 17,401 13,519 17,813 15,996
78,600 78,650 15,844 12,031 16,147 14,509 81,600 81,650 16,594 12,781 16,987 15,259 84,600 84,650 17,415 13,531 17,827 16,009
78,650 78,700 15,856 12,044 16,161 14,521 81,650 81,700 16,606 12,794 17,001 15,271 84,650 84,700 17,429 13,544 17,841 16,021
78,700 78,750 15,869 12,056 16,175 14,534 81,700 81,750 16,619 12,806 17,015 15,284 84,700 84,750 17,443 13,556 17,855 16,034
78,750 78,800 15,881 12,069 16,189 14,546 81,750 81,800 16,631 12,819 17,029 15,296 84,750 84,800 17,457 13,569 17,869 16,046
78,800 78,850 15,894 12,081 16,203 14,559 81,800 81,850 16,644 12,831 17,043 15,309 84,800 84,850 17,471 13,581 17,883 16,059
78,850 78,900 15,906 12,094 16,217 14,571 81,850 81,900 16,656 12,844 17,057 15,321 84,850 84,900 17,485 13,594 17,897 16,071
78,900 78,950 15,919 12,106 16,231 14,584 81,900 81,950 16,669 12,856 17,071 15,334 84,900 84,950 17,499 13,606 17,911 16,084
78,950 79,000 15,931 12,119 16,245 14,596 81,950 82,000 16,681 12,869 17,085 15,346 84,950 85,000 17,513 13,619 17,925 16,096
79,000 82,000 85,000
79,000 79,050 15,944 12,131 16,259 14,609 82,000 82,050 16,694 12,881 17,099 15,359 85,000 85,050 17,527 13,631 17,939 16,109
79,050 79,100 15,956 12,144 16,273 14,621 82,050 82,100 16,706 12,894 17,113 15,371 85,050 85,100 17,541 13,644 17,953 16,121
79,100 79,150 15,969 12,156 16,287 14,634 82,100 82,150 16,719 12,906 17,127 15,384 85,100 85,150 17,555 13,656 17,967 16,134
79,150 79,200 15,981 12,169 16,301 14,646 82,150 82,200 16,731 12,919 17,141 15,396 85,150 85,200 17,569 13,669 17,981 16,146
79,200 79,250 15,994 12,181 16,315 14,659 82,200 82,250 16,744 12,931 17,155 15,409 85,200 85,250 17,583 13,681 17,995 16,159
79,250 79,300 16,006 12,194 16,329 14,671 82,250 82,300 16,757 12,944 17,169 15,421 85,250 85,300 17,597 13,694 18,009 16,171
79,300 79,350 16,019 12,206 16,343 14,684 82,300 82,350 16,771 12,956 17,183 15,434 85,300 85,350 17,611 13,706 18,023 16,184
79,350 79,400 16,031 12,219 16,357 14,696 82,350 82,400 16,785 12,969 17,197 15,446 85,350 85,400 17,625 13,719 18,037 16,196
79,400 79,450 16,044 12,231 16,371 14,709 82,400 82,450 16,799 12,981 17,211 15,459 85,400 85,450 17,639 13,731 18,051 16,209
79,450 79,500 16,056 12,244 16,385 14,721 82,450 82,500 16,813 12,994 17,225 15,471 85,450 85,500 17,653 13,744 18,065 16,221
79,500 79,550 16,069 12,256 16,399 14,734 82,500 82,550 16,827 13,006 17,239 15,484 85,500 85,550 17,667 13,756 18,079 16,234
79,550 79,600 16,081 12,269 16,413 14,746 82,550 82,600 16,841 13,019 17,253 15,496 85,550 85,600 17,681 13,769 18,093 16,246
79,600 79,650 16,094 12,281 16,427 14,759 82,600 82,650 16,855 13,031 17,267 15,509 85,600 85,650 17,695 13,781 18,107 16,259
79,650 79,700 16,106 12,294 16,441 14,771 82,650 82,700 16,869 13,044 17,281 15,521 85,650 85,700 17,709 13,794 18,121 16,271
79,700 79,750 16,119 12,306 16,455 14,784 82,700 82,750 16,883 13,056 17,295 15,534 85,700 85,750 17,723 13,806 18,135 16,284
79,750 79,800 16,131 12,319 16,469 14,796 82,750 82,800 16,897 13,069 17,309 15,546 85,750 85,800 17,737 13,819 18,149 16,296
79,800 79,850 16,144 12,331 16,483 14,809 82,800 82,850 16,911 13,081 17,323 15,559 85,800 85,850 17,751 13,831 18,163 16,309
79,850 79,900 16,156 12,344 16,497 14,821 82,850 82,900 16,925 13,094 17,337 15,571 85,850 85,900 17,765 13,844 18,177 16,321
79,900 79,950 16,169 12,356 16,511 14,834 82,900 82,950 16,939 13,106 17,351 15,584 85,900 85,950 17,779 13,856 18,191 16,334
79,950 80,000 16,181 12,369 16,525 14,846 82,950 83,000 16,953 13,119 17,365 15,596 85,950 86,000 17,793 13,869 18,205 16,346
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on page 274)
- 273 -

Page 276 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2009 Tax Table±Continued
If line 43 If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð
income) is Ð income) is Ð income) is Ð
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð
86,000 89,000 92,000
86,000 86,050 17,807 13,881 18,219 16,359 89,000 89,050 18,647 14,631 19,059 17,109 92,000 92,050 19,487 15,381 19,899 17,859
86,050 86,100 17,821 13,894 18,233 16,371 89,050 89,100 18,661 14,644 19,073 17,121 92,050 92,100 19,501 15,394 19,913 17,871
86,100 86,150 17,835 13,906 18,247 16,384 89,100 89,150 18,675 14,656 19,087 17,134 92,100 92,150 19,515 15,406 19,927 17,884
86,150 86,200 17,849 13,919 18,261 16,396 89,150 89,200 18,689 14,669 19,101 17,146 92,150 92,200 19,529 15,419 19,941 17,896
86,200 86,250 17,863 13,931 18,275 16,409 89,200 89,250 18,703 14,681 19,115 17,159 92,200 92,250 19,543 15,431 19,955 17,909
86,250 86,300 17,877 13,944 18,289 16,421 89,250 89,300 18,717 14,694 19,129 17,171 92,250 92,300 19,557 15,444 19,969 17,921
86,300 86,350 17,891 13,956 18,303 16,434 89,300 89,350 18,731 14,706 19,143 17,184 92,300 92,350 19,571 15,456 19,983 17,934
86,350 86,400 17,905 13,969 18,317 16,446 89,350 89,400 18,745 14,719 19,157 17,196 92,350 92,400 19,585 15,469 19,997 17,946
86,400 86,450 17,919 13,981 18,331 16,459 89,400 89,450 18,759 14,731 19,171 17,209 92,400 92,450 19,599 15,481 20,011 17,959
86,450 86,500 17,933 13,994 18,345 16,471 89,450 89,500 18,773 14,744 19,185 17,221 92,450 92,500 19,613 15,494 20,025 17,971
86,500 86,550 17,947 14,006 18,359 16,484 89,500 89,550 18,787 14,756 19,199 17,234 92,500 92,550 19,627 15,506 20,039 17,984
86,550 86,600 17,961 14,019 18,373 16,496 89,550 89,600 18,801 14,769 19,213 17,246 92,550 92,600 19,641 15,519 20,053 17,996
86,600 86,650 17,975 14,031 18,387 16,509 89,600 89,650 18,815 14,781 19,227 17,259 92,600 92,650 19,655 15,531 20,067 18,009
86,650 86,700 17,989 14,044 18,401 16,521 89,650 89,700 18,829 14,794 19,241 17,271 92,650 92,700 19,669 15,544 20,081 18,021
86,700 86,750 18,003 14,056 18,415 16,534 89,700 89,750 18,843 14,806 19,255 17,284 92,700 92,750 19,683 15,556 20,095 18,034
86,750 86,800 18,017 14,069 18,429 16,546 89,750 89,800 18,857 14,819 19,269 17,296 92,750 92,800 19,697 15,569 20,109 18,046
86,800 86,850 18,031 14,081 18,443 16,559 89,800 89,850 18,871 14,831 19,283 17,309 92,800 92,850 19,711 15,581 20,123 18,059
86,850 86,900 18,045 14,094 18,457 16,571 89,850 89,900 18,885 14,844 19,297 17,321 92,850 92,900 19,725 15,594 20,137 18,071
86,900 86,950 18,059 14,106 18,471 16,584 89,900 89,950 18,899 14,856 19,311 17,334 92,900 92,950 19,739 15,606 20,151 18,084
86,950 87,000 18,073 14,119 18,485 16,596 89,950 90,000 18,913 14,869 19,325 17,346 92,950 93,000 19,753 15,619 20,165 18,096
87,000 90,000 93,000
87,000 87,050 18,087 14,131 18,499 16,609 90,000 90,050 18,927 14,881 19,339 17,359 93,000 93,050 19,767 15,631 20,179 18,109
87,050 87,100 18,101 14,144 18,513 16,621 90,050 90,100 18,941 14,894 19,353 17,371 93,050 93,100 19,781 15,644 20,193 18,121
87,100 87,150 18,115 14,156 18,527 16,634 90,100 90,150 18,955 14,906 19,367 17,384 93,100 93,150 19,795 15,656 20,207 18,134
87,150 87,200 18,129 14,169 18,541 16,646 90,150 90,200 18,969 14,919 19,381 17,396 93,150 93,200 19,809 15,669 20,221 18,146
87,200 87,250 18,143 14,181 18,555 16,659 90,200 90,250 18,983 14,931 19,395 17,409 93,200 93,250 19,823 15,681 20,235 18,159
87,250 87,300 18,157 14,194 18,569 16,671 90,250 90,300 18,997 14,944 19,409 17,421 93,250 93,300 19,837 15,694 20,249 18,171
87,300 87,350 18,171 14,206 18,583 16,684 90,300 90,350 19,011 14,956 19,423 17,434 93,300 93,350 19,851 15,706 20,263 18,184
87,350 87,400 18,185 14,219 18,597 16,696 90,350 90,400 19,025 14,969 19,437 17,446 93,350 93,400 19,865 15,719 20,277 18,196
87,400 87,450 18,199 14,231 18,611 16,709 90,400 90,450 19,039 14,981 19,451 17,459 93,400 93,450 19,879 15,731 20,291 18,209
87,450 87,500 18,213 14,244 18,625 16,721 90,450 90,500 19,053 14,994 19,465 17,471 93,450 93,500 19,893 15,744 20,305 18,221
87,500 87,550 18,227 14,256 18,639 16,734 90,500 90,550 19,067 15,006 19,479 17,484 93,500 93,550 19,907 15,756 20,319 18,234
87,550 87,600 18,241 14,269 18,653 16,746 90,550 90,600 19,081 15,019 19,493 17,496 93,550 93,600 19,921 15,769 20,333 18,246
87,600 87,650 18,255 14,281 18,667 16,759 90,600 90,650 19,095 15,031 19,507 17,509 93,600 93,650 19,935 15,781 20,347 18,259
87,650 87,700 18,269 14,294 18,681 16,771 90,650 90,700 19,109 15,044 19,521 17,521 93,650 93,700 19,949 15,794 20,361 18,271
87,700 87,750 18,283 14,306 18,695 16,784 90,700 90,750 19,123 15,056 19,535 17,534 93,700 93,750 19,963 15,806 20,375 18,284
87,750 87,800 18,297 14,319 18,709 16,796 90,750 90,800 19,137 15,069 19,549 17,546 93,750 93,800 19,977 15,819 20,389 18,296
87,800 87,850 18,311 14,331 18,723 16,809 90,800 90,850 19,151 15,081 19,563 17,559 93,800 93,850 19,991 15,831 20,403 18,309
87,850 87,900 18,325 14,344 18,737 16,821 90,850 90,900 19,165 15,094 19,577 17,571 93,850 93,900 20,005 15,844 20,417 18,321
87,900 87,950 18,339 14,356 18,751 16,834 90,900 90,950 19,179 15,106 19,591 17,584 93,900 93,950 20,019 15,856 20,431 18,334
87,950 88,000 18,353 14,369 18,765 16,846 90,950 91,000 19,193 15,119 19,605 17,596 93,950 94,000 20,033 15,869 20,445 18,346
88,000 91,000 94,000
88,000 88,050 18,367 14,381 18,779 16,859 91,000 91,050 19,207 15,131 19,619 17,609 94,000 94,050 20,047 15,881 20,459 18,359
88,050 88,100 18,381 14,394 18,793 16,871 91,050 91,100 19,221 15,144 19,633 17,621 94,050 94,100 20,061 15,894 20,473 18,371
88,100 88,150 18,395 14,406 18,807 16,884 91,100 91,150 19,235 15,156 19,647 17,634 94,100 94,150 20,075 15,906 20,487 18,384
88,150 88,200 18,409 14,419 18,821 16,896 91,150 91,200 19,249 15,169 19,661 17,646 94,150 94,200 20,089 15,919 20,501 18,396
88,200 88,250 18,423 14,431 18,835 16,909 91,200 91,250 19,263 15,181 19,675 17,659 94,200 94,250 20,103 15,931 20,515 18,409
88,250 88,300 18,437 14,444 18,849 16,921 91,250 91,300 19,277 15,194 19,689 17,671 94,250 94,300 20,117 15,944 20,529 18,421
88,300 88,350 18,451 14,456 18,863 16,934 91,300 91,350 19,291 15,206 19,703 17,684 94,300 94,350 20,131 15,956 20,543 18,434
88,350 88,400 18,465 14,469 18,877 16,946 91,350 91,400 19,305 15,219 19,717 17,696 94,350 94,400 20,145 15,969 20,557 18,446
88,400 88,450 18,479 14,481 18,891 16,959 91,400 91,450 19,319 15,231 19,731 17,709 94,400 94,450 20,159 15,981 20,571 18,459
88,450 88,500 18,493 14,494 18,905 16,971 91,450 91,500 19,333 15,244 19,745 17,721 94,450 94,500 20,173 15,994 20,585 18,471
88,500 88,550 18,507 14,506 18,919 16,984 91,500 91,550 19,347 15,256 19,759 17,734 94,500 94,550 20,187 16,006 20,599 18,484
88,550 88,600 18,521 14,519 18,933 16,996 91,550 91,600 19,361 15,269 19,773 17,746 94,550 94,600 20,201 16,019 20,613 18,496
88,600 88,650 18,535 14,531 18,947 17,009 91,600 91,650 19,375 15,281 19,787 17,759 94,600 94,650 20,215 16,031 20,627 18,509
88,650 88,700 18,549 14,544 18,961 17,021 91,650 91,700 19,389 15,294 19,801 17,771 94,650 94,700 20,229 16,044 20,641 18,521
88,700 88,750 18,563 14,556 18,975 17,034 91,700 91,750 19,403 15,306 19,815 17,784 94,700 94,750 20,243 16,056 20,655 18,534
88,750 88,800 18,577 14,569 18,989 17,046 91,750 91,800 19,417 15,319 19,829 17,796 94,750 94,800 20,257 16,069 20,669 18,546
88,800 88,850 18,591 14,581 19,003 17,059 91,800 91,850 19,431 15,331 19,843 17,809 94,800 94,850 20,271 16,081 20,683 18,559
88,850 88,900 18,605 14,594 19,017 17,071 91,850 91,900 19,445 15,344 19,857 17,821 94,850 94,900 20,285 16,094 20,697 18,571
88,900 88,950 18,619 14,606 19,031 17,084 91,900 91,950 19,459 15,356 19,871 17,834 94,900 94,950 20,299 16,106 20,711 18,584
88,950 89,000 18,633 14,619 19,045 17,096 91,950 92,000 19,473 15,369 19,885 17,846 94,950 95,000 20,313 16,119 20,725 18,596
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er). (Continued on page 275)
- 274 -

Page 277 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2009 Tax Table±Continued
If line 43 If line 43
(taxable And you are Ð (taxable And you are Ð
income) is Ð income) is Ð
At But Single Married Married Head At But Single Married Married Head
least less filing filing of a least less filing filing of a
than jointly sepa- house- than jointly sepa- house-
* rately hold * rately hold
Your tax is Ð Your tax is Ð
95,000 98,000
95,000 95,050 20,327 16,131 20,739 18,609 98,000 98,050 21,167 16,881 21,579 19,359
95,050 95,100 20,341 16,144 20,753 18,621 98,050 98,100 21,181 16,894 21,593 19,371
95,100 95,150 20,355 16,156 20,767 18,634 98,100 98,150 21,195 16,906 21,607 19,384
95,150 95,200 20,369 16,169 20,781 18,646 98,150 98,200 21,209 16,919 21,621 19,396
95,200 95,250 20,383 16,181 20,795 18,659 98,200 98,250 21,223 16,931 21,635 19,409
95,250 95,300 20,397 16,194 20,809 18,671 98,250 98,300 21,237 16,944 21,649 19,421
95,300 95,350 20,411 16,206 20,823 18,684 98,300 98,350 21,251 16,956 21,663 19,434
95,350 95,400 20,425 16,219 20,837 18,696 98,350 98,400 21,265 16,969 21,677 19,446
95,400 95,450 20,439 16,231 20,851 18,709 98,400 98,450 21,279 16,981 21,691 19,459
95,450 95,500 20,453 16,244 20,865 18,721 98,450 98,500 21,293 16,994 21,705 19,471
95,500 95,550 20,467 16,256 20,879 18,734 98,500 98,550 21,307 17,006 21,719 19,484
95,550 95,600 20,481 16,269 20,893 18,746 98,550 98,600 21,321 17,019 21,733 19,496
95,600 95,650 20,495 16,281 20,907 18,759 98,600 98,650 21,335 17,031 21,747 19,509
95,650 95,700 20,509 16,294 20,921 18,771 98,650 98,700 21,349 17,044 21,761 19,521
95,700 95,750 20,523 16,306 20,935 18,784 98,700 98,750 21,363 17,056 21,775 19,534
95,750 95,800 20,537 16,319 20,949 18,796 98,750 98,800 21,377 17,069 21,789 19,546
95,800 95,850 20,551 16,331 20,963 18,809 98,800 98,850 21,391 17,081 21,803 19,559
95,850 95,900 20,565 16,344 20,977 18,821 98,850 98,900 21,405 17,094 21,817 19,571
95,900 95,950 20,579 16,356 20,991 18,834 98,900 98,950 21,419 17,106 21,831 19,584
95,950 96,000 20,593 16,369 21,005 18,846 98,950 99,000 21,433 17,119 21,845 19,596
96,000 99,000
96,000 96,050 20,607 16,381 21,019 18,859 99,000 99,050 21,447 17,131 21,859 19,609
96,050 96,100 20,621 16,394 21,033 18,871 99,050 99,100 21,461 17,144 21,873 19,621
96,100 96,150 20,635 16,406 21,047 18,884 99,100 99,150 21,475 17,156 21,887 19,634
96,150 96,200 20,649 16,419 21,061 18,896 99,150 99,200 21,489 17,169 21,901 19,646
96,200 96,250 20,663 16,431 21,075 18,909 99,200 99,250 21,503 17,181 21,915 19,659
96,250 96,300 20,677 16,444 21,089 18,921 99,250 99,300 21,517 17,194 21,929 19,671
96,300 96,350 20,691 16,456 21,103 18,934 99,300 99,350 21,531 17,206 21,943 19,684
96,350 96,400 20,705 16,469 21,117 18,946 99,350 99,400 21,545 17,219 21,957 19,696
96,400 96,450 20,719 16,481 21,131 18,959 99,400 99,450 21,559 17,231 21,971 19,709
96,450 96,500 20,733 16,494 21,145 18,971 99,450 99,500 21,573 17,244 21,985 19,721
96,500 96,550 20,747 16,506 21,159 18,984 99,500 99,550 21,587 17,256 21,999 19,734
96,550 96,600 20,761 16,519 21,173 18,996 99,550 99,600 21,601 17,269 22,013 19,746
96,600 96,650 20,775 16,531 21,187 19,009 99,600 99,650 21,615 17,281 22,027 19,759
96,650 96,700 20,789 16,544 21,201 19,021 99,650 99,700 21,629 17,294 22,041 19,771
96,700 96,750 20,803 16,556 21,215 19,034 99,700 99,750 21,643 17,306 22,055 19,784
96,750 96,800 20,817 16,569 21,229 19,046 99,750 99,800 21,657 17,319 22,069 19,796
96,800 96,850 20,831 16,581 21,243 19,059 99,800 99,850 21,671 17,331 22,083 19,809
96,850 96,900 20,845 16,594 21,257 19,071 99,850 99,900 21,685 17,344 22,097 19,821
96,900 96,950 20,859 16,606 21,271 19,084 99,900 99,950 21,699 17,356 22,111 19,834
96,950 97,000 20,873 16,619 21,285 19,096 99,950 100,000 21,713 17,369 22,125 19,846
97,000
97,000 97,050 20,887 16,631 21,299 19,109
97,050 97,100 20,901 16,644 21,313 19,121
97,100 97,150 20,915 16,656 21,327 19,134
97,150 97,200 20,929 16,669 21,341 19,146
97,200 97,250 20,943 16,681 21,355 19,159
97,250 97,300 20,957 16,694 21,369 19,171
97,300 97,350 20,971 16,706 21,383 19,184 $100,00097,350 97,400 20,985 16,719 21,397 19,196 or over Ð
use the Tax97,400 97,450 20,999 16,731 21,411 19,209 Computation97,450 97,500 21,013 16,744 21,425 19,221 Worksheet97,500 97,550 21,027 16,756 21,439 19,234 on page 27697,550 97,600 21,041 16,769 21,453 19,246
97,600 97,650 21,055 16,781 21,467 19,259
97,650 97,700 21,069 16,794 21,481 19,271
97,700 97,750 21,083 16,806 21,495 19,284
97,750 97,800 21,097 16,819 21,509 19,296
97,800 97,850 21,111 16,831 21,523 19,309
97,850 97,900 21,125 16,844 21,537 19,321
97,900 97,950 21,139 16,856 21,551 19,334
97,950 98,000 21,153 16,869 21,565 19,346
* This column must also be used by a qualifying widow(er)
- 275 -

CAUTION
!
Page 278 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2009 Tax Computation WorksheetÐLine 44
See the instructions for line 44 in the instructions for Form 1040 to see if you must use the worksheet below to figure your tax.
CAUTION
!
Note. If you are required to use this worksheet to figure the tax on an amount from another form or worksheet, such as the Qualified
Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet, the Schedule D Tax Worksheet, Schedule J, Form 8615, or the Foreign Earned Income Tax
Worksheet, enter the amount from that form or worksheet in column (a) of the row that applies to the amount you are looking up. Enter the
result on the appropriate line of the form or worksheet that you are completing.
Section AÐUse if your filing status is Single. Complete the row below that applies to you.
Tax. 
Subtract (d) from (c).
(a) (b) (c) (d) Enter the result here
Taxable income. Enter the amount from line Multiplication Multiply Subtraction and on Form 1040, line
If line 43 isÐ 43 amount  (a) by (b) amount 44
At least $100,000 but not over
$171,550  $  ×  28% (.28)  $  $ 6,280.00  $
Over $171,550 but not over
$372,950  $  ×  33% (.33)  $  $ 14,857.50  $
Over $372,950  $  ×  35% (.35)  $  $ 22,316.50  $
Section BÐUse if your filing status is Married filing jointly or Qualifying widow(er). Complete the row below that applies to you. 
Tax. 
(a) (b) (c) (d) Subtract (d) from (c).
Taxable income. Enter the amount from line Multiplication Multiply Subtraction Enter the result here and
If line 43 isÐ 43 amount  (a) by (b) amount on Form 1040, line 44
At least $100,000 but not over
$137,050  $  ×  25% (.25)  $  $ 7,625.00  $
Over $137,050 but not over
$208,850  $  ×  28% (.28)  $  $ 11,736.50  $
Over $208,850 but not over
$372,950  $  ×  33% (.33)  $  $ 22,179.00  $
Over $372,950  $  ×  35% (.35)  $  $ 29,638.00  $
Section CÐUse if your filing status is Married filing separately. Complete the row below that applies to you.
Tax. 
Subtract (d) from (c).
(a) (b) (c) (d) Enter the result here
Taxable income. Enter the amount from line Multiplication Multiply Subtraction and on Form 1040, line
If line 43 isÐ 43 amount  (a) by (b) amount 44
At least $100,000 but not over
$104,425  $  ×  28% (.28)  $  $ 5,868.25  $
At least $104,425 but not over
$186,475  $  ×  33% (.33)  $ $ 11,089.50  $
Over $186,475  $  ×  35% (.35)  $  $ 14,819.00  $
Section DÐUse if your filing status is Head of household. Complete the row below that applies to you.
Tax. 
Subtract (d) from (c).
(a) (b) (c) (d) Enter the result here
Taxable income. Enter the amount from line Multiplication Multiply Subtraction and on Form 1040, line
If line 43 isÐ 43 amount  (a) by (b) amount 44
At least $100,000 but not over
$117,450  $  ×  25% (.25)  $  $ 5,147.50  $
Over $117,450 but not over
$190,200  $  ×  28% (.28)  $  $  8,671.00  $
Over $190,200 but not over
$372,950  $  ×  33% (.33)  $  $ 18,181.00  $
Over $372,950  $  ×  35% (.35)  $  $ 25,640.00  $
Page 276 Publication 17 (2009)

Page 279 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
EPS File Name: 10311G87 Size: Width = 44.0 picas, Depth = page
Tax Table Cat. 24811v52t
2009
Tax Rate
Schedules
The Tax Rate Schedules are shown so you can see the tax rate that applies
to all levels of taxable income. Do not use them to figure your tax. Instead,
see chapter 30.
Schedule Z—If your filing status is Head of household
Schedule X—If your filing status is Single
The tax is:If your taxable
income is: of the
amount
over—
But not
over—Over—
Schedule Y-2—If your filing status is Married filing separately
Schedule Y-1—If your filing status is Married filing jointly or Qualifying widow(er)
The tax is:If your taxable
income is: of the
amount
over—
But not
over—Over—
The tax is:If your taxable
income is: of the
amount
over—
But not
over—Over—
The tax is:If your taxable
income is: of the
amount
over—
But not
over—Over—
CAUTION
$0
8,350
33,950
82,250
171,550
372,950
$8,350
33,950
82,250
171,550
372,950
$0
8,350
33,950
82,250
171,550
372,950
$0
16,700
67,900
137,050
208,850
372,950
$0
8,350
33,950
68,525
104,425
186,475
$0
11,950
45,500
117,450
190,200
372,950
$16,700
67,900
137,050
208,850
372,950
$8,350
33,950
68,525
104,425
186,475
$11,950
45,500
117,450
190,200
372,950
$0
16,700
67,900
137,050
208,850
372,950
$0
8,350
33,950
68,525
104,425
186,475
$0
11,950
45,500
117,450
190,200
372,950
10%
$835.00 + 15%
4,675.00 + 25%
16,750.00 + 28%
41,754.00 + 33%
108,216.00 + 35%
10%
$1,670.00 + 15%
9,350.00 + 25%
26,637.50 + 28%
46,741.50 + 33%
100,894.50 + 35%
10%
$835.00 + 15%
4,675.00 + 25%
13,318.75 + 28%
23,370.75 + 33%
50,447.25 + 35%
10%
$1,195.00 + 15%
6,227.50 + 25%
24,215.00 + 28%
44,585.00 + 33%
104,892.50 + 35%
Publication 17 (2009) Page 277

Page 280 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Your Rights as a Taxpayer
This section explains some of your amount of your tax liability or cer- our examiner proposes any Your collection appeal rights are
most important rights as a tax- tain collection actions, you have changes to your return, he or she explained in detail in Publication
payer, including the examination, the right to ask the Appeals Office will explain the reasons for the 1660, Collection Appeal Rights.
appeal, collection, and refund to review your case. You may also changes. If you do not agree with Innocent spouse relief. Gener-processes. ask a court to review your case. these changes, you can meet with ally, both you and your spouse arethe examiner's supervisor.Relief from certain penalties and each responsible for paying the full
interest. The IRS will waive pen- Repeat examinations. If we ex- amount of any tax, interest, and
alties when allowed by law if you amined your return for the same penalties due on your joint return.
can show you acted reasonably items in either of the 2 previous However, if you qualify for innocentDeclaration of Taxpayer and in good faith or relied on the years and proposed no change to spouse relief, you may be relievedRights incorrect advice of an IRS em- your tax liability, please contact us of all or part of the joint liability. To
ployee. We will waive interest that as soon as possible so we can see request relief, you must file Form
Protection of your rights. IRS is the result of certain errors or de- if we should discontinue the exami- 8857, Request for Innocent
employees will explain and protect lays caused by an IRS employee. nation. Spouse Relief, no later than 2
your rights as a taxpayer through- years after the date on which the
out your contact with us. IRS first attempted to collect the tax
from you. For example, the 2-yearExaminations (Audits) AppealsPrivacy and confidentiality. period for filing your claim may startThe IRS will not disclose to anyone We accept most taxpayers' returns If you do not agree with the exam- if the IRS applies your tax refundthe information you give us, except as filed. If we inquire about your iner's proposed changes, you can from 1 year to the taxes that youas authorized by law. You have the return or select it for examination, it appeal them to the Appeals Office and your spouse owe for anotherright to know why we are asking does not suggest that you are dis- of IRS. Most differences can be year. For more information on inno-you for information, how we will use honest. The inquiry or examination settled without expensive and cent spouse relief, see Publicationit, and what will happen if you do may or may not result in more tax. time-consuming court trials. Your 971, Innocent Spouse Relief, andnot provide requested information. We may close your case without appeal rights are explained in detail Form 8857.change or you may receive a re- in both Publication 5, Your AppealProfessional and courteous
fund. Rights and How To Prepare a Pro-service. If you believe that an
The process of selecting a re- test If You Don't Agree, and Publi-IRS employee has not treated you Potential Third Partyturn for examination usually begins cation 556, Examination ofin a professional, fair, and courte- Contactsin one of two ways. First, we use Returns, Appeal Rights, andous manner, you should tell that
computer programs to identify re- Claims for Refund.employee's supervisor. If the su- Generally, the IRS will deal directly
turns that may have incorrect If you do not wish to use thepervisor's response is not satisfac- with you or your duly authorized
amounts. These programs may be Appeals Office or disagree with itstory, you should write to the IRS representative. However, we
based on information returns, such findings, you may be able to takedirector for your area or the center sometimes talk with other persons
as Forms 1099 and W-2, on studies your case to the U.S. Tax Court,where you filed your return. if we need information that you
of past examinations, or on certain U.S. Court of Federal Claims, or have been unable to provide, or toRepresentation. You may either issues identified by compliance the U.S. District Court where you verify information we have re-represent yourself or, with proper projects. Second, we use informa- live. If you take your case to court, ceived. If we do contact other per-written authorization, have some- tion from outside sources that indi- the IRS will have the burden of sons, such as a neighbor, bank,one else represent you in your cates that a return may have proving certain facts if you kept ad- employer, or employees, we willplace. Your representative must be incorrect amounts. These sources equate records to show your tax generally need to tell them limiteda person allowed to practice before may include newspapers, public liability, cooperated with the IRS, information, such as your name.the IRS, such as an attorney, certi- records, and individuals. If we de- and meet certain other conditions. The law prohibits us from disclos-fied public accountant, or enrolled termine that the information is ac- If the court agrees with you on most ing any more information than isagent. If you are in an interview and curate and reliable, we may use it issues in your case and finds that necessary to obtain or verify theask to consult such a person, then to select a return for examination. our position was largely unjustified, information we are seeking. Ourwe must stop and reschedule the Publication 556, Examination of you may be able to recover some of need to contact other persons mayinterview in most cases. Returns, Appeal Rights, and your administrative and litigation continue as long as there is activityYou can have someone accom- Claims for Refund, explains the costs. You will not be eligible to in your case. If we do contact otherpany you at an interview. You may rules and procedures that we follow recover these costs unless you persons, you have a right to re-make sound recordings of any in examinations. The following sec- tried to resolve your case adminis- quest a list of those contacted.meetings with our examination, ap- tions give an overview of how we tratively, including going throughpeal, or collection personnel, pro- conduct examinations. the appeals system, and you gavevided you tell us in writing 10 days us the information necessary to re- RefundsBy mail. We handle many exami-before the meeting. solve the case.nations and inquiries by mail. We You may file a claim for refund ifPayment of only the correct will send you a letter with either a you think you paid too much tax.amount of tax. You are respon- request for more information or a You must generally file the claimCollectionssible for paying only the correct reason why we believe a change to within 3 years from the date youamount of tax due under the lawÐ your return may be needed. You Publication 594, The IRS Collec- filed your original return or 2 yearsno more, no less. If you cannot pay can respond by mail or you can tion Process, explains your rights from the date you paid the tax,all of your tax when it is due, you request a personal interview with and responsibilities regarding pay- whichever is later. The law gener-may be able to make monthly in- an examiner. If you mail us the re- ment of federal taxes. It describes: ally provides for interest on yourstallment payments. quested information or provide an refund if it is not paid within 45 days• What to do when you oweexplanation, we may or may notHelp with unresolved tax of the date you filed your return ortaxes. It describes what to doagree with you, and we will explainproblems. The Taxpayer Advo- claim for refund. Publication 556if you get a tax bill and whatthe reasons for any changes.cate Service can help you if you has more information on refunds.to do if you think your bill isPlease do not hesitate to write to ushave tried unsuccessfully to re- If you were due a refund but youwrong. It also covers makingabout anything you do not under-solve a problem with the IRS. Your did not file a return, you generallyinstallment payments, delay-stand.local Taxpayer Advocate can offer must file within 3 years from theing collection action, and sub-you special help if you have a sig- date the return was due (includingBy interview. If we notify you mitting an offer innificant hardship as a result of a tax extensions) to get that refund.that we will conduct your examina- compromise.problem. For more information, see tion through a personal interview,Contacting your Taxpayer Advo- • IRS collection actions. It cov-or you request such an interview,cate under How To Get Tax Help. ers liens, releasing a lien, le-you have the right to ask that the vies, releasing a levy,examination take place at a rea-Appeals and judicial review. If seizures and sales, and re-sonable time and place that is con-you disagree with us about the lease of property.venient for both you and the IRS. If
■
Page 278 Publication 17 (2009)

Page 281 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
How To Get Tax Help
some clinics can provide multil- • Download forms, instructions, day, 7 days a week). Wait atYou can get help with unresolved ingual information about taxpayer and publications. least 72 hours after the IRStax issues, order free publications rights and responsibilities. For acknowledges receipt of yourand forms, ask tax questions, and • Order IRS products online.more information, see Publication e-filed return, or 3 to 4 weeksget information from the IRS in sev- • Research your tax questions4134, Low Income Taxpayer Clinic after mailing a paper return. Iferal ways. By selecting the method online.List. This publication is available at you filed Form 8379 with yourthat is best for you, you will have www.irs.gov , by calling return, wait 14 weeks (11• Search publications online byquick and easy access to tax help. 1-800-TAX-FORM weeks if you filed electroni-topic or keyword.Contacting your Taxpayer Advo- (1-800-829-3676), or at your local cally). Have your 2009 tax re-
• Use the online Internal Reve-cate. The Taxpayer Advocate IRS office. turn available so you can
nue Code, Regulations, orService (TAS) is an independent provide your social securityFree tax services. To find out other official guidance.organization within the IRS whose number, your filing status,what services are available, getemployees assist taxpayers who and the exact whole dollar• View Internal Revenue Bulle-Publication 910, IRS Guide to Freeare experiencing economic harm, amount of your refund. Re-tins (IRBs) published in theTax Services. It contains lists ofwho are seeking help in resolving funds are sent out weekly onlast few years.free tax information sources, in-tax problems that have not been Fridays. If you check the sta-cluding publications, services, and • Figure your withholding al-resolved through normal channels, tus of your refund and are notfree tax education and assistance lowances using the withhold-or who believe that an IRS system given the date it will be is-programs. It also has an index of ing calculator online at www.or procedure is not working as it sued, please wait until theover 100 TeleTax topics (recorded irs.gov/individuals.should. Here are seven things next week before checkingtax information) you can listen to onevery taxpayer should know about back.• Determine if Form 6251 mustyour telephone.TAS: be filed by using our Alterna-Accessible versions of IRS pub- • Other refund information. To
tive Minimum Tax (AMT) As-• TAS is your voice at the IRS. lished products are available on re- check the status of a prior
sistant.quest in a variety of alternative year refund or amended re-• Our service is free, confiden- formats for people with disabilities. turn refund, call• Sign up to receive local andtial, and tailored to meet your 1-800-829-1954.national tax news by email.needs. Free help with your return. Free
help in preparing your return is • Get information on starting• You may be eligible for TAS Evaluating the quality of ouravailable nationwide from and operating a small busi-help if you have tried to re- telephone services. To ensureIRS-trained volunteers. The Volun- ness.solve your tax problem IRS representatives give accurate,teer Income Tax Assistance (VITA)through normal IRS channels courteous, and professional an-program is designed to helpand have gotten nowhere, or swers, we use several methods toPhone. Many serviceslow-income taxpayers and the Taxyou believe an IRS procedure evaluate the quality of our tele-are available by phone. Counseling for the Elderly (TCE)just isn't working as it should. phone services. One method is forprogram is designed to assist tax-
 a second IRS representative to lis-• TAS helps taxpayers whose payers age 60 and older with their ten in on or record random tele-problems are causing finan- tax returns. Many VITA sites offer phone calls. Another is to ask somecial difficulty or significant • Ordering forms, instructions,free electronic filing and all volun- callers to complete a short surveycost, including the cost of pro- and publications. Callteers will let you know about credits at the end of the call.fessional representation. This 1-800-TAX FORMand deductions you may be entitled
includes businesses as well (1-800-829-3676) to orderto claim. To find the nearest VITA Walk-in. Many productsas individuals. current-year forms, instruc-or TCE site, call 1-800-829-1040. and services are availabletions, and publications, andAs part of the TCE program, on a walk-in basis.• TAS employees know the IRS
 prior-year forms and instruc-AARP offers the Tax-Aide counsel-and how to navigate it. We tions. You should receiveing program. To find the nearestwill listen to your problem, • Products. You can walk in toyour order within 10 days.AARP Tax-Aide site, callhelp you understand what many post offices, libraries,1-888-227-7669 or visit AARP'sneeds to be done to resolve • Asking tax questions. Call the and IRS offices to pick upwebsite atit, and stay with you every IRS with your tax questions at certain forms, instructions,www.aarp.org/money/taxaide.step of the way until your 1-800-829-1040. and publications. Some IRSFor more information on theseproblem is resolved. offices, libraries, grocery• Solving problems. You canprograms, go to stores, copy centers, city and• TAS has at least one local get face-to-face help solvingwww.irs.gov and enter keyword county government offices,taxpayer advocate in every tax problems every businessªVITAº in the upper right-hand cor- credit unions, and office sup-state, the District of Colum- day in IRS Taxpayer Assis-ner. ply stores have a collection ofbia, and Puerto Rico. You can tance Centers. An employeeInternet. You can access products available to printcall your local advocate, can explain IRS letters, re-the IRS website at www. from a CD or photocopy fromwhose number is in your quest adjustments to your ac-irs.gov 24 hours a day, 7 reproducible proofs. Also,
phone book, in Pub. 1546, count, or help you set up adays a week to: some IRS offices and librariesTaxpayer Advocate Serv- payment plan. Call your local
have the Internal RevenueiceÐYour Voice at the IRS, Taxpayer Assistance Center• E-file your return. Find out Code, regulations, Internaland on our website at www. for an appointment. To findabout commercial tax prepa- Revenue Bulletins, and Cu-irs.gov/advocate. You can the number, go to www.irs.ration and e-file services mulative Bulletins availablealso call our toll-free line at gov/localcontacts or look inavailable free to eligible tax- for research purposes.1-877-777-4778 or TTY/TDD the phone book under Unitedpayers.
1-800-829-4059. States Government, Internal • Services. You can walk in to• Check the status of your 2009 Revenue Service. your local Taxpayer Assis-• You can learn about your refund. Go to tance Center every businessrights and responsibilities as • TTY/TDD equipment. If youwww.irs.gov and click on day for personal, face-to-facea taxpayer by visiting our on- have access to TTY/TDDWhere's My Refund. Wait at tax help. An employee canline tax toolkit at www.taxtool- equipment, callleast 72 hours after the IRS explain IRS letters, requestkit.irs.gov. 1-800-829-4059 to ask taxacknowledges receipt of your adjustments to your tax ac-questions or to order formse-filed return, or 3 to 4 weeks count, or help you set up aLow Income Taxpayer Clinics and publications.after mailing a paper return. If payment plan. If you need to(LITCs). The Low Income Tax- you filed Form 8379 with your • TeleTax topics. Call resolve a tax problem, havepayer Clinic program serves indi- return, wait 14 weeks (11 1-800-829-4477 to listen to questions about how the taxviduals who have a problem with weeks if you filed electroni- pre-recorded messages cov- law applies to your individualthe IRS and whose income is below cally). Have your 2009 tax re- ering various tax topics. tax return, or you are morea certain level. LITCs are indepen- turn available so you can comfortable talking withdent from the IRS. Most LITCs can • Refund information. To checkprovide your social security someone in person, visit yourprovide representation before the the status of your 2009 re-number, your filing status, local Taxpayer AssistanceIRS or in court on audits, tax collec- fund, call 1-800-829-1954and the exact whole dollar Center where you can spreadtion disputes, and other issues for during business hours oramount of your refund. out your records and talk withfree or a small fee. If an individual's 1-800-829-4477 (automated
an IRS representativenative language is not English, refund information 24 hours a
Publication 17 (2009) Page 279

Page 282 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
face-to-face. No appointment www.irs.gov/localcontacts or • Current-year forms, instruc- • Toll-free and email technical
is necessaryÐjust walk in. If look in the phone book under tions, and publications. support.
you prefer, you can call your United States Government, • Prior-year forms, instructions, • Two releases during the year.local Center and leave a mes- Internal Revenue Service. and publications. ± The first release will shipsage requesting an appoint- the beginning of January• Tax Map: an electronic re-ment to resolve a tax account Mail. You can send your 2010.search tool and finding aid.issue. A representative will order for forms, instruc- ± The final release will shipcall you back within 2 busi- tions, and publications to • Tax law frequently asked the beginning of March 2010.
ness days to schedule an the address below. You should re- questions.in-person appointment at your ceive a response within 10 days Purchase the DVD from National• Tax Topics from the IRS tele-convenience. If you have an after your request is received. Technical Information Servicephone response system.ongoing, complex tax account (NTIS) at www.irs.gov/cdorders forproblem or a special need, Internal Revenue Service • Internal Revenue CodeÐTi- $30 (no handling fee) or callsuch as a disability, an ap- 1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorway tle 26 of the U.S. Code. 1-877-233-6767 toll free to buy thepointment can be requested. Bloomington, IL 61705-6613 DVD for $30 (plus a $6 handling• Fill-in, print, and save fea-All other issues will be han- fee).tures for most tax forms.DVD for tax products.dled without an appointment.
You can order PublicationTo find the number of your • Internal Revenue Bulletins.1796, IRS Tax Productslocal office, go to 
DVD, and obtain:
■
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See ªComments and Suggestionsº in the ªIntroductionº for the ways you can reach us.
Change of: Adjustments .................. . 210 Age test  (See Qualifying child)
Depreciation, to deduct unclaimed Administrators, estate  (See Agents  (See also10% tax for early withdrawal from amount .................. . 72 Executors and administrators) Fiduciaries) .................. . 103IRA or retirement plan  (See Early Accounting periods ............ . 13 Income paid to ................ . 13Adopted child ........... . 28, 33, 38withdrawal from deferred interest Calendar year .......... . 11, 13, 48 Signing return ................. . 15Earned income credit ......... . 245account, subheading: Tax on) Change in, standard deduction not AGI  (See Adjusted gross incomeAdoption:10-year tax option .............. . 80 allowed ................... . 141 (AGI))ATIN .................... . 14, 222591/2 rule ...................... . 129 Fiscal year ............. . 13, 44, 46 Child tax credit (See also Child tax Agricultural workers  (See60 day rule .................... . 126 Fringe benefits ................ . 48 credit) ..................... . 233 Farmworkers)701/2 rule ...................... . 123 Accrual method taxpayers ...... . 14 Credit Employer's assistance Agriculture  (See Farming)401(k) plans: Taxes paid during tax year, program ................... . 258 Aircraft:Tax treatment of deduction of ............... . 151 Credits ................. . 167, 257 Charitable gift of, deduction for faircontributions ................ . 51 Accumulation distribution of trusts: Married filing separately ...... . 23 market value ............... . 168403(b) plans: Tax on ...................... . 210 Taking .................... . 258 Airline club dues:Rollovers ............ . 80, 126, 132 Accuracy-related penalties ..... . 21 Employer assistance ........... . 49 Not entertainment expenses ... . 185457 plans  (See Section 457 deferred Acknowledgment .............. . 170 Employer's assistance Airplanes, donations of ........ . 167compensation plans) program ..................... . 1ACRS (Accelerated Cost Recovery Airport transportation:529 plans  (See Qualified tuition Exception for adopted child .... . 146System): Business-related travelprograms) Exemption for child ........... . 167Rental property: expense ................... . 179Expenses not deductible:Alternative minimum tax ...... . 73 Alaska:Foster care prior to, no charitableActivities not for profit .......... . 92 Standard meal allowance ...... . 181deduction ............... . 166A Address: Alaska Permanent FundNo charitable deductionChange of .................... . 19Abandonment of home ........ . 108 dividends .................... . 92for ...................... . 167Correcting label ............... . 18Abortion: Child's dividends ............. . 161Foreign child ................. . 258Foreign ...................... . 18Deductibility as medical Income from ................ . 9, 68Medical and dental expenses ofLabel ........................ . 18expense ................... . 147 Investment income not toadopted child .............. . 146No label received .............. . 18Abroad, citizens traveling or working include .................... . 161Taxpayer identificationP.O. box ..................... . 18(See also Citizens outside U.S.; Alaska Unemploymentnumber ................ . 14, 38Service Centers ............... . 18Foreign employment) .. . 8, 52, 182, Compensation Fund ......... . 151Taxpayer identification numbersAdjusted basis .............. . 97-98183 (TINs) ..................... . 222 Alcohol rehabilitation centers:Decreases to basis ............ . 97Absence, temporary ........ . 29, 33 Advance earned income Deductibility of medicalDepreciation .................. . 97Accelerated Cost Recovery System credit .................. . 3, 9, 252 expense ................... . 147Easements ................... . 98(ACRS): Filing requirements (Table Alcoholic beverages:Energy conservation subsidiesRental property: 1-3) ......................... . 9exclusion ................... . 98 IRA prohibited transactionsAlternative minimum tax ...... . 73 Age:Examples (Table 13-1) ......... . 97 in ......................... . 129
Accelerated death benefits ..... . 88 Children's investments (SeeGifts ......................... . 99 Aliens ........................ . 222
Accident insurance ............. . 49 Children, subheading: InvestmentHome sale (See Sale of home) Dual-status (See Dual-status
Cafeteria plans ................ . 53 income of child under age 18)Improvements ................ . 97 taxpayers)
Increases to basis ............. . 97 Form 1040EZ, taxpayer under 65Long-term care ............ . 49, 54 Filing required ................. . 8
Local assessments ............ . 97 may use ..................... . 9Accidental death benefits ....... . 49 Nonresident (See NonresidentSales of property ............. . 101 Gross income and filing requirementsAccidents, car ................ . 172 aliens)Section 179 deduction ......... . 97 (Table 1-1) .................. . 6 Resident (See Resident aliens)Value determination .......... . 174 IRAs:Adjusted gross income (AGI)  (SeeWillful negligence or intentional act Alimony ..... . 38, 133-136, 134, 135,Contribution cutoff at agealso Deductions) ............. . 136as cause .................. . 172 13670 ...................... . 123Business expenses, limit on Definition of .................. . 133Accountable plans for employee Distribution prior to agededuction ................. . 194reimbursements ........ . 190, 191 Mortgage payments:59 ...................... . 129Charitable contribution deduction Interest deduction .......... . 156Accountants: Distribution required at agelimit ....................... . 169 Reporting of income ........... . 92Basis to include fees of ........ . 96 70 ................. . 128, 130Itemized deduction limit ...... . 156,CPA review courses .......... . 199 Alternative filing methods:Pension distributions required at age197
Electronic (See E-file)Preparers of tax returns ........ . 15 701/2 ....................... . 82Medical and dental expenses and
Alternative minimum taxAccounting methods ........... . 13 Retirement plan recipients over agelimit of deduction ...... . 145, 149
(AMT) ....................... . 210Accrual method (See Accrual method 75 ......................... . 79Modified (See Modified adjusted
Accelerated depreciation and ... . 73taxpayers) Roth IRAs .............. . 131, 133gross income (MAGI))
Child's tax, figuring of ......... . 217Cash method (See Cash method Retirement savings contribution Standard deduction for age 65 or
taxpayers) credit ...................... . 23 older ...................... . 141 Exempt-interest dividends ...... . 68
Page 280 Publication 17 (2009)

Page 283 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appraisal fees ................ . 203 Bicycle:Alternative minimum tax (AMT) B Fringe benefit ................. . 51Donated property ............. . 167(Cont.) Babysitting .................... . 47Not deductible as interest ..... . 160 Bingo .................... . 164, 167Filing requirements (Table Back pay, award for ............ . 47Real estate transactions, when1-3) ......................... . 9 Birth control pills .............. . 147Emotional distress damages underrequired by lender ........... . 97Incentive stock option .......... . 10 Birth of child ................... . 29Title VII of Civil Rights Act ofNonrefundable credit for prior year Appraisals: Head of household, qualifying person1964 ....................... . 93tax ........................ . 259 Casualty or theft losses ....... . 174 to file as ................ . 25, 26Backup withholding ..... . 42, 45, 57Payments ..................... . 9 Archer MSAs ................... . 95 Social security number to beDividend income .............. . 65Refundable credit for prior year Contributions ................. . 49 obtained .................... . 38Penalties ..................... . 42tax ........................ . 262 Filing requirements (Table Birth of dependent ............. . 33Bad check penalty .............. . 16Alternative motor vehicle 1-3) ......................... . 9 Blackmail:Bad debts:credit ....................... . 258 Medical expenses paid for decedent Losses due to ................ . 172Bank deposit, loss due to bank'sAmount of credit .............. . 258 from ...................... . 146 Blind persons:insolvency or bankruptcy .... . 173How to take .................. . 258 Not deductible as medical Exemption from withholding .... . 40Reporting on Schedule D (FormPhaseout .................... . 258 expense ................... . 147 Guide dogs, deductible as medical1040) ................... . 173Amateur sports organizations: Armed forces  (See also Reservists; expense ................... . 147Claim for refund .......... . 20, 106Charitable contributions to ..... . 163 Veterans benefits; Veterans' Impairment-related work expenses,Nonbusiness ................. . 106organizations) ....... . 163, 164, 186Ambulance service personnel: deduction for ............... . 149Recovery ..................... . 89Combat zone:Life insurance proceeds when death Standard deduction for ........ . 141Reporting of ................. . 106Extension to file return ....... . 12in line of duty ............... . 89 Short-term capital loss ........ . 106 Blood banks:Signing return for spouse ..... . 23Amended returns  (See also Form When deductible ............. . 106 No charitable deduction for blood
Dependency allotments ........ . 341040X) ....................... . 19 donations to .......... . 164, 167Baggage:Differential wage payments ..... . 47Itemized deduction, change to Business-related travel Blue books to determine fair marketDisability pay ................. . 52standard deduction ......... . 143 expense ................... . 179 value ....................... . 168Disability pensions ............. . 53Standard deduction, change to Balance due .................. . 210 Boarding houses ............... . 71GI Bill benefits ................ . 36itemized deductions ........ . 143 Bankruptcy: Boats:Military ...................... . 203American citizens abroad  (See also Canceled debt not deemed to be Charitable gift of, deduction for fairMilitary quarters allotments ..... . 34Citizens outside U.S.) ........... . 7 income ..................... . 88 market value ............... . 168Naval officers on permanent dutyEmployment (See Foreign Financial institution's bankruptcy Donations of ................. . 167aboard ship ................ . 179employment) causing deductible loss ..... . 173 Body scan .................... . 147Permanent duty overseas ..... . 179American Indians  (See Indians) Reporting of ............... . 177 Bona fide business purpose:Real estate taxes when receivingAmerican Samoa: Banks: Travel expenses ............. . 181housing allowance ..... . 154, 156Income from ................... . 7 Automatic investment service, Work-related education ....... . 197Rehabilitative programAmortization: determination of holding Bonds:payments .................. . 52Bond premiums, treatment period ..................... . 106 Adjusted basis for ............ . 100Reserves .................... . 194of ......................... . 163 IRAs with .................... . 122 Amortization of premium ..... . 163,Retirees' pay: Losses on deposits, when casualtyAMT  (See Alternative minimum tax 205Taxable income ............. . 52 losses ................ . 105, 173(AMT)) As capital assets ............. . 104Withholding ................. . 39 Reporting of ............... . 177Annuities  (See also Convertible bonds ............ . 102Uniforms .................... . 203 Money market accounts ........ . 67Rollovers) .................... . 80 Discounted:Wages ....................... . 52 Bar associations:Cost computation .............. . 77 Capital gain or loss ......... . 104Art works: Charitable contributions to ..... . 167Decedent's unrecovered investment Issued at discount ............. . 62As capital assets ............. . 104in .......................... . 15 Bar employees: Market discount bonds ........ . 105Capital gains or losses from sale orEarly distributions from ......... . 81 Tips (See Tip income) Original issue discount ......... . 62trade of ................... . 115Deferred annuity contracts ... . 81 Bar review courses ............ . 199 Redemption of ............... . 101Artists, performing  (See PerformingEstimated tax ................. . 76 Retirement of ............ . 80, 101Bargain sales:artists)Exclusion limit ................ . 77 Sale of ....................... . 62As charitable contributions .... . 169Assessments, local  (See LocalForm 1099-R ................. . 45 Basis of purchase ............. . 98 Savings ...................... . 59assessments)General Rule: Sold at premium, computation ofBarter income .................. . 87Assistance  (See Tax help)Annuity starting before November adjusted basis ............. . 100Definition of bartering .......... . 87Assistance, tax  (See Tax help)19, 1996 ................. . 79 State or local government,Form 1099-B ............. . 45, 87Nonqualified plans and qualified Assumption of mortgage ....... . 96 tax-exempt ................ . 105Basis:plans for recipients over 75 Fees not included in basis ...... . 97 Tax-exempt ................... . 62Adjusted basis ................ . 97years .................... . 79 Athletic events: Bonuses ................ . 40, 47, 95Allocation between business andPurchased annuities ......... . 77 Charitable contributions, amount personal use ................ . 96 Bookkeeping  (See RecordkeepingSurvivor's annuity ........... . 82 deductible ................. . 164 Bad debts ................... . 106 requirements)Guaranteed payments ......... . 78 ATIN (Adoption taxpayer Bargain purchases ............ . 98 Books to determine fair marketIRAs as ..................... . 122 identification number) ........ . 14 Bonds ....................... . 100 value ....................... . 174Joint return ................... . 77 At-risk rules: Cost basis .................... . 96 Borrowed funds  (See alsoWorksheet .................. . 78 Rental property ............... . 73 IRAs for nondeductible Loans) .................. . 77, 162Loans from plan ............... . 77 contributions ........ . 125, 128Attachment of wages ........... . 13 Used for charitable contributions,Lump-sum distributions ........ . 79 Definition of ................... . 96Attachments to return .......... . 15 deduction for ............... . 169Multiple plan benefits ...... . 76, 77 Gifts ......................... . 99Attorneys: Bottled water ................. . 147Partly taxable payments ........ . 77 Home sales (See Sale of home)Bar review courses ........... . 199 Boy Scouts:Purchased annuities ........... . 77 Improvements to real estate .... . 97Attorneys' fees ........... . 204, 206 Charitable contributions to ..... . 164Reporting of .................. . 77 Inheritance ................... . 99Basis to include ............... . 96 Breach of contract:Retirement annuities (See also Involuntary conversion ......... . 98Social security and railroad Damages as income ........... . 93Retirement plans) ........... . 76 Like-kind exchanges .......... . 102retirement benefits, deductions employment ................. . 202Rollovers ..................... . 80 Other than cost ...... . 98-100, 102for ......................... . 86Sale of ...................... . 105 Bribes .................... . 92, 205Points not to be included ....... . 97Title to property, for preparation,Gain as ordinary income ..... . 77 Brokers:Property received forfiling, etc. ................... . 96Simplified method to calculate Form 1099-B ............ . 45, 101services .................... . 98Audits:tax-free part of annuity IRAs with .................... . 122Real estate ................... . 96Travel expense records ....... . 189payment .................... . 77 Commissions ......... . 122, 123Restricted property ............ . 98Auto insurance:Survivor's annuity ........... . 82 Receiving dividends, reporting onStock or stock rights ........... . 67Medical expenses covered by, notWorksheet for computation ... . 78 Form 1099-MISC ............ . 65Tax-exempt obligations:deductible ................. . 147Survivor annuities ............. . 82 Bonds ..................... . 100 Burglary:
Trade of insurance policies and Automatic extension of time to Transfers between spouses ... . 99, Losses due to ................ . 172
annuities .................. . 102 file .......................... . 12 103 Burial expenses  (See Funerals)
Unrecovered investment ...... . 205 Form 4868 .................... . 12 Beetles: Business associates  (See alsoWithholding ............ . 15, 41, 76 Automatic investment services: Damage or destruction to trees and Entertainment expenses) ..... . 181,
Annulled marriages: Holding period, determination plants, when casualty 183
of ......................... . 106Filing status .................. . 22 loss ....................... . 172 Business travel to meet ....... . 185
Autos:Anthrax incidents  (See Terrorist Beneficiaries  (See also Estate Travel expenses of, paying
attacks) Cars: beneficiaries; Trust for ........................ . 181
Cash for clunkers ........... . 86Antiques  (See Collectibles) beneficiaries) .......... . 65, 80, 93 Business expenses  (See also
Awards  (See Prizes and awards)Appliances: Bequests  (See also Estate Entertainment expenses) ..... . 181,
Deterioration and damage, not Away-from-home travel  (See Travel beneficiaries; Gifts; 183
casualty loss ............... . 172 and transportation expenses) Inheritance) ........... . 93, 94, 216 Job search expenses .......... . 94
Publication 17 (2009) Page 281

Page 284 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tax rates .................... . 115 Casualty insurance: Itemized deductions, limitBusiness expenses  (Cont.)
on ........................ . 163Premiums not in propertyMaximum capital gain rates (TableMeal expenses (See Meal and
Large quantities of items ...... . 168basis ....................... . 9716-1) .................... . 115lodging expenses)
Noncash contributions,Reimbursements .......... . 41, 47 Reimbursements from ......... . 93Total net gain ................ . 114
recordkeepingReturning excess for business Total net loss ................ . 114 Casualty losses ...... . 171-178, 203,
requirements .............. . 170expenses ............ . 41, 192 205Undistributed gains ........... . 114
Nonqualified organizations .... . 166Travel (See Travel and transportation Adjusted basis in property ..... . 97,Credit for tax on ........ . 67, 260
Not deductible ............... . 166expenses) 98, 174, 178Car expenses ................. . 171 Ordinary income property asWork-related education ....... . 199 Amount of loss ............... . 173Car pools ................. . 93, 186 donation ................... . 168Business organizations: Appraisals ................... . 174Carrybacks: Property contributions ......... . 167Charitable contributions to ..... . 167 Bank deposit, loss due to bank'sBusiness tax credit Decreased in value ......... . 168insolvency or bankruptcy .... . 173Business property: carrybacks ................. . 20 Increased in value .......... . 168As gift, adjusted basis for ....... . 99 Costs:Carryovers: Publication 78, list of qualifiedBasis for depreciation ......... . 100 Cleaning up or makingCapital loss .................. . 114 organizations .............. . 163Property use changed to, adjusted repairs .................. . 174Worksheet ................. . 115 Qualified organizations ........ . 163basis for ................... . 100 Photographs andCharitable contributions, when Types of ................... . 163Sales or exchanges .......... . 101 appraisals ............... . 174deduction exceeds Written statement from ...... . 165Like-kind exchanges ........ . 102 Deductible losses ............ . 172adjusted-gross-income Schedule A (Form 1040) to be usedBusiness tax credits: $500 rule .................. . 176limits ...................... . 169 for deductions .............. . 171Claim for refund ............... . 20 When to take (TableInvestment interest ........... . 161 Time of making contribution, how to25-2) .................... . 177Business use of home ......... . 202 Cars  (See also Standard mileage determine ................. . 169Deduction limits .............. . 176rates; Travel and To individuals, notFor personal property (Tabletransportation) ... . 50, 95, 178, 187 deductible ............ . 164, 16625-1) .................... . 176C Token items given byAccidents resulting in casualty Definition of casualty .......... . 172 recipients .................. . 165loss ....................... . 172Cafeteria plans ................. . 53 Disasters (See also Disaster Volunteers, deductibility ofValue determination ........ . 174Calendar year taxpayers: relief) ..................... . 175 contributions (Table 24-2) ... . 165Willful negligence or intentional actAccounting periods ..... . 11, 13, 48 Employer's emergency disaster Charitable deduction for livingas cause ................ . 172Filing due date ................ . 11 fund ...................... . 175 expenses ................... . 169Actual expenses ............. . 187California Nonoccupational Fair market value of Charity benefit events:Advertising displays on ........ . 186Disability Benefit Fund ...... . 151 property ................... . 173 Deduction amount for charitableAllowances from employers ... . 191Campaign contributions ... . 92, 164, Form 4684 to be filed ......... . 172 contributions ............... . 164As capital assets ............. . 104167 Insurance proceeds, treatment Checklists:Blue book to determine fair marketPresidential Election Campaign of ......................... . 174 Medical and dental expensevalue ..................... . 168Fund ....................... . 14 Net operating losses .......... . 178 deductions (Table 21-1) ..... . 148Books to determine fair marketCampaign expenses ........... . 206 Nondeductible losses ......... . 172 Checks:value ..................... . 174Canada: Proof of loss ................. . 173 As charitable contributions .... . 169Business and personal use,Contributions to charitable Property used partly for business and Canceled checks as evidence ofallocation between .... . 187, 189organizations in ....... . 164, 167 partly for personal travel expenses ............ . 188Business-related travelResident of ............... . 28, 33 purposes .................. . 176 Constructive receipt of ......... . 13expenses .................. . 179Cancellation of Debt ............ . 87 Reimbursement .............. . 174 Payment of tax ................ . 16Car pools .................... . 186Exceptions to treatment as Reporting of gain or loss ..... . 177, Penalty if not honored .......... . 16Cash for clunkers .............. . 93income ..................... . 88 178 Check-writing fees ............ . 206Charitable gift of, deduction for fairForm 1099-C ................. . 45 Single casualty on multiple Child:market value ............... . 168Candidates for public office: properties ................. . 176 Foster child .................. . 249Charitable organization service, useContributions to, no charitable Cell phone .................... . 202 Married child ................. . 247for ........................ . 166deduction for .......... . 164, 167 Cemeteries: Child and dependent careDepreciation ................. . 188Capital assets: Charitable contributions to ..... . 163 credit ........................ . 10Donations of ................. . 167Coal and iron ore .............. . 91 Certificate, mortgage credit .... . 259 Due diligence ................ . 224Electric vehicles (See Electric cars)Definition of .................. . 104 Certificates of deposit (CDs)  (See Earned income ............... . 222Fixed and variable rateCapital expenses ............... . 36 also Individual retirement Full-time student ............. . 222(FAVR) .................... . 192Capital gains or losses ... . 104, 107, arrangements (IRAs)) ..... . 63, 121 Married filing separately ........ . 23Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, how to fill113, 116 Chambers of commerce: Payments to relatives ......... . 223out ....................... . 193Bad debts as short-term capital Charitable contributions to .... . 164, Child born alive ................ . 29Hauling tools or instruments ... . 186loss ....................... . 106 167 Child care:Interest on loans, notCarryover of ................. . 114 Entertainment expenses for Babysitting ................... . 47deductible ................. . 162Worksheet ................. . 115 attending meetings ......... . 184 Care providers ................ . 47Leased vehicles .............. . 188Character of gain ............. . 104 Change of address ............. . 19 Credit (See Child and dependentMedical transportation ... . 147, 148Character of loss ............. . 104 Change of name ............ . 14, 46 care credit)Parking (See Parking fees)Child's distributions and dividends, Expenses .................... . 36Chaplains:Personal property taxes on,reporting of ........... . 161, 213 Nursing care for healthy baby, notLife insurance proceeds when deathdeduction of ............... . 155Collectibles .................. . 115 deductible as medicalin line of duty ............... . 89Deductions .................. . 114 Reporting of ................. . 190 expense ................... . 147CharitableLimit on ................... . 114 Table 26-3 showing forms to be Child custody .................. . 29contributions ........... . 163-171Married filing separately ...... . 23 used .................... . 193
Child support .................. . 93$500 or more noncash contribution:Distributions .................. . 67 Sale, trade-in, or other Alimony, difference from ..... . 133,Form 8283 to be used ...... . 171Form 1040 or 1040A to be disposition ................. . 188 134, 135Bargain sales as ............. . 169used ............. . 9, 10, 68, 114 Section 179 deductions ....... . 188
Benefit received as result of Child support under pre-1985Hobbies, sales from Work-related education, contribution ........... . 164, 167 agreement ................... . 37collections .................. . 94 transportation for ........... . 200
Capital gain property as Child tax credit ........... . 8, 10, 28,Holding period, determination Cash: donation ................... . 168 233-234of ......................... . 105 Dividends paid as ............. . 65 Limit on deduction .......... . 169 Additional credit .............. . 233How to report ................ . 113 Rebates ...................... . 93 Carryover of excess Amount of credit .............. . 233Installment sales and ......... . 113 Sales of property for .......... . 102 deduction ................. . 169 Claiming, procedure for ....... . 233Lump-sum distributions from Cash contributions, records to Deductions: Form 8812, completed ........ . 234pensions and annuities ....... . 80 keep ........................ . 170 Limits ................... . 23, 23330% limit of adjusted grossMutual funds paying ........... . 67 Cash for clunkers ............... . 1 income .................. . 169 Modified adjusted grossNet capital gain ..... . 104, 114, 115 Cash method taxpayers ........ . 13 income .................. . 23350% limit of adjusted grossIncluded as investment Bad debts ................... . 106 Married filing separately ........ . 23income .................. . 169income .................. . 161
Points, deduction of .......... . 158 Qualifying child ............... . 233Examples of (Table 24-1) ... . 163Net long-term capital loss ..... . 114
Real estate transactions, tax Withholding, checkingLimits on ............. . 164, 169Sale of personal items ......... . 95
allocation .................. . 152 amount .................... . 234Year to claim deduction ..... . 169Sale or trade of property held more
Taxes paid during tax year, Child, qualifying ................ . 28Definition of .................. . 163than 1 year ........... . 105, 114
deduction of ............... . 151 Fair market value of propertySchedule D .................. . 113 Childcare:
Worthless securities and negotiable contributions .......... . 164, 168Section 1250 gains from sale of real Credit ....................... . 220
promissory notes ........... . 101 Recordkeepingproperty .............. . 104, 115 Provider:
Cash rebates ................... . 93 requirements ............ . 171State or local government bonds, Taxpayer identification
tax-exempt ................ . 105 Casualties .................... . 112 Gifts to reduce public debt ...... . 18 number ................. . 224
Page 282 Publication 17 (2009)

Page 285 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Children  (See also Adoption) ... . 49, Earned income exclusion ........ . 3 Sharing of (kickbacks) ......... . 95 Period of ownership and
167 use ..................... . 110Employment (See Foreign Unearned, deduction for repayment
Additional credit on child tax employment) of .......................... . 47 Cooperatives:
credit ..................... . 233 Extension of time to file ........ . 12 Commodities: Patronage dividends ........... . 68
Adoption (See Adopted child) Filing requirements ............. . 7 Derivative financial Co-owners:
Babysitters ................... . 47 Withholding from IRA instruments ................ . 104 Dwelling unit used as home byBirth of child: distributions ............... . 128 Common law marriage .......... . 22 co-owner, rental income and
Head of household, qualifying Civic associations: expense allocation .......... . 71Communist organizations:person to file as ....... . 25, 26 Charitable contributions to ..... . 167 Charitable contributions to ..... . 167 Copyrights .................... . 104Social security number to be Contributions to, no charitable Community property ..... . 7, 60, 99 Infringement damages ......... . 93obtained ................. . 38 deduction for ............... . 164 Alimony, difference from ...... . 133 Royalties ..................... . 91Care providers (See also Child Civil defense organizations: IRAs ........................ . 122 Corporations  (See also Scare) ....................... . 47 Charitable contributions to ..... . 164 Married filing separately ........ . 24 corporations) ................. . 89Child's tax, figuring of ......... . 217 Civil service retirement Medical and dental Controlled corporations ...... . 102,Alternative minimum tax ..... . 217 benefits ...................... . 76 expenses .................. . 145 103Credit for (See also Child and Civil suits  (See also Damages from Commuting expenses .... . 186, 206 Director fees as self-employmentdependent care credit; Child tax lawsuits) ..................... . 93 Employer-provided commuter income ..................... . 94credit) .................... . 8, 10 Civil tax penalties  (See Penalties) vehicle ..................... . 51 Reorganizations and nontaxableCustody of .................... . 29 Clergy .......................... . 8 Compensation  (See also Wages and trade of stock .............. . 102Death of child: Contributions that can be spent as salaries) ...................... . 47 Corrections  (See Errors)Head of household, qualifying individual wishes, not deductible Defined for IRA purposes ...... . 122 Cosmetic surgery:person to file as ....... . 25, 26 charitable contribution ...... . 166 Defined for Roth IRA Not deductible as medicalDeductions .................. . 216 Housing ...................... . 51 purposes .................. . 131 expense ................... . 147Dividends of (See this heading: Real estate taxes when receiving Employee .................... . 47Investment income of child under Cosmetics:housing allowance ... . 154, 156 Miscellaneous compensation ... . 47age 18) Not deductible as medicalLife insurance proceeds when Nonemployee ................. . 94Earnings of .................... . 7 expense ................... . 147chaplain died in line of Unemployment ................ . 91Filing requirements ............. . 7 Cost basis ..................... . 96duty ....................... . 89 Computation of tax ............. . 14As dependents (Table 1-2) .... . 7 IRAs for nondeductiblePensions ..................... . 52 Equal amounts ................ . 14Gifts to .................. . 58, 216 contributions .......... . 125, 128Special income rules ........... . 51 Negative amounts ............. . 15Inclusion of child's income on Cost-of-living allowances ....... . 48Clerical help, deductibilityparents's return (Figure Rounding off dollars ........... . 14 Country clubs:of .......................... . 20331-A) ..................... . 213 Computer ..................... . 202 Charitable contributions to ..... . 167Clients  (See also EntertainmentIncome, calculation of ......... . 213 Condemnation of property .... . 112, Dues:expenses) .............. . 181, 183Capital gains distributions ... . 213 172 Charitable deduction notBusiness travel to meet ....... . 185Investment income of ...... . 57, 65 Basis computation ............. . 98 allowed ............ . 164, 165Travel expenses of, payingInvestment income of certain Disaster areas, government-ordered Entertainment expense deductionfor ........................ . 181children .............. . 212, 218 demolition of unsafe not allowed .............. . 185Closing costs:Form 8615, use of (Figure home ..................... . 172 Coupon bonds ................. . 63Real property transactions ...... . 9631-B) ................... . 214 Period of ownership and
Court awards and damages  (SeeSale of home ................ . 109Investment income use ....................... . 110
Damages from lawsuits)defined .................. . 216 Clothing: Confidential information:Parental information, providing Cousin ........................ . 33Military ...................... . 203 Privacy Act and paperwork reductionof ....................... . 216 Moth damage, not casualty Coverdell ESAs:information .................. . 4Parents' election to report on Form loss ....................... . 172 Additional tax on ............. . 210Travel expenses and ......... . 1891040 .................... . 212 Uniforms: Filing requirements (TableConservation:Trust income ............... . 216 Charitable organization requiring, 1-3) ......................... . 9Charitable contribution to promote,Investment income of child under deduction for cost and upkeep CPAs  (See Accountants)recordkeepingage 18: of ....................... . 166 requirement ............... . 171 Credit card payment of taxes:Dependent filing requirements Used clothing, charitable deduction Qualified contribution ......... . 169 Estimated tax ............. . 44, 45(Table 1-2) ................ . 7 for fair market value ........ . 168 Constructive receipt of Credit cards:Interest and dividends ..... . 8, 10 work ........................ . 203 income .................. . 13, 63 Annual fees, not deductible .... . 162Parents' election to report on Form Club dues and membership fees: Contributions  (See also Campaign Benefits, taxability of1040 ................. . 8, 161 Entertainment expenses ...... . 185 contributions; Charitable insurance .................. . 93Kidnapped ................ . 29, 32 Coal and iron ore ............... . 91 contributions) .... . 18, 92, 163-171, Charitable contributions chargedNet investment income, figuring COBRA Premium 164, 167 to ......................... . 169of ......................... . 216 Assistance .................. . 145 Nontaxable combat pay ....... . 122 Finance charges, notNontaxable income ........... . 216 Coins  (See Collectibles) Political ..................... . 206 deductible ................. . 162Property received as gift, income Collectibles: Reservist repayments ......... . 122from ...................... . 216 Payment of taxes ............... . 3As capital assets ............. . 104 Retirement (See specific type ofSigning return, parent for Credit for child and dependent careplan)Gains or losses from sale or tradechild ....................... . 15 expenses ................... . 211of ......................... . 115 Controlled corporations:Standard deduction for ... . 141, 142 Credit for prior year minimum tax:IRA investment in ............ . 129 Nontaxable stock purchaseStillborn ...................... . 29 Nonrefundable ............... . 259of ......................... . 102Collective bargainingSupport of (See Child support) Refundable .................. . 262agreements .................. . 41 Related party transactions ..... . 103Tax credit (See Child tax credit) Credit for the elderly or theCollege professor: Convenience fees ............. . 204Tentative tax figured at parent's tax disabled .................... . 211Research expenses .......... . 203rate ....................... . 217 Conventions: Nontaxable payments ......... . 232Transporting school children .... . 95 Colleges and universities: Delegates: Credit or debit cards:Charitable contributions to ..... . 164Chronic illness: Deduction of unreimbursed Payment of taxes .......... . 12, 1650% limit on deduction ...... . 169 expenses ................ . 165Accelerated payment of life Convenience fee of serviceinsurance proceeds (See Athletic events, amount Travel expenses ........... . 183 providers ................. . 16Accelerated death benefits) deductible ............... . 164 Travel expenses ............. . 183 Installment agreements ...... . 17Long-term care (See Long-term care Education costs (See also Qualified Work-related education, deduction of
Credit reports:insurance contracts) tuition programs) ............ . 95 travel expenses for overseas
Costs not included in propertyEmployer-provided educational conventions ............... . 200Church employees:
basis ....................... . 97assistance (See alsoFiling requirements (Table Conversion  (See specific retirement
Fees for, not deductible ....... . 162Educational1-3) ......................... . 9 or IRA plan)
assistance) .............. . 137 Credit to holders of tax creditChurches, temples, etc.: Convertible stocks and
bonds ...................... . 258Combat zone:Charitable contributions to .... . 163, bonds ...................... . 102
Extension to file return ......... . 12 Credits .................. . 209, 211164 Cooperative housing:
Signing return for spouse ....... . 23 Alternative motor vehicle ...... . 25850% limit on deduction ...... . 169 Dwelling unit used as home .... . 69
Comments on publication ....... . 5Convention delegates, deduction of Build America bonds (See Credit toMortgage interest
unreimbursed expenses ..... . 166 holders of tax credit bonds)Commission drivers: statements ................ . 160
Capital gains, undistributed, credit forCitizen or resident test ......... . 28 Deduction of expenses ........ . 190 Real estate taxes, deduction
tax on ................. . 67, 260of ......................... . 152Citizens outside U.S.: Commissions .................. . 40
Changing claim ............... . 19Taxes that are deductible (TableBusiness travel outside Advance ..................... . 47
Child and dependent care (See Child22-1) .................... . 153U.S. ................. . 182, 183 IRAs with brokers ....... . 122, 123
and dependent care credit)Sale or trade of:Self-employed persons ...... . 183 Property basis to include when buyer
Standard meal allowance ... . 181 pays ....................... . 96 Form 1099-S to report ...... . 114 Child tax (See Child tax credit)
Publication 17 (2009) Page 283

Page 286 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Daycare centers  (See also Child and Penalties, no deduction Depreciation:Credits (Cont.)
dependent care credit; Child permitted .................. . 162 Adjustment to basis for ......... . 97Clean renewable energy bonds (See
care) ................. . 10, 47, 223 Performing artists' Alternative minimum tax andCredit to holders of tax credit
expenses .................. . 194 accelerated depreciation ..... . 73bonds) De minimis benefits ............ . 49
Cars ........................ . 188Prepaid insuranceEarned income (See Earned income Deadlines  (See Due dates)
premiums ................. . 148 Cell phone ................... . 202credit) Death  (See Decedents) Change of use of property ..... . 100Prescription medicines ........ . 147Education (See Education credits) Death benefits: Computer ................... . 202Rental expenses .......... . 69, 72Elderly or the disabled ........ . 229 Accelerated ................... . 88 Correcting amount claimed ..... . 72Repayments .................. . 90Empowerment zone and renewal Life insurance proceeds (See Life Form 4562:Section 179 deductions:community employment insurance) Rental propertyAdjustment to basis for ....... . 97credit ..................... . 209 Public safety officers who died or depreciation .............. . 72Car expenses .............. . 188Excess withholding ........... . 263 were killed in line of duty, tax Home computer .............. . 204Self-employed persons:Excess withholding of social security exclusion ................... . 89 Property used in trade or business,Health insuranceand railroad retirement tax (See Death of child .................. . 29 as noncapital assets ........ . 104premiums ............... . 150Excess withholding credit) Death of dependent ............ . 33 Real property:Social security and railroadFirst-time homebuyer ......... . 260 Debt instruments  (See Bonds or Gain from disposition ofretirement benefits .......... . 86Foreign tax .................. . 259 Notes) property ............. . 73, 112Standard deduction ....... . 141-143Government retiree ........... . 262 Debts  (See also Bad debts) ..... . 20, Land, no depreciation of ..... . 73Stop-smoking programs ....... . 147Gulf tax credit bonds (See Credit to 89 Rental property ........... . 69, 72Student loan interest deduction (Seeholders of tax credit bonds) Canceled (See Cancellation of debt) Student loans) Designated Roth Account ... . 77, 80Health coverage .............. . 262 Nonrecourse .................. . 87 Theft loss .................... . 205 Defined. ...................... . 76Health coverage tax (See Health Paid by another ............... . 13 Transportation expenses (See Travel Destroyed records ............ . 189coverage tax credit) and transportation expenses)Payoff of debt included in sales Diaper service ................ . 147Hope scholarship .............. . 23 Tuition and fees (See Tuition)transaction ................ . 101 Differential wage payments ..... . 48Lifetime learning (See Lifetime Union dues (See Labor unions)Public, gifts to reduce .......... . 18 Differential wages:learning credit) Work-related education ....... . 199Recourse ..................... . 87 Wages for reservists:Making Work Pay ............ . 262 Deeds:Refund offset against ...... . 11, 16 Military reserves ............. . 52Midwestern tax credit bonds (See Preparation costs for .......... . 160Deceased taxpayers  (SeeCredit to holders of tax credit Direct deposit of refunds ....... . 15Recording fees, basis toDecedents)bonds) Directors' fees ................. . 94include ..................... . 97Decedents  (See also Executors andMortgage interest ............. . 259 Disabilities, persons with  (See alsoDeferred annuity contracts  (Seeadministrators) ................. . 7Nonfundable credits .......... . 257 Elderly or the disabled) ....... . 220,Annuities)Capital loss of ................ . 115Other than those on Form 1040A, 222, 229Deferred compensation:Deceased spouse .............. . 7Form 1040 to be used ....... . 10 Accrued leave payment ........ . 53Limit ......................... . 51Personal exemption ......... . 28Plug-in electric drive motor Armed forces ................. . 52Nonqualified plans ............. . 48Due dates .................... . 12vehicle .................... . 259 Blind (See Blind persons)Deferred compensation plans  (SeeFiling requirements ............. . 7Plug-in electric vehicle ........ . 260 Cafeteria plans ................ . 53Retirement plans)Funeral expenses ............ . 166Prior year minimum tax (AMT), Credit for (See Elderly or disabled,Delinquent taxes:Medical and dentalnonrefundable ............. . 259 credit for)Real estate transactions, taxexpenses .................. . 146Prior year minimum tax (AMT), Dependent who is disabled,allocation .................. . 152Savings bonds ................ . 61refundable ................. . 262 deduction for care
Delivery services ............. . 3, 11Spouse's death ............... . 22Qualified energy conservation bonds expenses .................. . 148
Business-related travelStandard deduction ........... . 141(See Credit to holders of tax credit Guide dogs, deductible as medical
expense ................... . 179bonds) Transfer of property at expense ................... . 147
Demutualization of life insurancedeath ..................... . 101Qualified forestry conservation bonds Impairment-related work expenses
companies .................. . 102(See Credit to holders of tax credit of .................... . 149, 195Declaration of rights of taxpayers:
bonds) Work-related education ..... . 201Dental expenses  (See Medical andIRS request for information ...... . 4
Qualified school construction bonds dental expenses) Insurance costs ............... . 53Deduction:
(See Credit to holders of tax credit Military and governmentDentures:Costs of discrimination suits .... . 93
bonds) pensions ................... . 53Deductibility as medicalDeductions  (See also Bad debts;Qualified zone academy bonds (See Public assistance benefits ...... . 92expense ................... . 147Capital losses; EntertainmentCredit to holders of tax credit Reporting of disability pensionDependent care:expenses; Personal exemption;bonds) income ..................... . 53Benefits ................ . 220, 224Points; Recovery of amounts Retirement, pensions, andRefundable credits ........... . 260 Center ...................... . 223previously deducted; Standard profit-sharing plans .......... . 53Residential energy ........... . 260 Credit for .................... . 220deduction) ...... . 23, 26, 27, 38, 89, Signing of return by court-appointedRetirement savings 106, 114, 133, 141, 158, 160, 181, Dependent taxpayer test ........ . 28 representative .............. . 15contribution ................ . 260 183 Dependents  (See also Child tax Social security and railroadCremation: Alimony, deductible by credit) ................. . 8, 10, 146 retirement benefits, deductionsNot deductible as medical payer ..................... . 135 Birth of ....................... . 33 for ......................... . 86expense ................... . 147 Business expenses (See Business Born and died within year .. . 14, 38 Special school or home for,Criminal prosecutions: expenses) Death of ...................... . 33 deductibility of medicalTravel expenses for federal Casualty losses (See Capital losses) Deceased dependent's medical and expense ................... . 147staff ...................... . 180 Changing claim after filing, need to dental expenses ........... . 146 Terrorist attack as cause of injury,amend ..................... . 19Cruises: Disabled dependent care expenses, disability payments excluded fromCharitable contributions (See also deduction for ............... . 148Travel expenses when incidental taxation .................... . 76Charitable Exemption for .............. . 28-38business activities .......... . 182 Workers' compensation ........ . 54contributions) .......... . 163-171 Filing requirements ............. . 7Work-related education, deduction of Disability:Dental expenses (See Medical and Earned income, unearned income,expenses .................. . 200 Income ...................... . 231dental expenses) and gross income levels (TableCustodial fees ................ . 204 Disability benefits:1-2) ....................... . 7Depreciation .................. . 97Custody of child ............... . 29 Earned income credit ......... . 244Married, filing joint return ... . 28, 30Educator expenses ........... . 136Customers  (See also Entertainment Disability insurance payments:Medical and dentalEstate ....................... . 204expenses) .............. . 181, 183 Earned income credit ......... . 244expenses .................. . 146Fee-basis governmentBusiness travel to meet ....... . 185 Disability, permanent and totalQualifying child ........... . 28, 146officials .................... . 194Travel expenses of, paying disability .................... . 229Qualifying relative ........ . 32, 146Impairment-related workfor ........................ . 181 Social security number ..... . 14, 38 Disabled:expenses ............. . 149, 195
Adoption taxpayer identification Child ......................... . 29Interest (See Interest payments)
number .............. . 14, 38 Dependent ................... . 33Investment expenses ......... . 161D Alien dependents ............ . 38 Disaster Assistance Act of 1988:IRA contributions (See IndividualDaily allowance  (See Per diem) Standard deduction for ........ . 142 Withholding ................... . 42retirement arrangements (IRAs))
Damage to property  (See also Travel expenses for .......... . 180Itemizing (See Itemized deductions) Disaster loss, standard deductionCasualty losses) ............. . 171 Tuition deduction for .......... . 139Long-term care insurance increased by ................ . 142
Disasters (See also Disaster Dependents not allowed to claimcontracts .................. . 147 Disaster relief  (See also Terroristrelief) ..................... . 175 dependents .................. . 28Medical expenses (See Medical and attacks) .......... . 54, 76, 92, 175
Damages ..................... . 202 Depletion allowance ............ . 91dental expenses) Cash gifts to victims .......... . 175
Damages from lawsuits ......... . 93 Mortgage interest (See Mortgages) Deposits ...................... . 223 Disaster Relief and Emergency
Medical expenses as part of Not itemizing, use of Form Loss on ..................... . 204 Assistance Act:
settlement ................. . 149 1040A ...................... . 9 Losses on .............. . 105, 173 Grants ..................... . 92
Dating your return .............. . 15 Pass-through entities ......... . 204 Reporting of ............... . 177 Unemployment assistance ... . 91
Page 284 Publication 17 (2009)

Page 287 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
IRAs ................... . 123, 127 Defined: Elderly persons  (See alsoDisaster relief  (Cont.)
Pensions) .................... . 76Medical and dental expenses ofEmployer's emergency disaster For purposes of standard
children of ................. . 146 Credit for (See Elderly or disabled,fund ...................... . 175 deduction ............... . 142
Mortgage interest, payment as credit for)Government-ordered demolition or Dependent filing requirements (Table
alimony ................... . 156relocation of home that is unsafe Exemption from withholding .... . 401-2) ......................... . 7
Personal exemption ........... . 28due to ..................... . 172 Home for the aged ............ . 34Employee ................... . 244
Real estate taxes, allocationGrants or payments ........... . 92 Long-term care (See Long-term careSelf-employed ............... . 244
of ......................... . 154Replacement of lost or destroyed insurance contracts)Earned income credit ..... . 211, 242Transfers between spouses ... . 99,property ................... . 175 Nutrition Program for theAdvance .................... . 3, 9103Discharge of qualified principal Elderly ..................... . 92Filing requirements (TableUse of home after divorce ..... . 111residence indebtedness .... . 108, Standard deduction for age 65 or1-3) ....................... . 9109 Doctors' bills  (See Medical and older ...................... . 141Considered unmarried ......... . 24dental expenses)Disclosure statement ........... . 21 Tax Counseling for theDisability benefits ............. . 244Documentary evidence: Elderly ..................... . 11Discount, bonds and notes issued Disability insuranceRecordkeepingat ............................ . 62 Election precinct officials:payments ................. . 244requirements .............. . 188Discounted debt instruments  (See Fees, reporting of ............. . 94Filing claim .................... . 8Domestic help:also Original issue discount Election to include child's incomeFoster child .................. . 245Withholding ................... . 39(OID)) ........................ . 45 on parent's return ....... . 212-214Married filing separately ........ . 23Capital gain or loss ........... . 104 Domestic help, no exemption Inclusion of child's income onMilitary personnel ............ . 247for ........................... . 28Discounts: parent's return (FigureSocial security card ........... . 247Employee discounts, effect on Domestic relations orders, qualified 31-A) ..................... . 213Social security number ........ . 247basis ....................... . 98 (QDROs): Elective deferrals  (See alsoTwo persons with same qualifyingRollover of retirement planDistributions  (See also Dividends; Retirement plans) ............. . 76child ....................... . 31distribution ................. . 80Rollovers) ................ . 45, 80 Limits ........................ . 51Earned income credit (EIC) ...... . 2Early (See Early withdrawal from Donations  (See Charitable Elective surgery:Earthquakes  (See also Disasterdeferred interest account) contributions) Not deductible as medicalrelief) ....................... . 175Liquidating distributions ........ . 67 Down payment assistance ...... . 93 expense ................... . 147Casualty loss caused by ...... . 172Lump sum (See Lump-sum Droughts: Electric cars:Easements:distributions) Losses of property due to ..... . 172 Credit ....................... . 187Adjustment to basis for ......... . 98Nondividend distributions ....... . 67 Drug or alcohol rehabilitation Credits:Economic recovery payment .... . 86Qualified charitable ........... . 128 centers: Filing requirements (TableQualified reservist ............. . 81 Government retiree credit:Deductibility of medical 1-3) ....................... . 9Required minimum distributions (See Making work pay credit ....... . 93expense ................... . 147 Electronic filing  (See E-file)also Individual retirement Education:Drugs: Electronic payment options ..... . 3,arrangements (IRAs); Savings bond program ......... . 61As medical expenses: 17Pensions) ......... . 82, 126, 128 Education credits  (See also HopeOver-the-counter drugs, not Credit card ................... . 44Return of capital ............... . 67 credit; Lifetime learningdeductible ............... . 147 Credit or debit card ............ . 16District of Columbia: credit) ................. . 2, 10, 238Prescription medicines, Electronic Federal Tax PaymentFirst-time homebuyer credit .... . 109 deductibility .............. . 147 Academic period ............. . 238 System (EFTPS) ........ . 17, 44Dividends  (See also Form Eligible educationalDry cleaning: Electronic funds withdrawal .... . 17,1099-DIV) ................. . 65-68 institution .................. . 238Business-related travel 38, 44, 45Alaska Permanent Fund (See Alaska expense .............. . 179, 181 Married filing separately ........ . 23 Electronic reporting:Permanent Fund dividends) Recapture of .................. . 10Dual-status taxpayers ........... . 8 Returns (See E-file)As stock dividends and stock Joint returns not available ...... . 23 Filing requirements (Table Tip statement from employees torights ...................... . 67 Standard deduction ........... . 141 1-3) ....................... . 9 employers .................. . 56Backup withholding ............ . 65 Timing of .................. . 241Due dates ...................... . 11 Eligible educational institution:Beneficiary of estate or trust 2009 dates (Table 1-5) ......... . 11 Refund of expenses .......... . 241 Education credits ............. . 238receiving ................... . 65 Disaster areas, postponed Tuition deduction and ......... . 241 Foreign schools ......... . 137, 139Buying more stock with ........ . 66 deadlines .................. . 177 Education expenses  (See alsoDefined ...................... . 65 Student loan interestExtension (See Extension of time to Tuition) ...................... . 138 deduction ................. . 137Exempt-interest dividends ...... . 68 file) Employer-provided (See EducationalExpenses related to, deduction Tuition and fees deduction .... . 139Nonresident aliens' returns ..... . 12 assistance)of .......................... . 68 Eligible student:Due diligence: Teacher's out-of-pocketFees to collect ............... . 204 Student loan interestChild and dependent care expenses .................. . 136Foreign income ............... . 65 deduction ................. . 137credit ..................... . 224 Tuition (See Qualified tuitionForm 1040A, use of ............ . 9 Tuition and fees deduction .... . 139Dues: programs)Form 1099-DIV (See Form Embezzlement:Chamber of Commerce ....... . 202 Work-related education, deduction of1099-DIV) Losses due to ................ . 172Club ........................ . 206 expenses .................. . 200Holding period, determination Reporting embezzled funds ..... . 94Union ....................... . 203 Educational assistance  (See alsoof ......................... . 106 Emergency medical serviceDwelling units  (See also Home; Tuition) ...................... . 138Insurance dividends ........... . 68 personnel:Vacation homes) ....... . 24, 71, 72 Employer-provided ............ . 49Money market funds ........... . 67 Life insurance proceeds when deathCooperative (See Cooperative Tuition deduction, effectNominees receiving on behalf of in line of duty ............... . 89housing) on ...................... . 139another .................... . 65 Emotional distress damages .... . 93Defined ...................... . 71Nondividend distributions ....... . 67 Scholarships (See Scholarships and Employee benefits  (See also FringeRenting (See Rental income andOrdinary dividends ............ . 65 fellowships) benefits; specific type of benefit (e.g.,expenses)Patronage dividends ........... . 68 Tuition (See Qualified tuition Health insurance, Life insurance,Qualified ................. . 65, 68 programs) etc.)) .................. . 41, 48, 49Real estate investment trusts Educational institution  (See Eligible Employee business(REITs) paying .............. . 67 E educational institution) expenses ............... . 178-195Redemption treated as ........ . 101 Early withdrawal from deferred Educational organizations: Commuting expenses ......... . 186Reinvestment plans ........... . 66 interest account: As related party in Deductions for ............... . 178Reporting of .................. . 68 Annuities ..................... . 81 transactions ............... . 103 Form 2106 for deducting .... . 190As interest .................. . 65 Form 1099-R reporting (See Form Charitable contributions to .... . 163, Impairment-related work expenses,Scrip dividends ................ . 68 1099-R) 164 deduction for .......... . 149, 195Sold stock .................... . 65 Form 5329 reporting (See Form 50% limit on deduction ...... . 169 Meals (See Meal and lodgingStockholder debts when canceled 5329) Educator expenses ............ . 202 expenses)as ......................... . 87 Higher education expenses, Educator out-of-pocket Reimbursements (See also PerVeterans' insurance ........... . 68 exception from penalty ...... . 121 expenses ................... . 136 diem) ..... . 41, 47, 190, 191, 192IRAs:Divorced parents ........... . 29, 32 EE series bonds  (See U.S. savings Returning excess ....... . 41, 192Early distributions,Divorced taxpayers  (See also bonds) Travel (See Travel and transportationdefined .................. . 129Alimony) ..................... . 92 E-file ..................... . 3, 6, 10 expenses)Penalties ............. . 127, 129Child and dependent care Extensions of time to file ....... . 12 Work-related education ...... . 197,Section 457 deferred compensationcredit ..................... . 222 On time filing ................. . 12 201plans ...................... . 81Child custody ................. . 29
EIC  (See Earned income credit) Employee expenses:Tax on ....................... . 81Definition of divorce instrument for
EITC Assistant ................ . 242 Cell phone ................... . 202purposes of alimony ........ . 133 Earned income ................ . 250
Elderly or disabled, credit for ... . 10 Home computer ......... . 202, 204Estimated tax payments ........ . 46 Child and dependent care
credit ..................... . 222Filing status .................. . 22 Married filing separately ........ . 23 Miscellaneous ............... . 202
Publication 17 (2009) Page 285

Page 288 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Employees  (See also Fringe Escrow: Excise taxes  (See also Family  (See also Child tax credit;
benefits) .................. . 48, 49 Penalties) ................... . 128 Children; Dependents; Related partyTaxes placed in, when
transactions) ..... . 7, 103, 217, 233deductible ................. . 154 Basis to include ............... . 96Awards for service ............. . 47
Adoption credit (See Adoption)Deductibility (Table 22-1) ...... . 153Business expenses (See Employee Estate beneficiaries  (See also
Care credit (See Child andIRAs for failure to take minimumbusiness expenses) Inheritance) .............. . 99, 106
dependent care credit)distributions ............... . 128Discounts for, effect on basis ... . 98 Dividends received by ......... . 65
Roth IRAs .............. . 132, 133 Standard meal allowance not allowedForm W-4 to be filled out when IRAs (See Individual retirement
if related to employer ....... . 191starting new job ............. . 40 arrangements (IRAs)) Exclusions from gross income:
Fringe benefits (See also Fringe Accelerated death benefits ..... . 88 Farming:Losses of estate ............... . 93
benefits) .................... . 41 Annuities ..................... . 77 Activity not for profit ........... . 92Receiving income from
Jury duty pay ................. . 95 Canceled debt ................ . 88estate ...................... . 93 Canceled debt, treatment of .... . 88
Capital gains from home sale (SeeOverseas employment (See Foreign Rollover restrictions ........... . 80 Patronage dividends ........... . 68
Sale of home)employment) Estate tax: Farmworkers:
Commuting benefits forEmployees of the intelligence Deduction ................... . 155 Estimated tax ................. . 42
employees ................. . 50community ................. . 110 Withholding ................... . 39Estates  (See also Estate De minimis benefits ............ . 49Employers: beneficiaries) ................. . 93 Federal crime investigations orDisability pensions of federalEducational assistance from (See Income ....................... . 93 prosecutions:employees and military ....... . 53Educational assistance) Investment interest ........... . 161 Travel expenses ............. . 180Education Savings BondE-file options .................. . 11 Tax (See also Estate tax) ..... . 155, Federal employees:Program .................... . 94205Form W-4, having new employees fill Accrued leave payment ........ . 48Educational assistance fromout ........................ . 40 Survivor's annuity ........... . 82 Cost-of-living allowances ....... . 48employer ................... . 49Overseas employment (See Foreign Estimated tax ............... . 38-46 Disability pensions ............. . 53Elective deferrals, limit onemployment) Amount to pay to avoid Based on years of service .... . 54exclusion ................... . 51Withholding rules .............. . 40 penalty ..................... . 44 Exclusion, conditions for ..... . 53Employee awards ............. . 47Avoiding ...................... . 42Employment: Terrorist attack .............. . 54Energy conservationChange in estimated tax ....... . 44 FECA payments ............... . 54Agency fees ............. . 93, 202 subsidies ............... . 93, 95Credit for .............. . 38, 45, 46RÂesumÂe expenses ........... . 202 Federal Employees' CompensationForeign earned income ......... . 3Definition ..................... . 38Taxes (See also Social security and Act (FECA) payments ......... . 54Frozen deposit interest ......... . 94Divorced taxpayers ............ . 46Medicare taxes) ............. . 48 Federal government:Group-term life insurance ...... . 50Electronic funds withdrawal .... . 38,FICA withholding (See also Charitable contributions to .... . 163,Long-term care insurance44, 45Withholding) .............. . 13 164contracts ................... . 54Figuring amount of tax ......... . 43Tip income ........... . 9, 10, 55 Employees (See Federal employees)Parking fees,First period, no income subject toEmployment taxes  (See also Social Federal income tax:employer-provided .......... . 50estimated tax in ............. . 44security and Medicare Interest on, not deductible ..... . 162Public safety officers who died orFiscal year taxpayers .......... . 44taxes) .............. . 220, 223, 226 Not deductible ............... . 155were killed in line of duty, deathMarried taxpayers ............. . 43FICA withholding (See also Deductibility (Table 22-1) .... . 153benefits .................... . 89Name change ................. . 46Withholding) ..... . 38, 39, 40, 42, Sale of home ................. . 95 Federal judges:Not required .................. . 4245 Scholarships .................. . 95 Employer retirement planOverpayment applied to ........ . 15Empowerment zone ........... . 209 Strike benefits ................ . 95 coverage .................. . 124Payment vouchers ............ . 44Endowment proceeds .......... . 88 Terrorist attack as cause of injury, Fee-basis officials:Payments ................ . 17, 44 disability payments .......... . 76Energy assistance .............. . 92 Business expenses of ......... . 194Figuring amount of each Executors and administrators .... . 7 Work-related educationEnergy conservation: payment ................. . 44 Related party transactions ..... . 103 expenses .................. . 201Measures and modifications .... . 93 Schedule ................... . 44 Exempt-interest dividends ...... . 58Subsidies ..................... . 93 Fees  (See also specific types ofWhen to start ............... . 44 Alternative minimum tax ........ . 68Exclusion as adjustment to deductions and income) ... . 94, 223Who must make ............. . 42 Dividend reporting ............. . 68basis ..................... . 98 Professional license .......... . 206Penalty for underpayment ..... . 38, Information-reportingUtility rebates ................. . 95 Fees, comprehensive/44, 46, 213 requirement ................ . 68Entertainers and musicians .... . 203 bundled .................... . 139IRS computation of, Form
Exemption amount:Entertainment expenses ...... . 181, Fellowships  (See Scholarships and2210 ..................... . 46
2009 changes .................. . 1183 fellowships)Pension payments ............. . 76
Exemption from foreign tax credit50% limit .................... . 184 Safe harbor for higher income Fertility enhancement procedures:
limit ........................ . 259Figure 26-A summary of individuals .................. . 38 Deductibility as medical
rules .................... . 183 Saturday, Sunday, holiday Exemptions: expense ................... . 147
Allocation of costs ....... . 184, 189 rule ........................ . 44 Dependents ............... . 28-38 FICA withholding  (See also Social
Business-related gifts vs. ...... . 185 Separate returns .............. . 46 From withholding .............. . 40 security and Medicare taxes;
Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, how to fill Social security or railroad retirement Personal (See Personal exemption) Withholding) .... . 13, 38, 39, 40, 42,
out ....................... . 194 benefits .................... . 84 Phaseout .............. . 23, 26, 38 45, 48
State and local income taxes,Meal expenses included ....... . 184 Securities, tax-exempt (See Fiduciaries  (See also Executors anddeduction of ............... . 151 Securities)Proof of expenses ............ . 188 administrators; Trustees) ... . 7, 122,Unemployment State or local government bonds,Table 26-2 summary ........ . 189 123compensation ............... . 91 tax-exempt ................ . 105Recordkeeping Fees for services .............. . 94requirements .............. . 188 Estimates: Expatriates ................... . 112 Prohibited transactions ........ . 129Reporting of ................. . 190 Travel expenses ............. . 188 Expenses paid by another ...... . 93 Related party transactions ..... . 103
Table 26-3 showing forms to be Excess benefits tax  (See Section Extension of time to file ........ . 12 Figures  (See Tables and figures)used .................... . 193 72(m)(5)) Automatic .................... . 12 Figuring taxes and credits  (See alsoTaking turns paying for meals or Excess reimbursements: Citizens outside U.S. .......... . 12 Worksheets) .... . 83, 138, 140, 209,entertainment .............. . 184 Business expense E-file options .................. . 12 263Tickets ...................... . 184 reimbursements ........ . 41, 192 Inclusion on return ............. . 12 Filing requirements  (See alsoFace-value as deductible Medical expenses ............ . 149 Extortion: Married filing separately) .... . 6-21,amount ................. . 184 Excess reimbursement flowchart Losses due to ................ . 172 23Gift vs. entertainment (Figure 21-A) ............ . 149 Extravagant expenses ......... . 184 Calendar year filers ............ . 11deduction ............... . 185 Excess withholding credit .... . 257, Citizens outside U.S. ........... . 7Eye surgery:Entertainment facilities: 263 Dependents ................... . 7Deductibility as medicalExpenses for use of .......... . 185 How to take .................. . 263 Electronic (See E-file)expense ................... . 147Equipment  (See also Tools) .... . 186 Joint returns ................. . 263 Extensions ................... . 12Eyeglasses:Rental for rental property ....... . 70 Exchange students: Gross income levels (TableAs medical expense .......... . 147Equitable relief  (See Innocent spouse Expenses paid for, deductible when 1-1) ......................... . 6
relief) under agreement with qualified Individual taxpayers ............ . 7
organization ............... . 165Errors: Joint filing (See also JointFAddress label, correction of ..... . 18 Exchanges  (See also Trade of returns) .................... . 22Failure to comply with tax laws  (SeeDepreciation, correcting amount on property) ............... . 101, 102 Late filing penalties (See Penalties)Penalties)Form 1040X ................ . 72 Like-kind exchanges ...... . 98, 102 Most taxpayers (Table 1-1) ...... . 6
Fair market value (FMV):Discovery after filing, need to amend Partially nontaxable Other situations requiring filing
Casualty loss ................ . 173return ...................... . 19 exchange ............. . 99, 102 (Table 1-3) .................. . 9
Definition of ................... . 96Form 1099 showing incorrect Taxable exchange, defined ..... . 98 Unmarried persons (See Single
Sales of property ............. . 101amount ..................... . 65 Tax-free: taxpayers)
Stolen property ............... . 173Form W-2c for corrected wage and Definition of ................. . 98 When to file ................... . 11
Fair rental price ................ . 71tax statement ............... . 45 Holding period, determination Where to file ................ . 6, 18
Refunds ...................... . 19 of ....................... . 106 Fair rental value ................ . 36 Who must file ............. . 6, 7, 8
Page 286 Publication 17 (2009)

Page 289 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Filing status .............. . 7, 21-26 Foreign Service ............... . 110 Investment expenses IRA distributions ............ . 128
deduction ............... . 161 Personal exemption ......... . 26Annulled marriages ............ . 22 Foreign students ............... . 28
Investment interest Presidential Election CampaignChange to, after time of filing ... . 19 Expenses paid for, deductible when
deduction ............... . 163 Fund ..................... . 14Divorced taxpayers ............ . 22 under agreement with qualified
Itemized deduction limit ..... . 143 Railroad retirement benefits,Head of household ........ . 22, 24 organization ............... . 165
Loss of deposits due to bank's reporting on .............. . 84Qualifying person to file as ... . 25 Foreign tax credit ............. . 259
insolvency or bankruptcy Reporting pay ............... . 47Joint returns .................. . 22 How to take .................. . 259
cause ................... . 173 Social security benefits, reportingMarried filing a joint return ..... . 244 Limit on ..................... . 259 Medical and dental on ....................... . 84Married filing separately ... . 23, 243 Forgiveness of debt  (See expenses ................ . 149 Social security numbers ...... . 38Surviving spouse .............. . 22 Cancellation of debt) Outplacement services, Student loan interestUnmarried persons (See also Single Form: deduction ................ . 48 deduction ............... . 138taxpayers) ................ . 7, 22 843: Travel expenses, deduction Tip income reporting ......... . 56Final return for decedent: Claim for refund and request for of ....................... . 192 Use of ............... . 9, 22, 23Capital loss deduction on ...... . 115 abatement ............... . 263 Unearned commission, deduction Workers' compensation ...... . 54Medical expenses ............ . 146 982: for repayment of .......... . 47 1040EZ ..................... . 211Standard deduction ........... . 141 Reduction of tax attributes due to 1040, Schedule B: Address label ............... . 18Finance charges: discharge of indebtedness (and Dividends .................. . 68 Alaska Permanent Fundsection 1082 basisCredit cards, retail installment 1040, Schedule C: dividends ................. . 68adjustment) .............. . 109contracts, etc., not Barter income ............... . 87 FECA benefits .............. . 54deductible ................. . 162 1040 .................... . 64, 211 Child care providers ......... . 47 No attachments ............. . 15Address label ............... . 18Financial institutions  (See also Corporate director fees ....... . 94 Personal exemption ......... . 26Adoption expenses ......... . 258Banks) ................. . 105, 122 Forgiveness of debts ........ . 87 Presidential Election CampaignAlaska Permanent FundFinancially disabled persons .... . 20 Foster-care providers ........ . 94 Fund ..................... . 14dividends ................. . 68Fines  (See also Penalties) ...... . 12, Kickbacks .................. . 95 Reporting pay ............... . 47Alien taxpayer identification20, 21 Notary fees ................. . 94 Tip income reporting ......... . 56numbers ................. . 38Deductibility ................. . 206 Oil, gas, or mineral interest Use of ................... . 9, 22Alternative minimum tax, royalties .................. . 91Firefighters: Workers' compensation ...... . 54nonrefundable credit for prior Rental income and 1040NR:Life insurance proceeds when death year tax ................. . 259 expenses ............. . 73, 90 Nonresident alien return ...... . 12in line of duty ............... . 89 Armed forces' retirement Statutory employees ........ . 190 1040NR-EZ:Volunteer firefighters: pay ...................... . 52 Work-related education Nonresident alien easyCharitable contributions Attachments to .............. . 15 expenses ................ . 201 return .................... . 12to ....................... . 164 Capital gains ................ . 68 1040, Schedule C-EZ: 1040-V:IRAs ...................... . 124 Charitable contributions, deduction Child care providers ......... . 47 Payment voucher ........... . 16Fires: to be itemized ............ . 163 Corporate director fees ....... . 94 1040X:Arson, no casualty loss for .... . 172 Check mailed with ........... . 16 Foster-care providers ........ . 94 Amended individual return .... . 19Casualty loss caused by ..... . 172, Child's capital gain Kickbacks .................. . 95 Annulled marriages .......... . 22176 distributions ............. . 161 Notary fees ................. . 94 Bad debts, claim forFirst-time homebuyer credit .. . 109, Clergy pension .............. . 52 Oil, gas, or mineral interest refund ................... . 106260 Deduction for alimony royalties .................. . 91 Change of filing status ....... . 24Recapture ................... . 113 paid .................... . 135 Rental income and Check mailed with ........... . 16First-year expensing  (See Section Disability retirement pay ...... . 53 expenses ............. . 73, 90 Child's return .............. . 216179 deductions) Dividends .................. . 68 Statutory employees ........ . 190 Completing ................. . 19Fiscal year .............. . 13, 44, 46 Educator expenses ......... . 136 Work-related education Depreciation: Correcting amountFishermen: expenses ................ . 201 of ........................ . 72Excess withholding credit ... . 263
Estimated tax ................. . 42 1040, Schedule D: Filing ...................... . 19FECA benefits .............. . 54
Indian fishing rights ............ . 94 Business property sales ..... . 102 Itemized deduction, change toFirst-time homebuyer
Fleet operations: Capital gains or losses ..... . 113, standard deduction ....... . 143credit ................... . 261
Standard mileage rate not 114 Standard deduction, change toForeign tax credit ........... . 259
allowed ................... . 187 Child's capital gain itemized deductions ...... . 143Health insurance credit ...... . 262
distributions ............. . 161 Worthless securities, claim forFlexible spending account or Insurance distributions ....... . 68
Fractional shares, sale of ..... . 67 refund ................... . 101arrangement ................ . 147 IRAs ................. . 128, 130
Nonbusiness bad debts, loss of 1065:Floods  (See also Disaster Mortgage interest credit ..... . 259 deposits due to bank's Partnership income .......... . 89relief) ....................... . 175 Personal exemption ......... . 26 insolvency or 1096 ........................ . 114Casualty loss caused by ...... . 172 Presidential Election Campaign bankruptcy .............. . 173 1098:FMV  (See Fair market value) Fund ..................... . 14 Sale expenses ............. . 114 More than one borrower (notRailroad retirement benefits,Food benefits: Undistributed long-term capital spouse), reporting of mortgagereporting on .............. . 84Nutrition program for the gains ................... . 114 interest deduction by attachingRecapture of alimony ....... . 136elderly ..................... . 92 Worthless securities ........ . 101 of ....................... . 162Reporting of alimonyFood stamps ................... . 34 1040, Schedule E: Mortgage insurance premiumsreceived ................. . 135Foreclosure .............. . 108, 160 Income-producing property, reported on .............. . 161Reporting taxes on tips notForeign children: deduction of interest on loan Mortgage interest overpaid inreported to employer ....... . 56Adoption credit ............... . 258 for ...................... . 163 earlier year .............. . 158Reporting uncollected taxes onForeign employment ......... . 8, 52 Rental income and Mortgage interesttips ...................... . 56Employment abroad ........... . 52 expenses ............. . 73, 75 statement ........ . 73, 89, 160Residential Energy Royalties ................... . 91 Points reported on .......... . 161Pension plan contributions ..... . 77 Credits .................. . 260 1040, Schedule F: Prepaid interest reportedSocial security and Medicare Schedule A, Mortgage interest Self-employed persons ...... . 190 on ...................... . 161taxes ...................... . 52 deduction ............... . 259 Work-related education Refund of interest reportedU.S. citizen ................... . 52 Social security benefits, reporting expenses ................ . 201 on ...................... . 161Waiver of alien status .......... . 52 on ....................... . 84 1040, Schedule SE .......... . 8, 52 1098-C:Foreign governments, employees Social security numbers ...... . 38 1040A .................. . 64, 211 Contributions of Motor Vehicles,of ........................... . 52 Student loan interest Address label ............... . 18 Boats, and Airplanes ...... . 167Foreign income: deduction ............... . 138 Adoption expenses ......... . 258 1098-E ...................... . 138Dividends .................... . 65 Tip income reporting ......... . 56 Alaska Permanent Fund 1099:Earned income exclusion ........ . 3 Undistributed long-term capital dividends ................. . 68 Taxable income report ... . 13, 47Reporting of ................... . 3 gains ................... . 260 Alien taxpayer identification 1099-A:Foreign income taxes: Use of .............. . 10, 22, 23 numbers ................. . 38 Acquisition or abandonment ofDeduction of ................. . 152 Wages and salary Armed forces' retirement secured property ......... . 108Form 1116 to claim credit ... . 155 reporting ................. . 47 pay ...................... . 52 1099-B ...................... . 114Schedule A or Form 1040 Workers' compensation ...... . 54 Attachments to return ........ . 15 Barter income ............... . 87reporting ................ . 155 1040, Schedule A: Capital gains ................ . 68 Broker to report sales of stocks,Definition of .................. . 151 Charitable contributions ..... . 18, Clergy pension .............. . 52 bonds, or commodities ... . 101,
Foreign nationals  (See Resident 163, 171 Disability retirement pay ...... . 53 113
aliens) Employee business expense Dividends .................. . 68 1099-C:
Foreign organizations: deduction ............... . 194 Educator expenses ......... . 136 Cancellation of debt .... . 87, 108
Charitable contributions to .... . 164, Federal employees buying back Excess withholding credit ... . 263 1099-CAP:
167 sick leave ................ . 54 FECA benefits .............. . 54 Change in control or capital
Foreign schools .......... . 137, 139 Gifts, deduction of .......... . 190 Insurance distributions ....... . 68 structure ................ . 114
Publication 17 (2009) Page 287

Page 290 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Filing paper form ............ . 12 8862 ........................ . 242 Overpayment offset against nextForm: (Cont.)
year's tax ................... . 444952: 8874:1099-DIV:
Investment interest expense New markets credit, filing Reporting sale of home ....... . 112Dividend income
deduction ............... . 162 requirements (Table 1-3) .... . 9 Schedule A:statement ......... . 51, 65, 68
Net capital gain, election to include 8879: State and local income taxes,Return of capital ............ . 67
as investment income ..... . 161 Authorization for E-file provider to deduction of ............. . 1551099-G:
4972: use self-selected PIN ...... . 11 State benefit funds, mandatoryState tax refunds ............ . 89
Lump-sum distributions ...... . 79 8880: contributions to .......... . 1511099-INT ................. . 58, 64
5329: Credit for Qualified Retirement Taxes, deduction of ......... . 1551099-MISC:
Savings Contributions ..... . 260Early distributions of sheltered Schedule C:Brokers receiving
funds .................... . 81 8885:dividends ................. . 65 Real estate or personal property
Required minimum distributions, Health insurance credit ...... . 262Nonemployee taxes on property used in
failure to take .... . 82, 130, 131 8901:compensation ............. . 94 business, deduction of .... . 155
5695: Information on Qualifying Children1099-OID ..................... . 63 Schedule E:
Residential Energy Who Are Not1099-R ....................... . 61 Real estate or personal property
Credits .................. . 260 Dependents ............. . 233Early distributions of pension taxes on rental property,
6251 ........................ . 210 8910:funds .................... . 81 deduction of ............. . 155
Alternative minimum tax ..... . 217 Alternative motor vehicleIRA distributions ....... . 128, 131 Schedule F:
credit ................... . 2586252:Life insurance policy surrendered Real estate or personal property
8911:Installment sale income ..... . 112for cash .................. . 88 taxes on property used in
Alternative fuel vehicle refueling8275:Retirement plan business, deduction of .... . 155
property credit ........... . 258Disclosure statement ........ . 21distributions .............. . 15 Self-employment tax, deduction
8912:8275-R:1099-S ...................... . 114 of ......................... . 155
Credit to Holders of Tax CreditRegulation disclosureReal estate transactions Form 1040, Schedule A ........ . 156
Bonds ................... . 259statement ................ . 21proceeds ........... . 108, 114 Form 1040, Schedule D:8936:8283:1116: Reporting sale of home ....... . 112Plug-in electric drive motor vehicleCharitable noncash contribution ofForeign tax credit ........... . 259 Form 1040A:credit ................... . 260more than $500 value ..... . 1711120S: Estimated tax payments ........ . 469465:8379:S corporation income ........ . 89 Overpayment offset against nextInstallment agreementInjured spouse claim ......... . 162106: year's tax ................... . 44request .................. . 178396:Business-related Form 1040-ES:Form 8919:Mortgage interest credit .... . 156,expenses ........... . 190, 193 Estimated tax ............. . 43, 44Uncollected social security and259Performing artists .......... . 195 Form 1040-ES(NR):Medicare tax on wages .... . 478453:Travel expenses ........... . 192 Estimated tax for nonresidentRequiring Form 1040 to be usedAddress label ............... . 18Work-related education aliens ...................... . 43when filing .................. . 108453-OL:expenses ................ . 201
Form 1099-B:RRB-1042S:Address label ............... . 182106-EZ:
Barter income ................. . 45Railroad retirement benefits for8582:Business-related
Form 1099-C:nonresident aliens ......... . 83Passive activity gains orexpenses ................ . 193
RRB-1099: Cancellation of Debt ........... . 45losses ............... . 73, 113Performing artists .......... . 195
Railroad retirement8606:Work-related education Form 1099-DIV:
benefits .................. . 83expenses ................ . 201 IRA contributions, Dividend income statement ..... . 45
SS-5 ........................ . 2432119: Nondeductible ...... . 121, 125, Form 1099-G:
Social security numberPostponement of gain from sale of 128 Government payments ......... . 45
request .............. . 14, 38home ................... . 109 IRA contributions, Form 1099-INT:SSA-1042S:2439: Recharacterization of ..... . 127 Interest income statement ...... . 45Social security benefits forNotice to shareholder on 8615 ......................... . 57 Form 1099-MISC:nonresident aliens ......... . 83undistributed long-term capital Certain children with more than Miscellaneous income ......... . 45SSA-1099:gains ............... . 67, 260 $1,900 of investment Withheld state and localSocial security benefits ....... . 832441 ........................ . 225 income ............. . 214, 216 taxes ..................... . 151W-10 ....................... . 2242555 ........................ . 244 Form 1040A may be used when Form 1099-OID:W-2:2555-EZ ..................... . 244 filing ..................... . 10 Original issue discount, from issuerBox 12 with code L .... . 178, 192,2848: Net investment income ...... . 216 or broker ................... . 45194Power of attorney and declaration Parental information ........ . 216 Form 1099-Q:Election precinct officials'of representative ...... . 15, 23 Sample completed form ..... . 218 Payments from Qualified Educationfees ..................... . 943115 ......................... . 60 8801: Programs .................. . 45Employer retirement plan3800: Alternative minimum tax ..... . 259
Form 1099-R:participation indicated ..... . 124General business credit ...... . 20 8812:
Retirement plan distributions .... . 45Employer-reported income4029 ........................ . 244 Additional child tax credit .... . 234
Withheld state and local taxes shownstatement .. . 13, 15, 47, 48, 514070: 8814 ......................... . 57
on ........................ . 151Fringe benefits .......... . 48, 49Reporting tips to employer .... . 55 Additional tax, figuring of .... . 213
Recordkeeping .............. . 18 Form 1099-S:4070A: Calculation of child's
Reimbursements reported as part Real estate transactionsDaily record of tips .......... . 55 income .................. . 213
of income ..... . 178, 190, 191, proceeds .................. . 1544137: Capital gains distributions ... . 213
192, 193Social security and Medicare taxes Parents' election to report child's Form 1116:
Statutory employees ........ . 190on tips not reported to interest and dividends .... . 65, Foreign tax credit ............. . 155
Uncollected taxes ........... . 56employer ................. . 56 161 Form 2210:W-2G:4361 ........................ . 244 Reduced deductions or Underpayment of estimatedGambling winnings withholding4506: credits .................. . 213 tax ......................... . 46statement ................ . 94Copy of tax return request .... . 18 Sample form ............... . 214 Form 8332:W-4P:4506-T: 8815 ......................... . 61 Release of exemption toRollover distributions, election notTax return transcript 8818 ......................... . 62 noncustodial parent .......... . 30to have tax withheld ....... . 77request .................. . 18 8822: Form RRB-1099:W-4V:4562: Change of address .......... . 19 Railroad retirement benefits .... . 45Voluntary withholdingDepreciation of rental 8824: Form SSA-1099:request .................. . 91property .................. . 72 Like-kind exchanges ........ . 102 Social security benefits ......... . 45W-5 ......................... . 2524684: 8828: Form W-2:W-7:Bank deposit, loss due to bank's Recapture of federal mortgage Employer-reported incomeIndividual taxpayer identificationinsolvency or subsidy ................. . 113 statement .................. . 45number request ........... . 38bankruptcy .............. . 173 8834: Filing with return .............. . 45W-7A:Casualty or theft loss ...... . 172, Plug-in Electric Vehicle
Separate form from eachAdoption taxpayer identification178 Credit ................... . 260
employer ................... . 45number request ....... . 14, 384797: 8839:
Withheld state and localW-9:Sales of business Qualified adoption
taxes ..................... . 151TIN of home seller andproperty ............ . 102, 112 expenses ............ . 49, 258
Form W-2c:purchaser ............... . 162Small business stock 8853:
Corrected wage and taxlosses ................... . 105 Accelerated death benefits ... . 89 Form 1040:
statement .................. . 454868 ..................... . 12, 38 Archer MSAs and long-term care Estimated tax payments ........ . 46
Form W-2G:Automatic extension of time to insurance contracts ........ . 49 Foreign income taxes, deduction
file ................... . 12, 38 8857: of ......................... . 155 Gambling winnings withholding
Filing electronic form ......... . 12 Innocent spouse relief ....... . 22 Gambling winnings ............ . 42 statement .............. . 42, 45
Page 288 Publication 17 (2009)

Page 291 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Expenses ................... . 205 Girl Scouts: Health insurance:Form W-2G: (Cont.)
Contributions to cover, not Auto insurance policy covering, notCharitable contributions to ..... . 164Withheld state and local taxes shown
deductible as charitable deductible as medicalon ........................ . 151 Glasses:
donations ............... . 166 expense ................... . 147Form W-4: As medical expense .......... . 147
Not deductible ............. . 147 Premiums:Employee withholding allowance Gold and silver: Deductible as medicalFuture interests:certificate ............ . 39, 40, 42 As capital assets ............. . 104 expense ................. . 147Definition of .................. . 168Filling out form and Capital gains or losses from sale or Self-employed persons, deductibleTangible personal property,worksheets ................. . 39 trade of ................... . 115 expenses ................ . 150charitable deduction for ..... . 168Form W-4P: IRA investments in ........... . 129 Reimbursement .............. . 148Pensions and annuities withholding Golden parachute payments: Health insurance premiums ..... . 36certificate ................... . 41 Tax on ...................... . 210 Health savings account ........ . 147GForm W-4S: Golf clubs  (See Country clubs) Health Spa .................... . 206Gains and losses  (See also CapitalSick pay withholding request .... . 41 Goodwill Industries  (See Charitable Hearing aids:gains; Capital gains or losses;Form W-4V ..................... . 42 contributions) As medical expense .......... . 147Capital losses) ......... . 9, 23, 113Unemployment compensation, Government employees: Hedging transactions .......... . 104Casualty (See also Casualtyvoluntary withholding Federal (See Federal employees)losses) ............... . 171, 172 Help  (See Tax help)request ..................... . 42 State (See State or localClaim for refund for loss ........ . 20 High income taxpayers:Form(s) 1099: governments)Collectibles .................. . 115 Estimated tax ................. . 42Taxable income report ..... . 42, 45 Government retiree credit ...... . 262Financial institution's bankruptcy Higher education  (See Colleges andForms  (See also Tax returns) ..... . 6 Graduate school  (See alsocausing deductible loss ..... . 173 universities)Foster care: Educational assistance) ....... . 137Reporting of ............... . 177 High-low rate method to computeAdoption as motive for, no charitable Tuition deduction (See Tuition)Gambling (See Gambling winnings per diem .................... . 191deduction ................. . 166 Grants  (See Scholarships andand losses) Hobbies ...................... . 204Care providers' payments ...... . 94 fellowships)Hobby losses ................. . 94 Activity not for profit ........... . 92Charitable deduction for nonprofit Grants, disaster relief .......... . 92Ordinary gain and loss ........ . 104 Losses ....................... . 94care ...................... . 166 Bank deposit, loss due to bank's Gratuities  (See Tip income) Holding period:Child tax credit ............... . 233 insolvency or Gross income: Determination of ............. . 105Difficulty-of-care payments ..... . 94 bankruptcy .............. . 173 Adjustments other than on Form Holding period,Emergency foster care, maintaining Ordinary loss ................ . 104 1040A, Form 1040 to be repossessed ................ . 106space in home for ........... . 94 Passive activity (See also Passive used ....................... . 10 Holiday gifts ................... . 49Expenses unreimbursed and not activity) ............ . 23, 73, 113 Age, higher filing threshold after Holiday, deadline falling on ..... . 44deductible as charitable Related party sale or trade of 65 .......................... . 7
contributions ............... . 166 depreciable property ........ . 103 Home  (See also Casualty losses;Defined ....................... . 7 Mortgages; Refinancing; VacationShort-term .............. . 104, 114Foster care payments and Filing requirements (Table homes) ...... . 71, 72, 156, 158, 171Priority in deducting ........ . 115expenses .................... . 34 1-1) ....................... . 6 Abandonment of ............. . 108Sale or trade of property held 1Foster child ........ . 28, 33, 34, 249 Dependent filing requirements (Table Acquisition debt (See alsoyear or less .............. . 105Earned income credit ......... . 245 1-2) ......................... . 7 Mortgages) ................ . 156Theft (See also TheftFoster Grandparent Program ... . 53 Rental income ................ . 69 Aged, home for ............... . 34losses) ............... . 171, 172Found property ................ . 94 Gross income test .............. . 33 As capital asset .............. . 104Total net gain ................ . 114Fractional shares: Group-term life insurance: Basis (See Sale of home)Gambling winnings andPayment for .................. . 67 Accidental death benefits ....... . 49 Business use of .............. . 202losses .................. . 94, 205Fraternal societies: Definition ..................... . 49 Closing costs ................ . 109Form 1040 .................... . 42Charitable contributions to ..... . 163 Exclusion from income ......... . 50 Cost of keeping up ............ . 24Withholding ............... . 41, 45
Dues, no charitable Limitation on ................ . 49 Worksheet .................. . 24Gaming Industry Tip Compliancededuction ............ . 164, 167 Damage to (See also CasualtyPermanent benefits ............ . 49Agreement Program .......... . 56 losses) .................... . 171Fraud: Taxable cost, calculation of ..... . 50Garbage pickup: Foreclosure .................. . 108Losses due to ................ . 172 Uncollected social security/MedicareDeductibility (Table 22-1) ...... . 153 Improvements:taxes ...................... . 10Penalties ................. . 20, 41 Garnishment and attachment ... . 13 For medical care,Reporting of (Table 1-3) ....... . 9Reporting anonymously to IRS ... . 4 Gas royalties ................... . 91 deductibility .............. . 147Uncollected tax .............. . 210Free tax services .............. . 279 Gems: Loans for .................. . 158Guam:Freight: As capital assets ............. . 104 Jointly owned:Income from ................... . 7Basis to include ............... . 96 IRA prohibited transactions Mortgage payments asGuide dogs:Fringe benefits: in ......................... . 129 alimony ................. . 134Deductibility as medicalAccident and health General business credit ....... . 209 Separate residences in andexpense ................... . 147insurance .................. . 49 alimony payments ........ . 134General Rule  (See Annuities)
Accounting period ............. . 48 Taxes and insurance premiums asGeneral sales taxes ...... . 151, 152,Adoption, employer alimony ................. . 134153, 155assistance .................. . 49 H Main home, defined .......... . 107GI Bill benefits ................. . 36Archer MSA contributions ...... . 49 Office ....................... . 202H.R. 10 plans ................... . 77Gift taxes:Bicycle commuters ............ . 47 Points ........................ . 97HAMP:Not deductible ............... . 155 Possession before final settlement,Commuters ................... . 47 Home affordable modification:Gifts: rent not deductible asDe minimis benefits ............ . 49 Pay-for-performance ......... . 92$25 limit on business-related interest .................... . 158Education assistance .......... . 49 Handicapped persons  (Seeexpenses .................. . 185 Repossession ................ . 108Form W-2 .................... . 48 Disabilities, persons with)$4 or less for business-related Security system .............. . 206Group-term life insurance expenses .................. . 185 Hawaii: Settlement fees .............. . 109premiums .................. . 49 Adjusted basis for ............. . 99 Standard meal allowance ...... . 181 Tax home, determination forHoliday gifts .................. . 49 Business-related expenses .... . 185 Head of household ............. . 22 travel-related businessRetirement planning services ... . 50 Children, income from property given Cost of keeping up home ....... . 24 expenses .................. . 179Taxable income ............... . 48 to ......................... . 216 Worksheet .................. . 24 Tenants in common, taxes andTransportation ................ . 50 Disaster victims receiving cash Filing requirements (Table insurance premiums asgifts ....................... . 175Withholding ................... . 41 1-1) ........................ . 23 alimony ................... . 134Holding period, determinationFrozen deposits: How to file .................... . 24 Home equity loans:of ......................... . 106Interest on .................... . 94 Qualifying person .............. . 24 Car purchased by ............ . 188Holiday gifts .................. . 49IRA rollover period Qualifying person to file as ..... . 25 Interest deduction ............ . 156Incidental costs of business-relatedextension .................. . 126 Summary (Table 2-1) ........ . 24 Proceeds invested in tax-exemptexpenses .................. . 185Full-time student: securities, interest notQualifying surviving spouse withNot taxed ..................... . 94Child and dependent care deductible ................. . 158dependent child ............. . 26Proof of expenses (Table 26-2credit ..................... . 222 Home improvement loans ...... . 158Health:summary) ................. . 189Fund-raising events: Flexible spending Home office:RecordkeepingCharitable contributions, amount arrangement ................ . 49 Capital gains exclusion ........ . 112requirements .............. . 188deductible ................. . 164 Travel to another workHealth insurance (See also AccidentReporting of expenses ........ . 190Rental of dwelling unit used as location ................... . 187insurance) .................. . 49Table 26-3 showing forms to behome ...................... . 71 Reimbursement arrangement ... . 49 Home schooling:used .................... . 193
Funeral expenses .............. . 36 Savings account .............. . 49 Expenses not deductible ...... . 136Schedule A (Form 1040) for
Funerals: deduction ................. . 190 Health coverage tax credit ...... . 8, Homebuyer credit ............. . 260
To reduce the public debt ...... . 18Clergy, payment for ............ . 51 145, 262 Recapture ................... . 113
Publication 17 (2009) Page 289

Page 292 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Homeowners' associations: Nonemployee compensation .... . 94 Early distributions (See Early Inheritance  (See also Estate
withdrawal from deferred interest beneficiaries) ................. . 93Charges ..................... . 154 Paid to agent ................. . 13
account)Deductibility (Table 22-1) .... . 153 Adjusted basis for ............. . 99Paid to third party ............. . 13
Charitable contributions to .... . 164, Holding period, determinationEmployer retirement planPartnership ................... . 89
167 of ......................... . 106participants ........... . 123, 124Prepaid ...................... . 14
IRAs (See Individual retirementEstablishing account .......... . 122Recovery ..................... . 89Homeworkers:
arrangements (IRAs))Deduction of expenses ........ . 190 Rental (See Rental income and Time of .................... . 122
Not taxed ..................... . 94expenses) Where to set up account .... . 122Hope credit:
Royalties ..................... . 91 Inheritance tax:Married filing separately ........ . 23 Excess contributions .......... . 129
S corporation ................. . 89 Deductibility of ............... . 155Tuition deduction and .... . 138, 241 Figuring modified AGI (Worksheet
Tax exempt ................... . 34 Deduction ................... . 15517-1) ...................... . 124Hospitals:
Taxable income in excess of Injured spouse ................. . 16Charitable contributions to Forms to use:
$100,000 ................... . 10 Claim for refund ............... . 16nonprofits ................. . 164 Form 1099-R for reporting
Taxable income less than50% limit on deduction ...... . 169 distributions ......... . 45, 128 Inmate ........................ . 222
$100,000 .................... . 9Meals and lodging provided for Form 8606 for nondeductible Innocent spouse relief:Tips (See Tip income)patients, deductibility ....... . 147 contributions ............. . 121 Form 8857 .................... . 22Underreported ................ . 19Payments for services for specific Inherited IRAs ....... . 94, 125, 126 Joint returns .................. . 22
Income aid payment ........... . 203patient, not deductible as Required distributions ....... . 128 Insider stock compensation fromcharitable contributions ..... . 166 Income from nonqualified deferred Interest on, treatment of ....... . 121 expatriated corporation:Services fees, deductibility of compensation plans: Married couples (See this heading: Tax on ...................... . 210medical expense ........... . 147 Additional tax on ............. . 210 Spousal IRAs) Insolvency:Host or hostess ................ . 88 Income taxes: Modified adjusted gross income Canceled debt not deemed to be
Hotels: Federal (See Federal income tax) (MAGI): income ..................... . 88
Club dues: Foreign (See Foreign income taxes) Computation of ............. . 125 Financial institution's insolvency
Not entertainment State or local (See State or local causing deductible loss ..... . 105Effect on deduction if covered byexpenses ................ . 185 income taxes) employer retirement plan (Table Reporting of ............... . 177
Not considered dwelling units ... . 71 Income-producing 17-1) .................... . 123 Installment agreements ......... . 17
Household employees ......... . 226 expenses ................... . 203 Effect on deduction if not covered Installment sales .............. . 101
Household furnishings: Income-producing property: by employer retirement plan Capital gains and ............. . 113Antiques (See Collectibles) Deduction of interest on loan (Table 17-2) ............. . 123 Home sale ................... . 112As capital assets ............. . 104 for ........................ . 163 Worksheet 17-1 ............ . 124 Insulin:Household items, charitable Indefinite absence from job: Nondeductible contributions ... . 125 Deductibility as medicaldeduction for ............... . 167 Work-related education Early withdrawal ............ . 130 expense ................... . 147
during ..................... . 197Household members  (See also Head Tax on earnings on ......... . 125 Insurance:of household) ................. . 22 Independent contractors: Ordinary income, distributions Accident (See Accident insurance)Alimony payments, spouses cannot Homeworkers, deduction of as ........................ . 128 Alimony deduction for, when homebe members of same expenses .................. . 190 Penalties .................... . 128 owned as tenants inhousehold ................. . 134 Indians: Early distributions (See Early common ................... . 134
Household services ........... . 223 Employment credit, recapture of: withdrawal from deferred interest Casualty or theft loss, reimbursement
Household workers  (See Domestic Filing requirements (Table account) to adjust loss .............. . 174
help) 1-3) ....................... . 9 Excess contributions ........ . 129 Distributions from, reporting
Fishing rights ................. . 94 of .......................... . 68Household workers, no exemption Form 8606 not filed for
Taxes collected by tribalfor ........................... . 28 Dividends:nondeductible
governments, deduction Interest on .................. . 68contributions ........ . 121, 125Housing  (See also Home; Vacation
of ......................... . 151 Form 1099-R to reportOverstatement of nondeductiblehomes) ................ . 24, 71, 72
benefits .................... . 45Individual retirement arrangements contributions ............. . 125Alimony payments made to
Life (See also Group-term life(IRAs)  (See also Rollovers; Rothcover ..................... . 133 Prohibited transactions ...... . 129
insurance; Life insurance) ... . 41,IRAs) ...... . 80, 121-133, 126, 131Clergy ....................... . 51 Required distributions, failure to
49Administrative fees ...... . 122, 123,Cooperative (See Cooperative take ............... . 128, 130
Living expenses paid by, possible205housing) Prohibited transactions ........ . 129
income from ............... . 175Age 591/2 for distribution ....... . 129Rental property (See Rental income Recharacterization of
Reimbursements:Exception to rule ........... . 129and expenses) contribution ................ . 127
From casualty insurance ..... . 93Age 701/2:Hurricanes  (See also Disaster Reporting of:
State insurer delinquencyContributions cut off at ...... . 123relief) ....................... . 175 Distributions ............... . 128 proceedings preventing minimumDistributions required at .... . 128,Casualty loss due to .......... . 172 Filing requirements (Table pension distributions ......... . 82130 1-3) ....................... . 9 Trade of policies andCompensation, defined ....... . 122 Recharacterization of annuities .................. . 102Contribution limits ............ . 122 contributions ............. . 127I Withholding against benefits .... . 15Age 50 or older, ............ . 122 Required distributions .... . 126, 128Icons, use of .................... . 5 Insurance agents:Under age 50, ............. . 122 Excess accumulations ...... . 130Identification number, qualifying Deduction of expenses ........ . 190Contributions ............... . 9, 23 Retirement savings contributionperson ...................... . 222 Insurance companies:Designating year for which credit ................. . 23, 260Illegal activities: contribution is made ...... . 123 State delinquency proceedings, IRASelf-employed persons ........ . 122Reporting of .................. . 94 distributions not made dueExcess .................... . 129 Spousal IRAs ...... . 121, 122, 123,Impairment  (See Disabilities, persons to ......................... . 130Filing before contribution is 124with) made ................... . 123 Insurance premiums:Taxability .................... . 130Impairment-related work Nondeductible ............. . 125 Alimony when spouse owns lifeDistributions ............... . 128expenses ................... . 201 Not required annually ....... . 123 insurance policy ............ . 133Time of taxation .............. . 122Improvements: Roth IRA contribution for same Casualty insurance ............ . 97Transfers permitted ........... . 126Real estate, adjustments to basis year .................... . 132 Health insurance:To Roth IRAs ......... . 126, 127for ......................... . 97 Time of .................... . 123 Credit for workers displaced byTrustee administrative fees .... . 205Rental property (See Rental income foreign trade or receivingWithdrawal before filing due Trustee-to-trustee transfers .... . 126and expenses) pension from PBGC ...... . 145date .................... . 127 IRA to Roth IRA ............ . 132Incidental expenses: Deductible as medicalCost basis .............. . 125, 128 Types of ..................... . 122Business-related gifts ......... . 185 expense ................. . 147Deduction for ............. . 9, 123 Withdrawals ............ . 127, 129Travel-related ................ . 181 Self-employed persons,Participant covered by employer Early (See Early withdrawal from deductible ............... . 150retirement plan (TableIncome  (See also Alimony; Wages deferred interest account) Liability ...................... . 20217-1) .................... . 123and salaries) ..... . 47-55, 86-95, 92 Required (See this heading: Life ..................... . 36, 206Participant not covered byBartering ..................... . 87 Required distributions) Life insurance ................ . 147employer retirement plan (TableCanceled debts ............... . 87 Withholding ........... . 15, 41, 128 Alimony ................... . 13317-2) .................... . 123Constructive receipt of ..... . 13, 63
Individual taxpayer identification Medical ...................... . 36Phaseout ............... . 1, 124Excess reimbursement of medical
numbers (ITINs) .......... . 14, 38 Paid in advance ............... . 58Definition of .................. . 122expenses .................. . 149
Individual taxpayers  (See Single Public safety officers ........... . 76Distributions:Gross ........................ . 33
taxpayers) Rental expenses, deduction ofIllegal activities ................ . 95 At age 591/2 ................ . 129
premiums paid in advance .... . 70Information returns  (See also FormInterest ....................... . 57 Required minimum distributions
1099; Form W-2) ... . 13, 15, 42, 45,Investment income ........... . 216 (See this heading: Required Insurance proceeds:
47, 48, 51distributions)Jury duty pay ................. . 95 Dividends, interest on .......... . 58
Life insurance proceeds ........ . 88 Divorced taxpayers ........... . 127 Partnerships to provide ........ . 89 Installment payments .......... . 62
Page 290 Publication 17 (2009)

Page 293 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Itemized deductions: Limit on itemized deduction:Insurance proceeds: (Cont.) LAdjusted gross income 2009 changes .................. . 1Life .......................... . 62 Labels ......................... . 18limiting ............... . 156, 197 Limits:Interest: Address correction ............ . 18Changing from standard to itemized Itemized deductions .......... . 207Fees to collect ............... . 204 Social security number to be writtendeduction (or vice versa) .... . 143 Miscellaneous deductions ..... . 202Frozen deposits ............... . 59 on .......................... . 3Choosing to itemize .......... . 143 Line of credit for home:Usurious ..................... . 59 Labor unions:Form 1040 to be used ..... . 10, 89 Interest ...................... . 156Interest income ................ . 57 Collective bargainingLimits on ................ . 23, 207 Liquidating distributions ........ . 67Children: agreements ................. . 41Charitable donations, deduction Living expenses:Gifts to children ............ . 216 Contributions to, no charitablefor ...................... . 163 Insurance paying, possible incomeDividends as .................. . 65 deduction for ............... . 164Married filing separately ... . 23, 143 from ...................... . 175Dues and fees ........... . 95, 167Form 1099-INT ............ . 13, 45 One spouse has itemized ... . 141
Loans  (See also Debts; StudentSick pay withholding under unionFrozen deposits, from .......... . 94 Recovery ..................... . 89
loans) ............ . 9, 20, 136, 162agreements ................. . 41Property purchase financed without Standard deduction to be compared
Fees for, not deductible ....... . 162Strike and lockout benefits ..... . 95adequate stated interest, treatment with ....................... . 143
Home improvement loans ..... . 158Trips from union hall to place ofof ......................... . 101 State tax, for ................. . 143
work ...................... . 186 Home mortgages (See Mortgages)Recovery of income, on ........ . 89 Itinerant workers:
Unemployment compensation Origination fees (See Points)Reporting on Forms 1040, 1040A, or Deduction of expenses ........ . 190
payments from .............. . 91 Retirement plans, from ......... . 771040EZ ..................... . 9 Tax home, determination of .... . 179
Land  (See also Real estate) ..... . 96Form 1040EZ filing Lobbying:ITINs  (See Individual taxpayer
Depreciation not allowed for .... . 73threshold .................. . 9 Contributions for, not charitableidentification numbers (ITINs))
Savings bonds (See also U.S. deductions ........... . 164, 167Landlords  (See Rental income and
savings bonds) .............. . 94 expenses) Lobbying expenses ........... . 206
Securities, Form 1040 to be Landscaping: Local assessments:Jused ....................... . 10 Cost of, when casualty or theft loss Adjusted basis for ............. . 97Jewelry:Tax refunds, from ............. . 19 involved .............. . 172, 174 Deductibility of ............... . 154As capital assets ............. . 104Interest payments  (See also Larceny: Rental property, deductionsJob  (See also headings starting withMortgages) ....... . 73, 89, 156-163 for ......................... . 70Losses due to ................ . 172``Employee'' or ``Employer'') ... . 41,Allocation of interest according to Local government employees:Late filing ....................... . 4178use of loan ................ . 162 Section 457 plans for employeesPenalties ................. . 12, 20Search:Canceled debt including ........ . 87 (See Section 457 deferredLate payment:Expenses ................. . 202Car loans .................... . 187 compensation plans)Penalties on tax payments ..... . 20Job search:Deductions: Local income taxes, itemizedPublic utility charges, notDeduction of expenses forForms to use (Table deductions ................. . 143deductible ................. . 162Interviews .................. . 9423-1) ............... . 162, 163 Local law violated .............. . 33Laundry:Joint accounts ................. . 57Not allowed ................ . 162 Lockout benefits ............... . 95Business-related travelDividends, reporting of ......... . 65Reporting of ............... . 162 expense .............. . 179, 181 Lodges  (See Social clubs)Joint return of parents:Investment interest ........... . 161 Lavish or extravagantInvestment income of certain Lodging  (See Meal and lodgingLimit on deduction .......... . 161 expenses ................... . 184children ................... . 212 expenses)Personal interest not Law enforcement officers:Joint return test  (See Qualifying Long-term care insurancedeductible ................. . 162 Life insurance proceeds when deathchild) contracts .................... . 54Reporting of deductions ....... . 162 in line of duty ............... . 89 Chronically ill individual .... . 54, 89Joint returns:Student loan interest Lead-based paint removal:Accounting period ............. . 22 Deductibility of medicaldeduction ................. . 136 After separate return ........... . 24 expense ................... . 147Deductibility as medicalStudent loans deduction ..... . 9, 23, Carryover of capital loss ....... . 115 expense ................... . 147 Exclusion, limit of .............. . 54162 Deceased spouse ............. . 22 Qualified services defined ...... . 54Leased property:Unstated interest ......... . 96, 101 Dependents on ................ . 33 Casualty or theft loss ......... . 173 Long-term debt instruments ... . 105Interference with business Divorced taxpayers ............ . 22 Leased vehicles: Long-term gains and losses  (Seeoperations: Estimated tax ................. . 43 Capital gains or losses)Car expenses ................ . 188Damages as income ........... . 93 Excess social security/railroad Losses  (See also Gains and losses;Leases  (See Rental income andInternal Revenue Service (IRS): retirement tax withholding Passive activity) ........ . 20, 23, 73expenses)Fraud or misconduct of employee, credit ..................... . 263 Capital (See Capital gains or losses)Legal expenses .......... . 204, 206reporting anonymously ........ . 4 Extension for citizens outside Casualty (See also CasualtyLiability insurance:U.S. ....................... . 12Mission of ..................... . 5 losses) ...... . 171, 172, 203, 205Reimbursements from ......... . 93Filing status .................. . 22Underpayment penalties, Gambling (See Gambling winningsLicense fees:Form 1040EZ, use of ........... . 9computation by .............. . 46 and losses)Deductibility of ............... . 155Fraud penalty ................. . 21International employment  (See Records of ................... . 173Nondeductibility of ............ . 205Guardian of spouse, signingForeign employment) Theft (See also Theftas ......................... . 23 Life insurance  (See also AcceleratedInternational organizations, losses) ...... . 171, 172, 203, 205Injured spouse ................ . 16 death benefits; Group-term lifeemployees of ................ . 52 Lost property ................. . 206Innocent spouse .............. . 22 insurance) ............. . 10, 49, 88Internet: When deemed casualty loss ... . 173Nonresident or dual-status alien Alimony, premiums when spouseElectronic filing over (See E-file) Lotteries and raffles  (See alsospouse ..................... . 23 owns policy ................ . 133Standard meal allowance Gambling winnings andPensions or annuities .......... . 77 Demutualization ofrates ...................... . 181 losses) ....................... . 94Worksheet .................. . 78 companies ................ . 102Inventory, retail ............... . 104 No charitable deduction forPersonal exemption ........... . 27 Form 1099-R for surrender of policyInvestment income: tickets ................ . 164, 167Responsibility for ............ . 3, 22 for cash .................... . 88Children .................. . 57, 65 Separate return after joint ...... . 24 Lump-sum distributions ........ . 79Premiums ................... . 206
Investment property: Signing ................... . 15, 22 10-year tax option ............. . 80Not deductible ............. . 147
Rental property (See Rental income Social security and railroad Capital gain treatment ......... . 80Proceeds ..................... . 62
and expenses) retirement benefits .......... . 86 Cost calculation ............... . 79As income .................. . 88
State and local income taxes,Investments: Election of .................... . 79Public safety officers who died or
deduction of ............... . 151Classes as travel expenses .... . 183 Form 4972 .................... . 79were killed in line of duty, tax
Judges, federal:Expenses ................... . 161 exclusion ................... . 89 Net unrealized appreciation
Employer retirement planFees ........................ . 204 Surrender of policy for cash .... . 88 (NUA) ...................... . 79
coverage .................. . 124 Withholding ................... . 41 Rollovers of ................... . 79Property:
Jury duty pay .................. . 95 Taxable and tax-free parts ...... . 79As capital asset ............ . 104 Life insurance premiums ....... . 36
Definition .................. . 161 Luxury travel:Life-care fees:
Like-kind exchanges ........ . 102 Travel expenses when incidentalPaid to retirement home and
business activities .......... . 182Seminars .................... . 206 designated for medical care,K
Work-related education, deduction ofdeductibility ................ . 147Involuntary conversion  (See also Keogh plans  (See also Retirement
expenses .................. . 200Condemnation of property) .... . 172 Lifetime learning credit:plans) .................... . 76, 77
Basis computation ............. . 98 Married filing separately ........ . 23Kickbacks ..................... . 95
Tuition deduction and .... . 138, 241Basis for depreciation .......... . 98 Kiddie tax  (See Children, subheading:
Like-kind exchanges .......... . 102IRAs  (See Individual retirement Investment income of) M
arrangements (IRAs)) Basis for depreciation .......... . 99Kidnapped children ........... . 247 M&IE (Meals and incidental
Qualifications ................. . 98Israel: Losses due to ransom ........ . 172 expenses)  (See also Incidental
Sale of home ................ . 112Contributions to charitable Qualifying child ................ . 29 expenses; Meal and lodging
organizations in ....... . 164, 167 Qualifying relative ............. . 32 Limit on credit ................ . 232 expenses) ..... . 179, 181, 188, 191
Publication 17 (2009) Page 291

Page 294 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Machinery  (See also Tools) .... . 186 Mass transit passes, Medicare  (See also Social security Mortgage interest credit ....... . 259
employer-provided ........... . 51 and Medicare taxes) .... . 10, 48, 52 Carryforward ................. . 259Rental for rental property ....... . 70
Form 8396 ................... . 156Benefits ...................... . 92Maternity clothes:MACRS (Modified Accelerated Cost
How to take .................. . 259Medicare A, when deductible asRecovery System): Not deductible as medical
Recapture ................... . 259medical expense ........... . 148expense ................... . 147Rental property:
Reduced deduction ........... . 259Medicare Advantage MSA (SeeAlternative minimum tax ...... . 73 MCC (Mortgage credit
Medical savings accounts (MSAs)) Mortgages  (See also Points) .. . 158,certificate) .................. . 259MAGI  (See Modified adjusted gross Medicare B, when deductible as 162income (MAGI)) Meal and lodging medical expense ........... . 148 Alimony, payments as ........ . 134expenses ............... . 181-184Mailing returns  (See Tax returns) Medicare D, when deductible as Assistance payments ..... . 92, 15650% deduction for business-relatedMaintenance of rental property  (See medical expense ........... . 148 Assumption of ................ . 96meals ................ . 181, 184Rental income and expenses) Fees not included in basis .... . 97Medicare tax .................. . 210Figure 26-A summary ofMaking Work Pay Credit ....... . 262 Credit certificate (MCC) from state orMedicare taxes, not support .... . 36rules .................... . 183Mandatory retirement age ...... . 231 local government ........... . 156Medications:Work-related education ..... . 200Market discount bonds ........ . 105 Discounted mortgage loan ...... . 87Deductibility as medicalBusiness-related entertainmentMarried child .................. . 247 Ending early, treatment ofexpense ................... . 147including ............. . 181, 184 points ..................... . 160Married dependents, filing joint Member of household orBusiness-related travel expense Federally subsidized mortgage,return ................... . 28, 30 relationship test .............. . 33including ............. . 179, 181 recapture of tax paid on homeMarried filing a joint return ..... . 244 Members of the uniformed servicesForm 2106 or 2106-EZ, how to fill purchased with ............. . 259Married filing separately ... . 23, 243 or Foreign Service .......... . 110out ....................... . 194 Interest:Carryover of capital loss ....... . 115 Lodging ................ . 179, 181 Membership fees  (See specific type Definition .................. . 156Community property states ..... . 24 of organization)Proof of expenses ............ . 188 Form 1098 (interestCredits, treatment of ........... . 23 Table 26-2 summary ........ . 189 Mentally incompetent persons  (See statement) ........... . 73, 160Deductions: also Disabilities, persons with;Recordkeeping Refund of .................. . 89Changing method from or to Elderly or disabled, creditrequirements ......... . 181, 188 Interest credit (See Mortgage interestitemized deductions ...... . 143 for) ................... . 10, 53, 76Reporting of ................. . 190 credit)Treatment of ................ . 23 Signing of return by court-appointedTable 26-3 showing forms to be Interest deduction:Earned income credit .......... . 23 representative .............. . 15used .................... . 193 Sale of home .............. . 156Gross income filing requirements Metals, precious  (See Gold andRestaurant receipts ........... . 188 Schedule A (Form 1040) to(Table 1-1) ................. . 23 silver)Standard meal allowance ..... . 181, deduct .................. . 162
How to file .................... . 23 Mexico:191 Late payment charges, deduction
Itemized deductions ...... . 23, 143 Contributions to charitable of ......................... . 156Amount of ................. . 181
One spouse has itemized so other organizations in ....... . 164, 167 Lender's charges forAreas outside continental
must as well ............. . 141 Resident of ............... . 28, 33 services ................... . 160U.S. .................... . 181
Joint state and local income taxes More than one borrower (notMidwestern disaster areaProrating on partial days of
filed, but separate federal spouse), reporting of intereststudents .................... . 139travel ................... . 192
returns .................... . 151 deduction ................. . 162Taking turns paying for meals or Midwestern disaster areas ..... . 29,
Medical and dental Preparation costs for notes or deedsentertainment .............. . 184 36, 238, 245
expenses .................. . 145 of trust .................... . 160Transportation workers ........ . 182 Mileage deduction for work-relatedRollovers ..................... . 23 Prepayment:Deduction limits ............ . 184 education ................... . 197 Allocation of deduction ...... . 156Social security and railroad Medical and dental Mileage rates  (See Standard mileage Penalty for, deduction of .... . 156retirement benefits .......... . 84 expenses ............... . 145-150 rates) Points ..................... . 158State and local income Adjusted gross income and limit of Military  (See Armed forces) Reported on Form 1098 ..... . 161taxes ..................... . 151 deduction ................. . 145 Military differential pay ........ . 122 Proceeds used for business orStudent loan interest deduction Adopted child ................ . 146 Military personnel: investment, deduction of .... . 163and ....................... . 138 Alimony payments made to Earned income credit ......... . 247 Refinancing .................. . 158Tenants by the entirety, allocation of cover ..................... . 133 Mineral royalties ............... . 91 Refund of interest:real estate taxes ........... . 154 Contributions to cover, not deductible Reported on Form 1098 ..... . 161Ministers  (See Clergy)Tuition deduction and ......... . 138 as charitable donations ..... . 166 Treatment of ............... . 158Miscellaneous deductions ..... . 201Married taxpayers  (See also Joint Damages including ........... . 149 Reverse ..................... . 158Federal employees buying back sickreturns; Married filing separately; Decedent's expenses ......... . 146 Seller-financed ............... . 112leave ...................... . 54Spouse; Tenants by the Deduction ................... . 145 Mosques  (See Churches, temples,Outplacement agency fees ..... . 48entirety) .... . 3, 9, 22, 23, 24, 65, 77 Checklist for deductible expenses etc.)Missing children:Age 65 or older spouse: (Table 21-1) ............. . 148 Motels  (See Hotels)Photographs of, included in IRSStandard deduction ......... . 142 Dependent's expenses ........ . 146 publications .................. . 4 Moth damage:Blind spouse: Determination of date paid .... . 145 Not casualty losses ........... . 172Mistakes  (See Errors)Standard deduction ......... . 142 Doctor ...................... . 145 Motor vehicles, donationsChild and dependent care Modified adjusted gross incomeForm 1040, Schedule A, for of .......................... . 167credit ..................... . 223 (MAGI):reporting .................. . 149 Child tax credit limits .......... . 233Deceased spouse (See also Moving expenses:Future expenses, settlement IRAs, computation for:Surviving spouse) ...... . 6, 7, 22 Standard mileage rates ......... . 1including .................. . 149 Effect on deduction if covered byDefinition of spouse for purposes of MSAs  (See Medical savings accountsHealth insurance credit ........ . 262 employer retirement plan (Tablealimony ................... . 133 (MSAs))Health insurance premiums (See 17-1) ............... . 123, 124Dual-status alien spouse ....... . 23 Multiple support agreement ..... . 36Health insurance) Effect on deduction if not coveredEducator expenses ........... . 136 Municipal bonds ............... . 62Included expenses: by employer retirement planEstimated tax ................. . 43 Museums:Individuals covered ......... . 145 (Table 17-2) ............. . 123Filing status ............. . 6, 7, 22 Charitable contributions to ..... . 164Meals and lodging related to Worksheet 17-1 ............ . 124Form 1040EZ, use of ........... . 9 Musicians and entertainers .... . 203receiving medical care ..... . 148, Roth IRAs, computation for .... . 131Gross income filing requirements Mutual funds .................. . 204181 Phaseout (Table 17-3) ...... . 131(Table 1-1) ................. . 23 Adjusted basis of shares ...... . 100Medical care, defined ......... . 145 Worksheet 17-2 ............ . 130IRAs ................... . 122, 123 Allocated expenses ........... . 204Physician .................... . 145 Money market certificates ...... . 58Spouse covered by employer Capital gains .................. . 67Purpose of expenses ......... . 145 Money market funds ............ . 67plan ............... . 123, 124 Dividends from ................ . 67Reimbursements, treatment Money orders:Living apart ................... . 22 Exempt-interest dividends ...... . 68of ..................... . 55, 148 Payment of tax ................ . 16Medical and dental Nonpublicly offered ........... . 204Work-related ................. . 224 Penalty if not honored .......... . 16expenses .................. . 145 Publicly offered .............. . 204Medical devices: More information  (See Tax help)Deceased spouse's Undistributed capital gains .... . 114Deductibility of ............... . 147expenses ................ . 146 Mortgage: Credit for tax on ............ . 260Medical insurance  (See AccidentNonresident alien spouse .. . 14, 23 Relief ........................ . 87
insurance)Performing artists ............ . 195 Mortgage credit certificate
Medical insurance premiums ... . 36Roth IRAs ................... . 131 (MCC) ...................... . 259 NMedical research organizations:Signatures when spouse unable to Mortgage insurance premiums: Name change .............. . 14, 46Charitable contributions to ..... . 164sign ........................ . 15 Basis in property not to Nanny tax  (See Domestic help)Social security or railroad retirement Medical savings accounts (MSAs) include ..................... . 97 National Housing Act:benefits, taxability ........... . 83 (See also Archer MSAs) .... . 49, 95 Definition .................... . 160 Mortgage assistance ...... . 92, 156Transfer of home to spouse ... . 109 Additional tax on ............. . 210 Form 1098 reporting .......... . 161
National of the United States .... . 28Transfers between spouses ... . 99, Medicare Advantage MSA ...... . 95 Limit on deduction ............ . 160
Native Americans  (See Indians)103 Medical expenses paid for Schedule A (Form 1040) to
Travel expenses for spouse ... . 180 decedent from ........... . 146 deduct .................... . 162 Negligence penalties ........... . 21
Page 292 Publication 17 (2009)

Page 295 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Net investment income ........ . 161 Occupational taxes ............ . 203 Rental property ............. . 73 Underpayment of estimated
tax ............. . 38, 44, 46, 213Deduction of: Reporting of gains or losses ... . 113Net operating losses:
Willful failure to file ............ . 21Taxes that are deductible (Table Pass-through entities .......... . 204Casualty or theft losses ....... . 178
22-1) .................... . 153 Withholding ............... . 41, 42Refund of carryback ........... . 20 Patents:
Office rent, deductibility of ..... . 203 Pennsylvania UnemploymentInfringement damages ......... . 93New Jersey Nonoccupational
Compensation Fund ......... . 151Office, use of home as ......... . 202 Royalties ..................... . 91Disability Benefit Fund ...... . 151
Pensions  (See also Annuities;Offset against debts ........ . 11, 16 Patronage dividends ........... . 68New Jersey Unemployment
Railroad retirement benefits;Compensation Fund ......... . 151 OID  (See Original issue discount Payment of tax .... . 3, 11, 16, 17, 19 Rollovers) .......... . 76-82, 80, 82(OID)) By check or money order .... . 3, 16,New job, trade, or business: 457 plans (See Section 457 deferred44Oil, gas, and minerals:Employment agency fees ...... . 202 compensation plans)By credit card .................. . 3Future production sold ......... . 91Job search expenses ......... . 202 Clergy ....................... . 52By credit or debit card ...... . 12, 16Royalties from ................ . 91Travel expenses ............. . 203 Contributions:Schedule C or C-EZ ......... . 91 By electronic means ........... . 17Work-related education Retirement savings contributionSale of property interest ........ . 91 Credit card ................. . 44expenses .................. . 199 credit ............... . 23, 260Credit or debit card .......... . 16Older taxpayers:New motor vehicle taxes ...... . 150, Taxation of ................. . 51Electronic Federal Tax PaymentCredit for the elderly .......... . 229153, 154, 155 Cost computation .............. . 77System (EFTPS) ...... . 17, 44Online help:New York Nonoccupational Decedent's unrecovered investmentFunds withdrawal .... . 17, 38, 44EITC Assistant ............... . 242Disability Benefit Fund ...... . 151 in .......................... . 15Delivery services ............ . 3, 11Online Payment AgreementNightclubs: Definition of ............... . 81, 82Estimated tax ............. . 17, 44application ................... . 17Cover charges, 50% limit on Disability pensions ............. . 53Installment agreements (SeeOptions .................... . 51, 67deduction ................. . 184 Early distributions:Installment agreements)Charitable contributions, dateNobel Prize .................... . 95 Exceptions to tax on ......... . 81Late payment penalties ........ . 20of ......................... . 169 Qualified retirement plans,Nominees .................. . 58, 63 Payable to ``United StatesOrdinary dividends  (See Dividends) exceptions for ............. . 81Dividends that belong to someone Treasury`` ................... . 3Ordinary gain ................. . 104 Tax on ..................... . 81else ........................ . 65 Vouchers ..................... . 44 Elective deferral limitation ...... . 51Ordinary gain and loss  (See GainsNonaccountable plans for employee Payments ................ . 210, 211 Employer plans:and losses)reimbursements ........ . 191, 193 Disaster relief ................. . 92 Benefits from previous employer'sOrgan donors:Noncapital assets ............. . 104 Payroll deductions ....... . 155, 170 plan .................... . 124Deductibility of medicalNonemployee compensation .... . 94 Withholding (See also Rollover to IRA ........ . 126, 132expense ................... . 147Nonrefundable credits ......... . 257 Withholding) ................ . 38 Situations in which noOriginal issue discount (OID) ... . 62Nonresident alien ........ . 222, 244 Payroll taxes  (See also Social coverage ................ . 124Adjusted basis and ........... . 100Nonresident aliens .............. . 8 security and Medicare taxes; Estimated tax ................. . 76Discounted debt Withholding) .............. . 38, 48Due dates .................... . 12 Excess accumulation, tax on (Seeinstruments ................ . 105Estimated tax ................. . 43 Peace Corps allowances ........ . 53 also this heading: RequiredForm 1099-OID ............... . 45Form 1040EZ, use of ........... . 9 distributions) ............ . 81, 82Pell grants:Origination fees  (See Points)Individual taxpayer identification Foreign employmentTuition deduction, effect on .... . 139Other taxes ................... . 209number (ITIN) ............... . 14 contributions ................ . 77Penalties:Out of work ................... . 229 Form 1099-R ................. . 45Spouse ...................... . 14 Accuracy-related .............. . 21Outplacement services ......... . 48 General Rule for nonqualified plansJoint returns not available .... . 23 Alimony deduction, failure to provideDeduction of agency fees ...... . 48 and qualified plans for recipientsSeparated .................. . 24 social security number ofOverpayment of tax  (See also Tax over 75 years ............... . 79recipient ................... . 135Transfers between spouses when refunds) ...................... . 15 Inherited pensions ............. . 94Backup withholding ............ . 42one spouse is nonresident
Overseas work  (See Foreign Joint returns .................. . 77alien .................... . 103 Check not honored ............ . 16employment) Loans from plan ............... . 77Civil penalties ................. . 20Standard deduction ........... . 141
Over-the-counter drugs: Lump-sum distributions (See alsoCriminal ...................... . 21Taxpayer identification Lump-sum distributions) ...... . 79Not deductible as medical Deductibility ............ . 162, 206number .................... . 38
expense ................... . 147 Military (See Armed forces)Defenses ..................... . 21Tuition deduction and ......... . 138 Multiple pension planOvertime pay .................. . 40 Estimated tax (See this heading:Waiver of alien status .......... . 52 benefits ................ . 76, 77Oxygen equipment and oxygen: Underpayment of estimated tax)Nontaxable payments: Partly taxable payments ........ . 77Deductibility as medical Failure to include social securityCredit for the elderly or the Reporting of .................. . 77expense ................... . 147 number ................ . 14, 21disabled ................... . 232 Required distributions:Failure to pay tax .............. . 20Nontaxable trades  (See Tax-free At age 701/2 ................. . 82Failure to provide social securityexchanges) Excise tax for failure to takenumber or TIN:PNorthern Mariana Islands: minimum distributions ...... . 82Alimony deduction .......... . 135Paper vs. electronic return  (SeeIncome from ................... . 7 Form 5329 for failure to receiveHome seller andE-file)Notary fees .................... . 94 required minimum, ........ . 82purchaser ............... . 162Paperwork Reduction Act ofNot deductible as interest ..... . 160 State insurer delinquencyTo dividend payers .......... . 651980 .......................... . 4 proceedings preventingNotes: Form 8606 not filed for nondeductibleParental responsibility  (See minimum distributions ...... . 82As obligations of individuals ... . 105 IRA contributions ...... . 121, 125Children) State and local governmentDiscounted ............... . 48, 62 Fraud .................... . 20, 21Parents who never married ..... . 30 employees (See Section 457Received for services .......... . 48 Frivolous tax submission ....... . 21 deferred compensation plans)Parents, divorced orNot-for-profit activities ......... . 92 Interest on .................... . 17 Unrecovered investment in .... . 205separated ............... . 29, 248Nursery schools  (See Child and IRAs ........................ . 128 Withholding ......... . 15, 41, 76, 80Divorced parents ............. . 248dependent care credit) Early distributions .......... . 129 Pentagon attacks  (See TerroristParking fees:Nursing care: Excess contributions ........ . 129 attacks)Business-related travel ........ . 187 Form 8606 not filed forEmployment taxes for worker Commuting expense .......... . 186 Per capita taxes:nondeductibleproviding medical care, Employer-provided fringe benefit: Deductibility of ............... . 155contributions ........ . 121, 125deductibility of ............. . 147 Exclusion from income ....... . 50 Per diem:Overstatement of nondeductibleFor healthy baby, not deductible as Medical-related travel ......... . 148 Allowance orcontributions ............. . 125medical expense ........... . 147 Sports arena, business-related reimbursement .... . 190, 191, 192Required distributions, failure toWages for, deductibility as medical entertainment subject to 50% Charitable organization service,take .................... . 128expense ................... . 147 limit ....................... . 184 for ........................ . 166Late filing ................. . 12, 20Nursing homes: Parks and recreation facilities: Federal rate ................. . 191Exception .................. . 20Insurance for care in (See Long-term Charitable contributions to ..... . 164 High-low rate method toLate payment ................. . 20care insurance contracts) compute ................... . 191Parochial school tuition: Negligence ................... . 21Meals and lodging, deductible as Standard meal allowance ...... . 181No charitable deduction ....... . 167 Reportable transactionmedical expense ........... . 148 Performing artists:Partners and partnerships ..... . 204 understatements ............ . 21Nutrition Program for the Business expenses ........... . 194Capital gains or losses from ... . 114 Roth IRAs:Elderly ....................... . 92 Work-related educationIncome ....................... . 89 Conversion contributionsNutritional supplements: expenses .................. . 201Investment interest ........... . 161 withdrawn in 5-yearNot deductible as medical Related party transactions ..... . 103 Permanent and totalperiod ................... . 133expense ................... . 147 disability .................... . 229Excess contributions ........ . 132Passive activity ............... . 101
Substantial understatement ofLosses .................. . 23, 161 Personal exemption ..... . 26-38, 27
income tax ................. . 21Exception for real estate Joint return ................... . 27
O Tax evasion .................. . 21professionals ............. . 73 Limits ........................ . 23
OASDI ......................... . 92 Investment interest and ..... . 161 Tips, failure to report ........... . 56 Phaseout .............. . 23, 26, 38
Publication 17 (2009) Page 293

Page 296 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Mortgage interest (See Mortgages) Real estate-related items notPersonal exemption (Cont.) Q deductible ................. . 154Spouse's exemption ........... . 27 Rent paid in advance .......... . 69 Qualified dividends ......... . 65, 68 Rental (See Rental income andPersonal injury suits: Prescription medicines: Qualified domestic relations orders expenses)Damages from ................ . 93 Deductibility as medical (QDROs): Settlement fees ............... . 96Personal interest: expense ................... . 147 Rollover of retirement plan Transfer taxes ............... . 154Not deductible ............... . 162 Presidential Election Campaign distribution ................. . 80 Real estate investment trustsPersonal property  (See also Casualty Fund ........................ . 14 Qualified education expenses: (REITs):losses) ...................... . 176 Presidentially declared disasters Work-related education, business Dividends from ................ . 67As capital assets ............. . 104 (See Disaster relief) deduction ............. . 199-200 Undistributed capital gains .... . 114Rental income from ............ . 90 Prevention of cruelty to children or Qualified Education Programs, Credit for tax on ........ . 67, 260Taxes (See Personal property taxes) animals organizations: Payments from: Real estate taxes:Theft of (See Theft losses) Charitable contributions ....... . 163 Form 1099-Q ................. . 45 Alimony deduction for, when homePersonal property taxes: Price reduced after purchase ... . 88 Qualified individuals: owned as tenants inCar taxes .................... . 188 Under age 65 and retired onPrincipal residence  (See Home) common ................... . 134Deduction of ................. . 155 permanent and totalPrisoner ...................... . 222 Assessments (See LocalSchedule A, C, E, or F (Form disability ................... . 229Privacy Act and paperwork assessments)1040) ................... . 155 Qualified plans  (See also Retirementreduction information ......... . 4 Basis of property and .......... . 96Taxes (See Personal property taxes) plans; Rollovers) ...... . 76, 80, 126Private delivery services ...... . 3, 11 When not reimbursed by propertyPersonal representatives  (See Qualified student loan  (See StudentPrivate schools: seller .................... . 97Fiduciaries) loan interest deduction) Cooperative housing (SeeCharitable deduction forPersons with disabilities  (See Qualified tuition programs ...... . 95 Cooperative housing)tuition ..................... . 167Disabilities, persons with) Additional tax on ............. . 210 deduction of ................. . 152Prizes and awards  (See alsoPhotographs: Filing requirements (Table List of deductible taxes (TableBonuses) .............. . 40, 47, 95Casualty or theft loss claims ... . 174 1-3) ......................... . 9 22-1) .................... . 153Exclusion from income ......... . 47Physical examination .......... . 147 Qualifying child ................ . 28 Schedule A, C, E, or F (FormPulitzer, Nobel, and similarPhysician certification ......... . 229 Age test ..................... . 245 1040) ................... . 155prizes ...................... . 95Physician's statement ......... . 229 Change to definition .......... . 242 Refund, treatment of .......... . 154Scholarship prizes ............. . 95Veterans .................... . 231 Joint return test ......... . 245, 247 Real estate taxes, standardProbationary work periods: Of another person ............ . 249Place for filing ............... . 6, 18 deduction increased by ...... . 142Travel expenses during ....... . 180 Relationship test ............. . 245Plants and trees: Rebates  (See Refunds)Professional license fees ...... . 206 Residency test ............... . 245Cost of, when casualty or theft loss Recapture:Professional Reputation ....... . 207 Qualifying person:involved .............. . 172, 174 Alimony ..................... . 135Professionals: Child and dependent carePlastic surgery: Reporting on Form 1040 .... . 136credit ..................... . 220Entertainment expenses forNot deductible as medical expense Alternative motor vehicleattending association Qualifying relative .............. . 32when cosmetic ............. . 147 credit ..................... . 258meetings .................. . 184Plug-in electric drive motor vehicle Credits ....................... . 10Profit-sharing plans:credit ....................... . 259 Filing requirements (Table
Form 1099-R ................. . 45Plug-in electric vehicle R 1-3) ....................... . 9
credit ....................... . 260 Lump sums (See Lump-sum New markets credit, filingRaffles ......................... . 94
distributions)Points ........................ . 158 requirements (Table 1-3) ...... . 9No charitable deduction for
Basis in property not to Withholding ............... . 15, 41 Taxes ....................... . 209tickets ................ . 164, 167
include ..................... . 97 Promissory notes: Recharacterization:Railroad retirement benefits  (See
Definition .................... . 158 also Excess withholding IRA contributions ............. . 127Charitable contributions, date
Excess points ................ . 160 credit) .......... . 76, 82-86, 95, 257of ......................... . 169 Recording fees:Form 1098 reporting .......... . 161 Deductions related to .......... . 86 Basis to include ............... . 96Proof of business expense .... . 188Limits on deduction ........... . 160 Employer retirement plans different Recordkeeping:Table 26-2 summary .......... . 189Main home purchase, special from ...................... . 124 Gambling .................... . 205Proof of loss .................. . 173treatment of ................ . 97 Equivalent tier 1 (social security General requirements ......... . 201Property  (See also RealMortgage ending early ........ . 160 equivalent benefit (SSEB)) .. . 83, Sale of home ................ . 109estate) .................. . 96, 106Paid by seller ................ . 160 95 Savings bonds used forFound ........................ . 94Refinancing .................. . 158 Estimated tax ................. . 84 education .................. . 62Stolen ........................ . 95Schedule A (Form 1040) to Form RRB-1099 ........... . 45, 83 Recordkeeping requirements ... . 18Prostheses:deduct .................... . 162 Income ........................ . 9 Business travel expenses .... . 180,Second home ................ . 158 Deductibility of medical Joint returns .................. . 86 188Settlement statement shows as expense ................... . 147 Lump-sum election ............ . 84 Copies of returns .............. . 18charged for mortgage ....... . 158 Protective clothing ............ . 203 Married filing separately .... . 23, 84 Destroyed records ............ . 189Political campaign Repayment of benefits ......... . 84Psychiatric care: Documentary evidence ........ . 188expenses ................... . 206 Reporting of .................. . 84Specially equipped medical centers, Electronic records of tips ....... . 55Political contributions  (See Taxability of .............. . 83, 84deductibility of expense ..... . 147 Form W-2 .................... . 18Campaign contributions) Withholding ................... . 42Public assistance benefits ...... . 92 Gambling ..................... . 94Not tax deductible .......... . 155Political conventions: Public debt: Incomplete records ........... . 189Withholding for ................ . 84Travel expenses ............. . 183 Gifts to reduce ................ . 18 Meal expenses:Railroad retirement tax (RRTA)  (SeePonzi-type investment Public parks and recreation Actual cost ................ . 181also Excess withholdingschemes .................... . 173 facilities: Standard meal allowance ... . 181credit) ....................... . 257Post office employees: Period of retention ........ . 18, 190Charitable contributions to ..... . 164 Railroad Unemployment InsuranceRural mail carriers ............ . 187 Tip income ................... . 55Public safety officers insurance Act .......................... . 54Postponed tax deadlines: Travel expenses ........ . 180, 188premiums .................... . 76 Real estate  (See also Mortgages;Disaster areas ............... . 177 Work-related educationPublic transportation passes, Vacation homes) ..... . 71, 72, 106,Postponement of gain: expenses .................. . 201employer-provided ........... . 51 156Sale of home ................ . 109 Records of loss ............... . 173Public utilities  (See Utilities) As noncapital assets .......... . 104Adjusted basis .............. . 98 Records to keep ............... . 169Publication 1244: Basis ........................ . 96Power of attorney .......... . 15, 23 Recovery of amounts previouslyDaily record of tips (Form Canceled business debt, treatmentPreferred stock: deducted .................... . 894070A) ..................... . 55 of .......................... . 88Redeemable at a premium ..... . 67 Itemized deductions ........... . 89Reporting tips to employer ...... . 55 Casualty loss ................ . 176Pregnancy test kit ............. . 147 Mortgage interest refund ....... . 89Closing costs ................. . 96Publication 584:Premature distributions  (See Early Over multiple years ............ . 89Definition of ................... . 96Casualty and theft losses, workbookwithdrawal from deferred interest Stolen property, adjustment of theftDivision of real estate taxes ... . 152for ........................ . 172account) loss ....................... . 173Fair market value (FMV) ....... . 96Publication 78 ................. . 164Prepaid: Tax refunds ................... . 89Form 1099-S to report saleList of qualified organizations forInsurance .................... . 58 Red Cross:proceeds ............. . 114, 154charitable contributions ..... . 163Preparer's fee: Blood donations notHolding period, determinationPublications  (See Tax help)Deductible amount ........... . 203 deductible ............ . 164, 167of ......................... . 106Puerto Rico:Preparers of tax returns ........ . 15 Charitable contributions to .... . 163,Itemized charges for services notResidents of ................... . 7 164deductible ................. . 154Prepayment:
Pulitzer Prize ................... . 95 Points ....................... . 158 Redeemable ground rents:Insurance premiums:
Punitive damages: Progressive deterioration, notDeductibility as medical Deduction as mortgage
casualty loss ............... . 172expense ................. . 148 As income .................... . 93 interest .................... . 156
Page 294 Publication 17 (2009)

Page 297 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Redemption of bonds ......... . 101 Deductions ............... . 69, 72 Required minimum distribution: IRAs (See Individual retirement
arrangements (IRAs))Waiver ...................... . 128Losses that exceed passiveState and local bonds, before
Joint return ................... . 77income ................... . 73maturity ................... . 105 Required minimum distributions 
Keogh plans .................. . 77Depreciation (See also (See also Individual retirementRedemption of stock .......... . 101
Loans from plan ............... . 77Depreciation) ........... . 69, 72 arrangements (IRAs);Refinancing:
Lump-sum distributions (See alsoDwelling unit not used as Pensions) ........... . 82, 126, 128Fees for, not part of property Lump-sum distributions) ...... . 79home ...................... . 72 Rescue squad members:basis ....................... . 97 Military (See Armed forces)Dwelling unit used as home .... . 71 Life insurance proceeds when deathPoints ....................... . 158 Multiple pension planCapital gains exclusion ...... . 112 in line of duty ............... . 89Refund of expenses  (See name of benefits ................ . 76, 77Computation of income and Research expenses:benefit) Partly taxable payments ........ . 77expenses ................. . 72 College professor ............ . 203Refundable credits ............ . 260 Reporting of .................. . 77Days used for repairs and Reservists:Refunds ...................... . 210 Required distributions .......... . 82maintenance .............. . 72 Deduction for transportationMortgage interest, treatment At age 701/2 ................. . 82Determining if used as expense ................... . 186of ......................... . 158 Excise tax for failure to takehome .................... . 71 IRAs ........................ . 124State tax ..................... . 89 minimum distributions ...... . 82Division of expenses ......... . 72 Repayments ................. . 122Taxes (See Tax refunds) Form 5329 for failure to receiveDonation of use of property ... . 71 Residency:Tuition refunds ............... . 139 required minimum retirementFiguring days of personal Home outside U.S. (See CitizensRegulated investment companies: plan distributions .......... . 82use ...................... . 71 outside U.S.) State insurer delinquencyUndistributed capital gains, credit for Limit for rental losses ........ . 73 Main home, defined .......... . 107 proceedings preventingtax on ..................... . 260 Main home determination .... . 71 Residency test  (See Qualifying child) minimum distributions ...... . 82Rehabilitative program Rented for 15 days or Resident aliens: Section 457 plans (See Section 457payments .................... . 52 more ..................... . 72 Earned income credit ......... . 244 deferred compensation plans)Reimbursement  (See also Per diem; Rented for fewer than 15 Estimated tax ................. . 43 State and local governmentRecovery of amounts previously days .............. . 69, 71, 72 IRA distributions, withholding employees (See Section 457deducted) ...... . 89, 190, 191, 192, Shared equity financing from ...................... . 128 deferred compensation plans)194 agreement ................ . 71 Social security number Withholding ......... . 15, 41, 76, 80Accountable plans, definition Equipment rental for rental (SSN) ...................... . 14 Retirement savings contributionof ......................... . 190 property .................... . 70 Spouse treated as ............. . 24 credit ....................... . 260Allocation of ................. . 194 Expenses paid by tenant ....... . 69 Residential energy credits ..... . 260 Adjusted gross income limit ..... . 23Casualty losses .............. . 174 Fair rental price ............... . 71 Resorts: Returns, tax  (See Tax returns)Employee business Home possession before final Travel expenses when incidental Revenue stamps:expenses ........... . 41, 47, 184 settlement, rent not deductible as business activities .......... . 182 Basis to include ............... . 96interest .................... . 158Gain from casualty or theft Restaurant employees: Reverse Mortgages ............ . 158Improvements ................ . 69loss ....................... . 174 Tips (See Tip income)Defined .................... . 69 Revolving charge accounts:Health insurance, reimbursement in Retail installment contracts:Increase due to higher real estatelater year .................. . 149 Finance charges, notFinance charges, nottaxes ..................... . 154 deductible ................. . 162Medical and dental deductible ................. . 162Deductibility (Table 22-1) .... . 153expenses .................. . 148 Rewards ....................... . 95Retail inventory ............... . 104Insurance premiums paid inExcess reimbursement flowchart Rhode Island Temporary DisabilityRetention of records  (Seeadvance .................... . 70(Figure 21-A) ............ . 149 Benefit Fund ................ . 151Recordkeeping requirements)Local assessments ............ . 70Mileage (See Standard mileage Robbery:Retired Senior VolunteerLosses from rental real estaterates) Losses due to ................ . 172Program ..................... . 53activities ................ . 23, 73Personal expenses ........... . 190 Rollovers ................. . 80, 126Not-rented-for-profit property ... . 70 Retirees  (See also RetirementReceived after deducting Beneficiaries, restrictions ....... . 80Part interest .................. . 69 plans) ........................ . 76loss ....................... . 175 Definition of .................. . 126Armed forces:Part of property rented ......... . 70Returning excess for business Designated Roth account ....... . 80Taxable income ............. . 52Personal property rental ........ . 90expenses .............. . 41, 192 Direct rollovers ................ . 80Withholding ................. . 39Personal use of property includingTax year of inclusion for insurance Eligible distributions ........... . 80vacation home .............. . 71 Retirement of bonds ...... . 101, 105reimbursement ............. . 175 Excess due to incorrect rollover
Allocation of expenses ....... . 69 Rollover of amount information ................ . 129Theft losses ................. . 174
Pre-rental expenses ........... . 69 redeemed .................. . 80 From 403 plan to IRA ......... . 126Travel advances ............. . 192 Property or services received instead Retirement planning services ... . 50 From employer's plan toTypes of ..................... . 175 of money ................... . 69 IRA ....................... . 126Retirement plans  (See also Annuities;Unclaimed ................... . 200 Purchaser's payment of rent, not From IRA to IRA ............. . 126Railroad retirement benefits;Work-related education included in property basis .... . 97 From IRA to Roth IRA ......... . 132Rollovers; Roth IRAs) ...... . 23, 76,expenses .................. . 200 Repairs ...................... . 69 From Roth IRA to Roth IRA .... . 13380, 82Reinvestment plans: Reporting of .................. . 73 From section 457 plan to457 plans (See Section 457 deferredDividends used for ............ . 66 Sale of rental property ......... . 69 IRA ....................... . 126compensation plans)Related party transactions ..... . 103 Schedule E for reporting of ..... . 73 From SIMPLE IRA to RothClergy ....................... . 52Indirect transactions .......... . 103 Security deposits .............. . 69 IRA ....................... . 132Contributions ................. . 51Like-kind exchanges ..... . 102, 103 Self-employment tax, when Gain from publicly tradedCredit for (See Retirement savingsMultiple property sales or applicable .................. . 73 securities .................. . 107contribution credit)trades ..................... . 103 Tax return preparation ......... . 70 Inherited IRAs ............... . 126Taxation of ................. . 51
Relationship test  (See Qualifying Lump-sum distributions ........ . 79Tax shelters and at-risk rules ... . 73 Cost computation .............. . 77
child) Married filing separately ........ . 23Time to report ................. . 69 Decedent's unrecovered investment
Nonspouse beneficiary ......... . 80Relative, qualifying ............. . 32 Travel expenses associated with in .......................... . 15
Nontaxable amounts ........... . 80management and Definition of ............... . 81, 82Relief fund contributions ...... . 207
Partial rollovers .............. . 126maintenance ................ . 70 Disability pensions ............. . 53Relief funds  (See also Disaster
Qualified domestic relations ordersVacant rental property ......... . 69 Early distributions:relief) ....................... . 175
for distribution of retirement planExceptions to tax on ......... . 81Reorganizations, corporate:Religious organizations  (See also funds ...................... . 80Tax on ..................... . 81Nontaxable trade of stock ..... . 102Churches, temples, etc.; Reporting:Elective deferral limitation ...... . 51Clergy) .... . 8, 51, 52, 163, 164, 166 Repairs: From employer's plan toEmployer plans:Basis, effect on ........... . 96, 97Charitable contributions to .... . 163, IRA ..................... . 127Benefits from previous employer's164 Cost of, when casualty or theft loss IRA to IRA ................. . 126plan .................... . 124involved ................... . 17450% limit on deduction ...... . 169 Retirement bond redemption .... . 80Rollover to IRA ........ . 126, 132Rental expenses .............. . 69Written statement not Roth IRAs .................... . 80Situations in which noneeded ................. . 165 Repayment: Surviving spouse .............. . 80coverage ................ . 124Amount previously included inRemainder interest, sale of .... . 112 Taxability ............... . 126, 131Estimated tax ................. . 76income .................... . 205Rental income: Time limits (60-day rule) ....... . 126Excess accumulation, tax on (SeeRepayments ................... . 90Uncollected rent ............... . 69 Treatment of ................. . 126also this heading: RequiredSocial security benefits ..... . 84, 90Rental income and Waiting period between ....... . 126distributions) ............ . 81, 82Unemploymentexpenses ................. . 68-75 Withholding tax ............... . 80Foreign employmentcompensation ............... . 91Advance rent ................. . 69 contributions ................ . 77 Roth IRAs  (See also
Reporting:Canceling lease, payments Form 1099-R ................. . 45 Rollovers) .......... . 131-133, 133
Rollovers .................... . 127for ......................... . 69 General Rule for nonqualified and Age:
Repossession of home ........ . 108Capitalized costs .............. . 70 qualified plans for recipients over Distributions after age
Change of property to rental Requests for information from 75 years .................... . 79 59 ...................... . 133
use ................... . 70, 100 IRS .......................... . 18 Inherited pensions ............. . 94 No limit for contributions .... . 131
Publication 17 (2009) Page 295

Page 298 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Transfer to spouse ...... . 109, 111 Required distributions .......... . 82 Separated taxpayers ........... . 22Roth IRAs
Rollovers: Filing status .............. . 23, 24Undeducted points ........... . 107Age: (Cont.)
To IRAs .............. . 126, 132 IRAs ........................ . 123Sale of property ........... . 100-107No required distribution
Medical and dental expenses ofSection 72(m)(5) ............... . 210age ..................... . 133 Adjusted basis ............... . 101
children of ................. . 146Compensation, defined ....... . 131 Amount realized .............. . 101 Securities  (See also Capital gains;
Mortgage interest ............. . 156Contribution limits ............ . 131 Basis other than cost ......... . 102 Dividends) ............... . 65, 113
Nonresident alien spouse ...... . 24Age 50 or older, ............ . 132 Business property that has Adjusted basis for ............ . 100
Personal exemption ........... . 28Under age 50, ............. . 132 undergone change of use ... . 100 As capital assets ............. . 104
Contributions ................ . 131 Separation agreements:Cash payment ............... . 102 Bought at various times, how to
No deduction for ........... . 131 Defined for purposes ofDebt payoff included in ........ . 101 indicate ................... . 114
Roth IRA only .............. . 132 alimony ................... . 133Claim for refund ............... . 20Definition of .................. . 101
Time to make .............. . 132 Constructive ownership of stock, SEPs  (See Simplified employeeFair market value (FMV) ...... . 101
To traditional IRA for same determination of ............ . 103 pensions (SEPs))Figuring gain or loss .......... . 101
year .................... . 132 Convertible stocks andForm 1099-B ................ . 101 Series EE and E savings bondsConversion .................. . 132 bonds ..................... . 102Like-kind exchanges .......... . 102 (See U.S. savings bonds)Definition of .................. . 131 Fractional shares .............. . 67Personal items ................ . 95 Series HH and H savingsDistributions: Holding period, determinationRedemption of stock .......... . 101 bonds ....................... . 59Qualified distributions ....... . 133 of ......................... . 106Rental property that has undergone Series I savings bonds ......... . 59Effect of modified AGI on Joint owners, reporting ofchange of use .............. . 100 Service Center addresses ....... . 18contributions (Table 17-3) ... . 131 dividends ................... . 65Transfers between spouses ... . 103 Service charges ............... . 204Establishing account .......... . 131 Nontaxable trades ............ . 102Sales and exchanges: Credit or debit card payment ofExcess contributions .......... . 132 Options .................. . 51, 67Bonds ........................ . 62 taxes ...................... . 16Failed conversions and Preferred stock, redeemable at aSales tax: Deductibility of ............... . 162recharacterizations .... . 127, 132 premium ................... . 67Basis to include ............... . 96 Employer treating as wages for tipIRA transfer to .......... . 126, 127 Redemption of stock .......... . 101Car purchase ................ . 188 income ..................... . 55Modified adjusted gross income Reinvestment plan, dividends usedDeductibility of .......... . 152, 153 Service Corps of Retired Executives(MAGI) .................... . 131 for ......................... . 66General Sales tax ............ . 152 (SCORE) ..................... . 53Computation (Worksheet Rollover of gain from publicly tradedSales taxes, standard deduction17-2) .................... . 130 Services:securities .................. . 107increased by ................ . 142Phaseout (Table 17-3) ...... . 131 No charitable deduction for valueSale expenses, how to adjustSales to related persons,Penalties .................... . 133 of ......................... . 164for ........................ . 114exception ................... . 112Conversion contributions Property received for .......... . 98Short-term gains and losses ... . 114withdrawn in 5-year Salvation Army  (See Charitable Settlement date of securitiesStock appreciation rights ....... . 48period ................... . 133 contributions) transaction ................. . 106Stock rights:Excess contributions ........ . 132 Saturday, deadline falling on .... . 44 Settlement fees:As capital assets ........... . 104Spousal contributions ......... . 131 Savings: Real property transactions ...... . 96Dividends as ................ . 67Taxability .................... . 133 Bonds .................... . 59, 64 Sale of home ................ . 109Holding period, determinationWithdrawals ................. . 133 Bonds used for education ...... . 61 of ....................... . 106 Severance pay ................. . 48Excess contributions ........ . 132 Certificate ................ . 58, 63 Worthless ................. . 101 Accrued leave payment ........ . 48Not taxable ................ . 133 Surrender of stock ............ . 101Savings Bonds .................. . 1 Outplacement services ......... . 48Rounding off dollars ........... . 14 Tax-exempt:Schedule  (See also Form Shipping:Royalties ...................... . 91 Home equity loan proceeds1040) .......... . 18, 47, 48, 52, 54 Business-related travel
invested in ............... . 158RRTA tax  (See also Excess Form 1040, A-F, R, SE (See Form expense ................... . 179
Interest incurred to producewithholding credit) ............ . 257 1040) Shipwrecks:income from ............. . 161Rural mail carriers ............. . 187 K-1: Casualty loss due to .......... . 172Interest to purchase or carry, notBeneficiaries receiving income Short tax year:deductible ............... . 162from estate or trust ........ . 65 Change in annual accountingTenants by the entirety owning,Partnership income .......... . 89S period ..................... . 141reporting of dividends ........ . 65S corporation income ........ . 89S corporations ................ . 204 Short-term debt instruments:Tenants in common owning,K-1, Form 1041 ............... . 57Capital gains or losses from ... . 114 Government obligations ....... . 104reporting of dividends ........ . 65R (Form 1040A or 1040) ...... . 231Related party transactions ..... . 103 Ordinary gain ................ . 104Worthless securities .......... . 101X:Shareholders ................. . 89 Short-term gains andSecurity deposits:Tax rates for singleInvestment interest ......... . 161 losses ................. . 104, 114Rental property, for ............ . 69persons .................. . 22Safe deposit box .............. . 204 Priority in deducting .......... . 115Self-employed persons  (See alsoY-1: Sale or trade of property held 1 yearSalaries  (See Wages and salaries) Self-employment tax) ......... . 155Tax rates for married filing or less .................... . 105Sale of home  (See also Real Corporate directors as ......... . 94jointly .................... . 22 Sick leave:estate) ........... . 73, 95, 107-113 Definition ...................... . 8Y-2: Cash payments for unusedAbandonment ................ . 108 Filing requirements (TableTax rates for married filing leave ..................... . 148Adjusted basis .......... . 108, 109 1-3) ......................... . 9separately ................ . 23 Federal employees buyingAmount realized .............. . 108 Foreign government or internationalSchedules A ± F, R, SE (Form 1040) back ....................... . 54Basis ....................... . 109 organizations, U.S. citizens(See Form 1040)Capital gains exclusion ........ . 110 Sick pay:employed by ................. . 8Scholarships ............ . 30, 33, 36Division of real estate taxes ... . 152 FECA payments ............... . 54Gross income .................. . 7Scholarships and fellowships .... . 9Employer, payment by ........ . 108 Income ....................... . 48Health insurance costs, deductible asEarned income including ...... . 142Federal subsidy, recapture Railroad Unemployment Insurancemedical expense ........... . 150Exclusion from gross income ... . 95of ......................... . 113 Act ........................ . 54Homeworkers, deduction ofTeaching or researchForeclosure or Withholding ............... . 40, 41expenses .................. . 190fellowships ................. . 95repossession .............. . 108 Signatures ..................... . 15IRAs ........................ . 122Tuition deduction, effect on .... . 139Form 1099-S ................ . 108 Agent, use of ................. . 15Meal allowance not permitted whenScientific organizations:Gain or loss, figuring of ....... . 108 Joint returns .................. . 22more than 10% ownership ofCharitable contributions to ..... . 163Interest deduction for corporation ................ . 191 Mentally incompetent .......... . 15mortgage .................. . 156 Scrip dividends ................ . 68 Ministers ...................... . 8 Parent for child ................ . 15Interest paid to seller, reporting Second homes  (See Vacation homes) Nonemployee compensation .... . 94 Physically disabled ............ . 15of ......................... . 162 Qualified retirement plans for ... . 77Second mortgages: Signing your return ............ . 11Jointly owned home .......... . 108 Travel outside U.S. ........... . 183Interest ...................... . 156 Silver  (See Gold and silver)Land ........................ . 107 Work-related educationSection 1202 exclusion: SIMPLE plans:Main home, defined .......... . 107 expenses .................. . 201Capital gains or losses Rollover to Roth IRA .......... . 132More than one home .......... . 108 Self-employment tax .......... . 209under ..................... . 115 Simplified employee pensionsOption to buy ................ . 108 Deduction of ................. . 155Section 1244 stock: (SEPs):Period of ownership and List of deductible taxes (TableLosses on ................... . 105 IRAs as ..................... . 122use ....................... . 110 22-1) .................... . 153Section 1250 gains: Simplified Method:Points paid by seller .......... . 160 Rental income ................ . 73Sale of real property subject Computation of taxablePostponed gain from ........... . 98 Seller-financed mortgages ..... . 112to ......................... . 115 annuity ..................... . 78Recordkeeping ............... . 109 Seminars:Section 179 deductions: Worksheet .................. . 78Reporting of gain ............. . 112 Investment-related ............ . 206Adjustment to basis for ......... . 97Seller-financed mortgage ...... . 112 Single taxpayers ............... . 22
Senior Companion Program .... . 53Car expenses ................ . 188Selling price ................. . 108 Charitable contributions to, no
Separate returns  (See Married filingSection 457 deferred compensationSettlement fees or closing deduction for .......... . 164, 166
separately)plans ........................ . 76costs ...................... . 109 Filing requirements ............. . 7
Trading homes ............... . 109 Early distributions from ......... . 81 Separated parents ...... . 29, 32, 248 Filing status ................ . 7, 22
Page 296 Publication 17 (2009)

Page 299 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Stamp taxes: Stock options .............. . 51, 67 Alimony requirements (instrumentsSingle taxpayers (Cont.)
executed after 1984) (TableReal estate transactionsForm 1040EZ, use of ........ . 9, 22 Stockholders  (See also
18-1) ...................... . 134and ....................... . 154 Securities) .................... . 20Gross income filing requirements
Capital gain rates (Table(Table 1-1) .................. . 6 Stamps  (See Collectibles) Debts ........................ . 87
16-1) ...................... . 115Small businesses: Standard deduction ...... . 141, 143 Stockholders' meeting
Car expenses, reporting of (Tableexpenses ................... . 2072009 changes .................. . 1Capital gains or losses from stock
26-3) ...................... . 193of ......................... . 115 Age 65 or older .............. . 141 Stocks  (See also Dividends; Casualty and theft losses:Keogh plans .................. . 77 Blind persons ................ . 141 Securities) ................ . 20, 45 Deduction limits for personalChanging from itemized to standardLosses on stock of ........... . 105 Stolen funds: property (Table 25-1) ..... . 176deduction (or vice versa) .... . 143 Reporting of .................. . 95Smoking cessation programs: Deduction of loss, when to takeComparison with itemized deductionDeductibility as medical Stolen property  (See Theft losses) (Table 25-2) ............. . 177amount .................... . 143expense ................... . 147 Stop-smoking programs: Charitable contributions, deductibilityDefined ..................... . 141Social clubs: Deductibility as medical of (Table 24-1) ............. . 163Dependents ................. . 142Contributions to, no charitable expense ................... . 147 Children's income:Final return of decedent ....... . 141deduction for ............... . 164 Storms  (See also Disaster Inclusion on parent's return (FigureMarried filing separately:Dues: relief) ....................... . 175 31-A) ................... . 213One spouse has itemized ... . 141Not entertainment Casualty loss due to .......... . 172 Investment income more thanPurpose of .................. . 141expenses ................ . 185 Straddles: $1,900, reporting of (FigureReal property taxes ........... . 142Social security and Medicare taxes Interest from ................. . 161 31-B) ................... . 214Sales taxes .................. . 142(See also Excess withholding Strike benefits ................. . 95 Entertainment expenses:Standard meal allowance ..... . 181,credit) .............. . 210, 226, 257 50% limit (Figure 26-A) ...... . 183Student loan interest deduction:1912009 changes .................. . 2 Proof of (Table 26-2) ........ . 189Loan repayment assistance ... . 137Amount of ................... . 181Reporting of (Table 1-3) ......... . 9 Reporting of (Table 26-3) .... . 193Student loans:Areas outside continentalSupport, not included in ........ . 36 Estimated tax, who must makeCancellation of debt ........... . 88U.S. ...................... . 181Social security benefits ..... . 34, 82, payments (Figure 4-A) ....... . 44Interest deduction ..... . 9, 136, 162Prorating on partial days of86 Filing requirements:Academic period ........... . 137travel ..................... . 192 Dependents (Table 1-2) ....... . 7Deductions related to .......... . 86 Amount of deduction ........ . 138Standard medical mileage Gross income levels (TableEmployer retirement plans different Claiming ............. . 137, 138rates ....................... . 145 1-1) ....................... . 6from ...................... . 124 Double deduction notStandard mileage rates ........ . 187 Other situations requiring filingEstimated tax ................. . 84 allowed ................. . 1382009 rates ..................... . 1 (Table 1-3) ................ . 9Foreign employer .............. . 52 Eligible educationalBusiness-related miles ... . 178, 187 Gift expenses:Form SSA-1042S for nonresident institution ................ . 137Car expenses ................ . 187 Proof of (Table 26-2) ........ . 189aliens ...................... . 83 Eligible student ............. . 137Charitable organization service, auto Reporting of (Table 26-3) .... . 193Form SSA-1099 ........... . 45, 83 Features of (Table 19-1) .... . 136use for .................... . 166 Head of household, qualifying personGroup-term life insurance, taxes Married filing separately ...... . 23Medical reasons for use of (Table 2-1) ................. . 24owed on .................... . 10 Qualified student loan ....... . 136car ....................... . 148 Individual retirement arrangementsIncome ........................ . 9 Worksheet ................. . 138Not allowed .................. . 187 (IRAs):IRAs for recipients of Interest, defined .............. . 136Work-related education ...... . 197, Figuring modified AGI (Worksheetbenefits ................... . 124 Student claimed as exemption on tax200 17-1) .................... . 124Joint returns .................. . 86 return of another person .... . 138State: Modified AGI, effect on deduction ifLump-sum election ............ . 84 Students ...................... . 169Obligations, interest on ......... . 62 covered by retirement plan atMarried filing separately .... . 23, 84 Credit (See Education credits) work (Table 17-1) ........ . 123State bar associations:Paid by employer .............. . 48 Defined ...................... . 29 Modified AGI, effect on deduction ifBar review courses ........... . 199 Exemption from withholding .... . 40Repayment of benefits ..... . 84, 90 not covered by retirement planCharitable contributions to ..... . 167 Foreign ...................... . 28Repayments ................. . 204 at work (Table 17-2) ...... . 123State or local governments: Foreign students ............. . 165Reporting of .................. . 84 Roth IRAs, effect of modified AGIBonds, tax-exempt ........... . 105 Loans (See Student loans)Taxability of .............. . 83, 84 on contributions (TableCharitable contributions to .... . 163, Scholarships (See Scholarships andTips, taxes owed on ........... . 10 17-3) .................... . 131164 fellowships)Withholding for ............ . 42, 84 Roth IRAs, modified AGIEmployees: Tuition deduction (See Tuition)Not deductible ............. . 155 (Worksheet 17-2) ......... . 130Section 457 plans for (See Section Tuition programs, qualified (See Interest deductions, forms to useSocial security number (SSN) ... . 14 457 deferred compensation Qualified tuition programs) (Table 23-1) .......... . 162, 163Correspondence with IRS, include plans) Work-related education (See Meal expenses and 50% limit (FigureSSN ....................... . 14 Unemployment Work-related education) 26-A) ..................... . 183Dependents .................. . 14 compensation ............. . 91 Substantial gainful activity ..... . 229 Medical and dental expenses:Exception .................. . 14 Fee-basis officials: Substitute forms ............... . 13 Checklist for deductible expenseFailure to include penalty ....... . 14 Business expenses of ....... . 194 Suggestions for publication ..... . 5 (Table 21-1) ............. . 148Form SS-5 to request Work-related education
Reimbursement, excess algorithmSunday, deadline falling on ..... . 44number .................... . 14 expenses ................ . 201
(Figure 21-A) ............ . 149Supplemental wages ........... . 40Nonresident alien spouse ...... . 14 State or local income taxes .... . 143 Roth IRA and modified adjustedSupplies:Resident aliens ............... . 14 Deduction of ................. . 151 gross income (MAGI) phaseoutRegularly used or consumed inSocial security numbers List of deductible taxes (Table (Table 17-3) ............... . 131ordinary course of trade or(SSNs) ...................... . 222 22-1) .................... . 153 Student loan interest deductionbusiness .................. . 104Alimony recipient's number Schedule A (Form 1040) .... . 155 (Table 19-1) ............... . 136Support test:required ................... . 135 Electronic returns filed with Tax returns:Qualifying child ................ . 30federal ..................... . 11Child's ........................ . 3 Due dates (Table 1-5) ........ . 11Qualifying relative ............. . 34Exception to deduction ........ . 151Number to be obtained at Steps to prepare (TableFederal changes, effect on ..... . 20birth ..................... . 38 Surveys: 1-6) ...................... . 13Form W-2 to show withheld Property basis to include ....... . 96Dependents ................... . 3 Taxes that are deductible (Tabletaxes ..................... . 151Dividend payers to use ......... . 65 Surviving spouse: 22-1) ...................... . 153Interest on, not deductible ..... . 162Earned income credit .... . 243, 247 Annuity ....................... . 82 Travel and transportation expenses:Joint state and local returns butLabel, number need to be written Filing status .................. . 22 Examples of deductible expensesfederal returns filedin ........................... . 3 With dependent child ........ . 26 (Table 26-1) ............. . 179separately ................. . 151Penalty for failure to provide: Gross income filing requirements Local transportation (FigureMarried filing separately ....... . 151 (Table 1-1) .................. . 6To dividend payers .......... . 65 26-B) ................... . 185Refunds, treatment of ......... . 151 Life insurance proceeds paidSocial security card ........... . 243 Proof of (Table 26-2) ........ . 189State or local taxes: to .......................... . 88Sonic booms: Reporting of (Table 26-3) .... . 193Refunds ...................... . 89 Rollovers by .................. . 80Casualty loss due to .......... . 172 Tuition deduction (TableSingle filing status ............. . 22Statute of limitations:Special needs children: 19-2) ...................... . 138Tax (See Estate tax)Claim for refund ............... . 16Adoption credit ............... . 258 Tuition deduction (Table 19-3):Claim for refunds .............. . 19 Synagogues  (See Churches, temples, Claiming dependent's expensesSpouse  (See also Married taxpayers; etc.)Statutory employees .......... . 190 (Table 19-3) ............. . 140Surviving spouse) ... . 7, 14, 15, 22,
Stillborn child .................. . 29 Volunteers, deductibility of23, 80, 88
Stock appreciation rights ....... . 48 contributions (Table 24-2) ... . 165Disabled, qualifying for dependent
Work-related education (Figurecare credit ................. . 222 Stock bonus plans ............. . 41 T
27-A) ..................... . 198Student ..................... . 222 Stock certificates: Tables and figures:
Tax computation worksheet ... . 276SSN  (See Social security number Charitable contributions, date Adjusted basis, examples of (Table
(SSN)) of ......................... . 169 13-1) ....................... . 97 Tax counsel fees .............. . 203
Publication 17 (2009) Page 297

Page 300 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tax Counseling for the Tax shelters: Telephones ................... . 207 Business travel expense ..... . 179,
Elderly ....................... . 11 181Business-related travelRental property and at-risk
expense ................... . 179rules ....................... . 73Tax credits  (See Credits) Tip income .................. . 55-57
Fraud or misconduct of IRS Allocated tips .......... . 41, 56, 57Tax table .................. . 264-275Tax evasion .................... . 21
employee, number for reporting Daily record of tips ............ . 55Tax year  (See also AccountingTax figured by IRS ............. . 210
anonymously ................ . 4 Electronic tip record ........... . 55periods) .................. . 11, 13Tax help .............. . 4, 5, 11, 279 Tax return to include phone Form 4070A for daily records ... . 55Taxable exchanges:Tax Counseling for the number ..................... . 3 Noncash tips .............. . 55, 56Definition of ................... . 98Elderly ..................... . 11 Penalty for failure to report ..... . 56Temples  (See Churches, temples,Volunteer counseling (Volunteer Taxes  (See also Sales Reporting on tax return ......... . 56etc.)Income Tax Assistance tax) ............ . 150-155, 188, 209 Reporting tips to employer ...... . 55Temporary absence from job:program) ............... . 11, 53 Alternative minimum .......... . 210 Failure to report toWork-related educationTax preference items .......... . 210 Business taxes, deduction employer ............. . 10, 56during ..................... . 197of ......................... . 150Tax rates: Form 4070 for ............... . 55Temporary absences ....... . 29, 33Married filing jointly (Schedule Deduction of ................. . 151 Service charges paid by employer asTemporary job assignments:Y-1) ....................... . 22 Schedules to use ........... . 155 wages ..................... . 55Travel expenses ............. . 179Married filing separately (Schedule Types of taxes deductible (Table Social security and Medicare tax:Tenants  (See also Rental income andY-2) ....................... . 23 22-1) .................... . 153 Employer reporting for purposesexpenses) .................... . 69Single person filing (Schedule Estate (See Estate tax) of ........................ . 55By the entirety ................ . 58X) ......................... . 22 Estimated (See Estimated tax) Filing requirements (TableIn common ................... . 58Tax refunds: Excise (See Excise taxes) 1-3) ....................... . 9
Agreement with IRS extending Tenants by the entirety:Federal income taxes, not Uncollected ................. . 10
assessment period, claim based Alimony, no deduction for taxes anddeductible ................. . 155 Tip Rate Determination and
on ......................... . 20 insurance paid on home ownedForeign taxes ................ . 151 Education Program .......... . 56
Bad debts .................... . 20 as ........................ . 134 Tip-splitting or tip-poolingIncome tax. deduction of .... . 152
Business tax credit Dividends, reporting of ......... . 65 arrangements ............... . 55Gift taxes .................... . 155carrybacks ................. . 20 Real estate taxes, allocation when Uncollected taxes ............. . 56How to figure ................ . 209Cashing check ................ . 16 filing separately ............ . 154 Withholding ............... . 41, 55Income taxes, deduction of .... . 151Check's expiration date ........ . 16 Tenants in common: Employee contributing to ..... . 56Indian tribal government taxes,Claim for ................. . 19, 20 Underwithholding ........ . 41, 56Alimony deduction for taxes anddeduction of ............... . 151Limitations period ........... . 19 insurance paid on home owned Title insurance:Inheritance tax ............... . 155Litigation ................... . 20 as ........................ . 134 Property basis to include ....... . 96Kiddie tax (See Children,Direct deposit ................. . 15 Dividends, reporting of ......... . 65 Title to property:subheading: Investment income of)Erroneous refunds ............. . 19 Terminal illness: Abstract fees, property basis toNanny tax (See Domestic help)Federal income tax refunds ..... . 89 Accelerated payment of life include ..................... . 96New motor vehicle taxes ..... . 150,Financially disabled ............ . 20 insurance proceeds (See Attorneys' fees:153, 154, 155Foreign tax paid or accrued ..... . 20 Accelerated death benefits) Property basis to include ..... . 96Not deductible ............... . 155General rules ................. . 11 Viatical settlements ............ . 88 Tolls:Personal property taxes:Inquiries ...................... . 11 Business-related travel ........ . 187Termite damage:Car taxes .................. . 188Interest on ............. . 19, 20, 59 Not casualty losses ........... . 172 Tools ......................... . 203Deduction of ............... . 155Late filed returns ............... . 4 Hauling to and from work ...... . 186Terrorist attacks:Real estate taxes (See Real estateLess than $1 .................. . 16 Rental for use on rentalCasualty loss due to .......... . 172taxes)Limits .................... . 19, 20 property .................... . 70Disability payments for injuries from,Sales tax ..................... . 96Exceptions ................. . 20 Tornadoes  (See also Disastertax exclusion ................ . 76Withholding ................... . 39More or less than expected ..... . 16 relief) ....................... . 175Disability pensions for federalTaxes, not support ............. . 36Net operating loss carryback .... . 20 Casualty loss due to .......... . 172employees ................. . 54Tax-exempt:Offset: Total support .................. . 34Theft losses ...... . 171-178, 203, 205Bonds and other obligations .... . 62Against debts ........... . 11, 16 $500 Rule ................... . 176 Tour guides:Income ...................... . 207Against next year's tax ... . 15, 44 Free tour for organizing tour .... . 94Adjusted basis in property ..... . 97,Interest ....................... . 62Past-due ................. . 11, 18 98, 174 Trade Act of 1974:Obligations:Real estate taxes, treatment Amount of loss ............... . 173 Trade readjustment allowancesAdjusted basis ............. . 100of ......................... . 154 Appraisals ................... . 174 under ...................... . 91Organizations:Reduced ..................... . 20 Cost of cleaning up or making Trade associations:Related partyState and local income tax repairs .................... . 174 Meetings and entertainmenttransactions ............. . 103refunds .................... . 151 Costs of photographs and expenses .................. . 184Section 457 deferredState liability, effect on ......... . 20 appraisals ................. . 174 Trade of property  (See also Sale ofcompensation plans ....... . 76Withholding .................... . 8 Deduction of loss: property) .................... . 100Worthless securities ........... . 20 Tax-exempt income ............ . 34 When to take (Table Definition of .................. . 101Claim for refund ............ . 101 Tax-exempt obligations: 25-2) .................... . 177 Form 8824 for reporting ....... . 102Tax return preparation: Adjusted basis for ............ . 100 Definition of theft ............. . 172 Like property and moneyRental expenses .............. . 70 Tax-free exchanges: Fair market value of stolen transferred ............ . 99, 102Tax returns  (See also Due dates; Definition of ................... . 98 property ................... . 173 Like-kind exchanges ...... . 98, 102Joint Returns; Signatures) ..... . 11, Holding period, determination Nontaxable exchanges .... . 98, 102Form 4684 to be filed ......... . 17215, 22 of ......................... . 106 Holding period, determinationInsurance proceeds, treatmentAliens ......................... . 8 Taxis: of ....................... . 106of ......................... . 174Amended (See also Form Business-related travel Partially nontaxableNet operating losses .......... . 1781040X) ................ . 19, 143 expense ................... . 179 exchange ............. . 99, 102Proof of loss ................. . 173Attachments to returns ......... . 15 Standard mileage rate not Reporting of ................. . 102Property used partly for business andChild ......................... . 15 allowed ................... . 187 Taxable exchange, defined ..... . 98partly for personalCopies of ..................... . 18 Taxpayer Advocate ............ . 279 Trade-in of car ................ . 188purposes .................. . 176Dating of ..................... . 15 Recovered stolen property .... . 173Taxpayer Assistance Center ..... . 4 Trading date of securitiesFiling of (See also Filing transaction ................. . 106Reimbursement .............. . 174Taxpayer identification numberrequirements) ................ . 6 Reporting of gain or loss ..... . 177,(TIN): Traditional IRAs  (See IndividualForms to use .................. . 9 178 retirement arrangements (IRAs))Adoption (ATIN) ............... . 14Free preparation help .......... . 11 Third parties:Individual (ITIN) ............... . 14 Traffic violations:How to file .................... . 13 Alimony payments made to ... . 133, Fines not deductible .......... . 188Social security number (See SocialJoint returns (See Joint Returns) 134security number (SSN)) Transfer taxes:Mailing of ................... . 2, 18 Designee for IRS to discuss return Property basis to include ....... . 96Taxpayer identification numbersPaid preparer ................. . 15 with ...................... . 3, 15 Real estate transactions(TINs) .................. . 220, 222Payment with ................. . 16 Income from taxpayer's property paid and ....................... . 154Child and dependent carePhone number to be included .... . 3 to .......................... . 13credit ..................... . 224 Transit passes ................. . 51Preparation fees ............. . 203 Threats:Childcare provider ............ . 224 Transportation ................ . 223Private delivery services ..... . 3, 11 Losses due to ................ . 172Individual (ITIN) ............... . 38 Transportation expenses  (SeeRequest copy of, Form 4506 .... . 18
Tickets  (See Entertainment expenses)Social security numbers (See Social Travel and transportation expenses)Request transcript of, Form
security numbers (SSNs)) Tiebreaker rules ........... . 31, 2474506-T ..................... . 18 Transportation workers:
Teachers:Steps to prepare (Table 1-6) .... . 13 Tip expense: Meal expenses ............... . 182
Expenses, deduction of ....... . 136Third party designee ......... . 3, 15 Business meal or entertainment Deduction limits ............ . 184
Transcript of .................. . 18 Work-related education ...... . 198, activity, 50% deduction Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, how to
Who must file ............. . 6, 7, 8 199 limit ....................... . 184 complete ................ . 194
Page 298 Publication 17 (2009)

Page 301 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Travel and transportation Traveling salespersons: U.S. Virgin Islands: Vasectomy:
expenses ...... . 178-183, 185-188 Deductibility as medicalIncome from ................... . 7Deduction of expenses ........ . 190
Advances .............. . 190, 192 expense ................... . 147Tax home, determination of .... . 179 Unclaimed reimbursement ..... . 199
Allocation of types of costs ... . 180, Veterans benefits .............. . 52Treasury bills, notes, and Uncollected rent:
189 Retroactive determination ...... . 54bonds ....................... . 62 Income ....................... . 69
Bona fide business purpose ... . 181 Special statute of limitations. .... . 54Treasury Inspector General: Underpayment penalties .... . 38, 44,Business associates .......... . 181 Veterans' benefits:Telephone number to report 46Business travel ............... . 179 Educational assistance ......... . 95anonymously fraud or misconduct IRS computation .............. . 46$75 or less ................ . 188 Tuition deduction, effectof IRS employee ............. . 4 Undistributed capital gains .... . 67,Confidential information on ...................... . 139Treasury notes ................. . 59 114, 260and ..................... . 189 Veterans' insurance:Treaties: Unearned income of child  (SeeEmployees' expenses ....... . 180 Dividends on .................. . 68Foreign charitable organizations, Children, subheading: InvestmentIncidental expenses ........ . 181 Veterans' organizations:contributions to ............. . 164 income of)Proof of business Charitable contributions to .... . 163,Trees and plants: Unemployment compensation .. . 9,purpose ................. . 188 164Cost of, when casualty or theft loss 86, 91Receipt not readily available to 30% limit .................. . 169involved .............. . 172, 174 Credit card insurance paying ... . 93prove ................... . 188 Viatical settlements ............ . 88Mandatory contributions to stateTrust beneficiaries:Spouse or dependents ...... . 180 Victims of terrorism  (See Terroristfunds, deduction of ......... . 151Dividends received by ......... . 65Trip outside U.S. ...... . 182, 183 attacks)Private fund, from ............. . 91Losses of trust ................ . 93Trip primarily for business ... . 182 Repayment of benefits ......... . 91 VISTA volunteers ............... . 53Receiving income from trust ... . 93,Trip primarily for personal Reporting on Forms 1040, 1040A, or94 Vitamins:reasons ................. . 182 1040EZ .................... . 91Rollover restrictions ........... . 80 Not deductible as medicalU.S. travel ................. . 182 Supplemental benefits ......... . 91 expense ................... . 147Trustees:Unproved amounts ......... . 192
Voluntary benefit fund Volunteer firefighters:Administrative fees ........... . 205Visiting clients or contributions ............... . 207 Charitable contributions to ..... . 164customers ............... . 185 IRA ......................... . 205
Withholding ............... . 42, 91 IRAs ........................ . 124Charitable organization service, IRAs:
Unemployment tax:deduction for ............... . 166 Volunteer work ............ . 53, 222Fees ................. . 122, 123
State employment taxes ....... . 226Commuting expenses ......... . 186 Deductibility of contributions (TableNotification of
Uniform Settlement Statement (FormEmployer-provided commuter 24-2) ...................... . 165recharacterization ........ . 127
HUD-1):vehicle ................... . 51 Out-of-pocket expenses, deductibleTransfer from trustee to
Points shown on ............. . 158Conventions ................. . 183 when serving for qualifiedtrustee ............. . 126, 132
Delegates, deduction of organization .......... . 163, 165Uniformed services ........... . 110Trusts  (See also Trust
unreimbursed amount ..... . 165 Tax counseling (Volunteer IncomeUniforms ..................... . 203beneficiaries) ......... . 65, 93, 210
Deductible expenses ......... . 180 Tax Assistance program) .... . 11,Charitable organization requiring,Grantor trusts ................. . 93
Examples of (Table 26-1) ... . 179 53deduction for cost and upkeepIncome ....................... . 93
Definition of .................. . 178 Value of income lost by, notof ......................... . 166Child beneficiary ........... . 216
Estimates of ................. . 188 deductible ................. . 167Unions  (See also LaborInvestment interest ........... . 161Expenses paid for others ...... . 207 Vouchers for payment of tax .... . 44unions) ................ . 41, 91, 95Related party transactions withFederal crime investigators or Assessments ................ . 203fiduciaries ................. . 103prosecutors ................ . 180 Dues ........................ . 203TTY/TDD information .......... . 279Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, how to fill United States  (See headings starting WTubal ligation:out ....................... . 193 with ªFederalº or ªU.S.º)Deductibility as medical W-2 form  (See Form W-2)Fringe benefits ................ . 50 United Way  (See Charitableexpense ................... . 147 Wages and salaries  (See also FormGetting from home to temporary contributions)Tuition ........................ . 138 W-2) ............... . 13, 47-55, 51workplace when multiple regular Universities  (See Colleges and Accident and healthAlimony payments made toworkplaces ................ . 185 universities) insurance .................. . 49cover ..................... . 133Going home on days off from Accrued leave payment ........ . 48Unlawful discrimination suits:Charitable deduction not allowed fortemporary assignment ...... . 180 Adoption, employerpaying ............... . 164, 167 Deduction for costs ............ . 93Going to business meeting away assistance .................. . 49Credit (See Education credits) Unmarried persons  (See Singlefrom regular workplace ...... . 185
Advance commissions ......... . 47Deduction for ................ . 138 taxpayers)Going to family home ......... . 179
Allowances andClaiming for dependent ..... . 139 Unrecaptured Section 1250Indefinite assignment ......... . 179
reimbursements ......... . 41, 47Refund of expenses ........ . 139 gain ................... . 104, 115Job search expenses .......... . 94
Archer MSA contributions ...... . 49Eligible educational institution,Medical purposes, for .... . 147, 148 Unstated interest .......... . 96, 101 Awards and prizes ............. . 47defined .................... . 138Mileage rates (See Standard mileage Unused sick leave: Babysitting ................... . 47Expenses that do notrates) Cash payments for ........... . 148 Back pay awards .............. . 47qualify .................... . 139New employment ............. . 203 Use of home in business ...... . 202 Bonuses ..................... . 47Qualified programs (See QualifiedNo main place of business or Used clothing and household Child care providers ........... . 47tuition programs)work ...................... . 179 goods: Children's earnings ............. . 7Related expenses, defined .... . 139Nonaccountable plans, definition Charitable deduction for ....... . 167 Clergy ....................... . 51of ......................... . 193 Tuition and fees deduction: Used clothing and household items: De minimis benefits ............ . 49Parking fees: Refund of expenses .......... . 139 Charitable deduction for fair market Elective deferrals .............. . 51Business-related travel ...... . 187 Tuition programs, qualified  (See value ..................... . 168 Employee achievementCommuting expense ........ . 186 Qualified tuition programs) Usurious interest ............... . 59 award ...................... . 47Employer-provided fringe Tuition, benefits under GI Bill ... . 36 Utilities: Employee compensation ....... . 47benefit ................... . 51
Charges for installing included in Farmworkers ................. . 39Medical-related travel ....... . 148
property basis ............... . 96 Foreign employer .............. . 52Probationary work periods ..... . 180
U Emergency energy programs, Form W-2 (See Form W-2)Proof of expenses ............ . 188
U.S. citizen: charitable contributions to ... . 164 Fringe benefits ................ . 48Summary (Table 26-2) ...... . 189
Earned income credit ......... . 244 Energy conservation Garnisheed ................... . 13Recordkeeping
subsidies ............... . 93, 95 Government cost-of-livingrequirements ......... . 180, 188 U.S. citizen or resident ......... . 28
Late payment charges, not allowances ................. . 48Rental property maintenance and U.S. national ................... . 28
deductible ................. . 162 Household workers ............ . 39management, for ............ . 70 U.S. obligations, interest ........ . 59
Income ........................ . 9Reporting of ................. . 190 Rebates ...................... . 95U.S. possessions: Foreign .................... . 47Table 26-3 showing forms to be Charitable contributions to ..... . 163 Long-term care coverage ....... . 49used .................... . 193 Deduction of income tax paid Military retirees ............ . 39, 52Resorts or cruise ships ........ . 182 to ......................... . 152 V Military service ................ . 52School children, transporting Income from ................... . 7 Vacation homes: Miscellaneous compensation ... . 47of .......................... . 95 U.S. Postal Service  (See Post office Determining if used as home ... . 71 Note for services .............. . 48Summary of rules (Figure employees) Points ....................... . 158 Outplacement services ......... . 4826-B) ..................... . 185 Rental expenses .......... . 71, 72U.S. savings bonds: Religious orders ............... . 52Tax home, determination of .... . 179 Education, used for ............ . 23 Valuations  (See also Appraisals; Fair Restricted property ............ . 51Temporary assignment or Interest on .................... . 94 market value (FMV)) ...... . 96, 174 Dividends on restrictedjob ........................ . 179
Transfer between spouses ..... . 99 Value of time or services: stock ..................... . 51Temporary work location ...... . 185
U.S. Treasury bills or notes: No charitable deduction for ... . 164, Retirement plan contributions byTips ................... . 179, 181
165, 167Trade of ..................... . 102 employer ................... . 51Transit pass .................. . 51
Vandalism: Severance pay ................ . 48Work-related education ...... . 199, U.S. Treasury bills, notes, and
Sick pay .................. . 48, 54200 bonds ....................... . 62 Casualty loss due to .......... . 172
Publication 17 (2009) Page 299

Page 302 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Withholding  (See also Form Sick pay ...................... . 41 Casualty and theft losses ...... . 172Wages and salaries  (Cont.)
W-2) ............... . 13, 38-46, 39 Social security benefits ..... . 42, 84 Excess withholding credit ...... . 263Social security and Medicare taxes
Agricultural Act of 1949 State and local income taxes, Head of household status and cost ofpaid by employer ............ . 48
payments .................. . 42 deduction for ............... . 151 keeping up home ............ . 24Stock appreciation rights ....... . 48
Changing amount withheld ..... . 39 Supplemental wages .......... . 40 Individual retirement arrangementsStock options ................. . 51
For 2011 ................... . 39 Tips (See Tip income) (IRAs), modified AGI computationSupplemental ................. . 40
Checking amount of ...... . 39, 234 Unemployment (Worksheet 17-1) ........... . 124Volunteer work ................ . 53
Claim for refund ................ . 8 compensation ........... . 42, 91 Pensions or annuities, jointWithholding (See Withholding)
Commodity credit loans ........ . 42 returns ..................... . 78Work clothes .................. . 203Waiters and waitresses:
Credit for ................. . 38, 45 Roth IRA modified adjusted grossTips (See Tip income) Workers' compensation ........ . 54
Cumulative wage method ...... . 40 income (MAGI), computationMandatory contributions to stateWar veterans' organizations  (See Definition ..................... . 38 (Worksheet 17-2) ........... . 130funds, deduction of ......... . 151Veterans' organizations) Determining amount to Simplified Method computation ofReturn to work ................ . 54War zone  (See Combat zone) withhold ................ . 39, 40 taxable annuity .............. . 78Work-related education ........ . 197Wash sales .......... . 101, 103, 106 Disaster Assistance Act of 1988 Social security or railroad retirementBusiness deduction:Washington State Supplemental payments .................. . 42 benefits, to figureQualified expenses ..... . 199-200Workmen's Compensation Dividend income .............. . 65 taxability ............... . 83, 84Reimbursements ........... . 200Fund ....................... . 151 Employers, rules for ........... . 40 Student loan interestTax benefit of .............. . 197Welfare benefits ............ . 34, 92 Exemption from ............... . 40 deduction ................. . 138Education required by employer orWhat's new ................... . 1, 2 Federal income taxes, not Support test .................. . 34by law ..................... . 197Adoption benefits ............... . 1 deductible ................. . 155 Withholding (Form W-4) ........ . 39Education that qualifies for new tradeEducator expenses ........... . 136 Fiscal years .................. . 46 World Trade Center attacks  (Seeor business ................ . 199Exemption amount ............. . 1 Form W-4: Terrorist attacks)Education to maintain or improveHope credit ............... . 2, 238 Provided by employer ........ . 40 Worthless securities .......... . 101skills ...................... . 197Individual retirement arrangements Fringe benefits ................ . 41 Education to meet minimum Wristwatch .................... . 207(IRAs) ....................... . 1 Gambling winnings ........ . 41, 45 requirements .............. . 198 Write-offs  (See Cancellation of debt)Lifetime learning credit ..... . 2, 238 General rules ................. . 39 Indefinite absence fromLimit on itemized deduction ...... . 1 Highest rate, employer must withhold work ...................... . 197Medical and dental expenses: at if no W-4 ................. . 40 Meal expenses ............... . 200 YStandard mileage ............ . 1 Incorrect form ................. . 45 Qualifying education (Figure Yard-care workers  (See DomesticMoving expenses: IRA distributions .............. . 128 27-A) ..................... . 198 help)Standard mileage ............ . 1 New job ...................... . 39 Recordkeeping Youth groups:Social security and Medicare Penalties .............. . 38, 41, 42 requirements .............. . 201 Troop leader's traveltaxes ....................... . 2 Pensions and annuities .... . 15, 41, Reimbursement for ........... . 200 expenses .................. . 166Standard deduction ............. . 1 76, 80 Teachers ............... . 198, 199Standard mileage rates ......... . 1 Railroad retirement benefits ... . 42, Temporary absence from ■Wheelchairs: 84 work ...................... . 197As medical expense .......... . 147 Repaying withheld tax ......... . 40 Travel expenses for .......... . 200Rollovers ..................... . 80Widow/widower  (See Surviving Unclaimed reimbursement ..... . 199Salaries and wages ............ . 39spouse) Worksheets:Separate returns .............. . 45Winter energy payments ........ . 93 Capital loss carryover ......... . 115
Page 300 Publication 17 (2009)

Page 303 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Where To File
Note. Use this table only if you are an individual taxpayer filing your own return.
AND use the zip code below according to the form you are filing and whether you
are enclosing payment
Form 1040 Form 1040A Form 1040EZ
THEN send your return No payment Payment No payment Payment No payment Payment
IF you live in... to... enclosed enclosed enclosed enclosed enclosed enclosed
Department of the
TreasuryFlorida, Georgia, North Internal Revenue 39901±0002 39901±0102 39901±0015 39901±0115 39901±0014 39901±0114Carolina, South Carolina Service Center
Atlanta, GA
Arkansas, Connecticut,
Delaware, District of
Columbia, Maine, Maryland, Department of the
Massachusetts, Missouri, Treasury
New Hampshire, New Jersey, Internal Revenue 64999±0002 64999±0102 64999±0015 64999±0115 64999±0014 64999±0114
New York, Ohio, Service Center
Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Kansas City, MO
Vermont, Virginia, West
Virginia
Department of the
Alabama, Kentucky, Treasury
Louisiana, Mississippi, Internal Revenue 73301±0002 73301±0102 73301±0015 73301±0115 73301±0014 73301±0114
Tennessee, Texas Service Center
Austin, TX
Alaska, Arizona, California,
Colorado, Hawaii, Idaho,
Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Department of the
Kansas, Michigan, Minnesota, Treasury
Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, Internal Revenue 93888±0002 93888±0102 93888±0015 93888±0115 93888±0014 93888±0114
New Mexico, North Dakota, Service Center
Oklahoma, Oregon, South Fresno, CA
Dakota, Utah, Washington,
Wisconsin, Wyoming
A foreign country, American
Samoa, Puerto Rico (or are
excluding income under Department of theInternal Revenue Code Treasurysection 933), or use an APO Internal Revenue 73301±0215 73301±0215or FPO address, or file Form Service Center 2555, 2555-EZ, or 4563, or Austin, TX, USAare a dual-status alien or
nonpermanent resident of
Guam* or the Virgin Islands**
* Permanent residents of Guam should use: 
Department of Revenue and Taxation
Government of Guam, P.O. Box 23607 
GMF, GU 96921
** Permanent residents of the Virgin Islands should use:
V.I. Bureau of Internal Revenue
9601 Estate Thomas
Charlotte Amalie, St. Thomas VI, 00802
Publication 17 (2009) Page 301

Page 304 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
EPS File Name: NEWIND01 Size: Width = 44.0 picas, Depth = 58.0 picas
Tax Publications for Individual Taxpayers
General Guides
Your Rights as a Taxpayer
Your Federal Income Tax For
Individuals
Farmer’s Tax Guide
Tax Guide for Small Business (For
Individuals Who Use Schedule C or
C-EZ)
Tax Calendars for 2010
IRS Guide to Free Tax Services
Specialized Publications
Armed Forces’ Tax Guide
Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Expenses
Exemptions, Standard Deduction, and
Filing Information
Medical and Dental Expenses (Including
the Health Coverage Tax Credit)
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Divorced or Separated Individuals
Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax
Foreign Tax Credit for Individuals
U.S. Government Civilian Employees
Stationed Abroad
Social Security and Other Information
for Members of the Clergy and
Religious Workers
U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens
Moving Expenses
Selling Your Home
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Taxable and Nontaxable Income
Charitable Contributions
Residential Rental Property (Including
Rental of Vacation Homes)
Commonly Used Tax Forms
Miscellaneous Deductions
Tax Information for Homeowners
Reporting Tip Income
Installment Sales
Partnerships
Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets
Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
Investment Income and Expenses
(Including Capital Gains and Losses)
Basis of Assets
Recordkeeping for Individuals
Tax Guide for Seniors
Community Property
Examination of Returns, Appeal Rights,
and Claims for Refund
Survivors, Executors, and
Administrators
Determining the Value of Donated
Property
Mutual Fund Distributions
Tax Guide for Individuals With Income
From U.S. Possessions
Pension and Annuity Income
Casualty, Disaster, and Theft Loss
Workbook (Personal-Use Property)
Business Use of Your Home (Including
Use by Daycare Providers)
Individual Retirement Arrangements
(IRAs)
Tax Highlights for U.S. Citizens and
Residents Going Abroad
The IRS Collection Process
Earned Income Credit (EIC)
Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service
Retirement Benefits
Tax Highlights for Persons with
Disabilities
Bankruptcy Tax Guide
Social Security and Equivalent
Railroad Retirement Benefits
How Do I Adjust My Tax Withholding?
Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
Household Employer’s Tax Guide For
Wages Paid in 2010
Tax Rules for Children and
Dependents
Home Mortgage Interest Deduction
How To Depreciate Property
Practice Before the IRS and
Power of Attorney
Introduction to Estate and Gift Taxes
The IRS Will Figure Your Tax
Per Diem Rates (For Travel Within the
Continental United States)
Reporting Cash Payments of Over
$10,000 (Received in a Trade or
Business)
Taxpayer Advocate Service – Your
Voice at the IRS
Derechos del Contribuyente
El Impuesto Federal sobre los Ingresos
Para Personas Fisicas
Crédito por Ingreso del Trabajo
English-Spanish Glossary of Words
and Phrases Used in Publications
Issued by the Internal Revenue
Service
U.S. Tax Treaties
Spanish Language Publications
910
509
334
225
17
1
3
463
501
502
503
504
505
514
516
517
519
521
523
524
525
526
527
529
530
531
537
544
547
550
551
552
554
541
555
556
559
561
564
570
575
584
587
590
593
594
596
721
901
907
908
915
919
925
926
929
946
936
950
1542
967
1544
1546
596SP
1SP
850
17SP
El Proceso de Cobro del IRS594SP
947
Informe de Pagos en Efectivo en
Exceso de $10,000 (Recibidos en
una Ocupación o Negocio)
1544SP
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get forms, including by computer, phone, and mail.
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Itemized Deductions
Profit or Loss From Business
Net Profit From Business
Capital Gains and Losses
Supplemental Income and Loss
Earned Income Credit
Profit or Loss From Farming
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Income Tax Return for Single and 
Joint Filers With No Dependents
Self-Employment Tax
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Estimated Tax for Individuals
Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Unreimbursed Employee Business
Expenses
Underpayment of Estimated Tax by
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
Power of Attorney and Declaration of
Representative
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Moving Expenses
Depreciation and Amortization
Application for Automatic Extension of Time
To File U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Investment Interest Expense Deduction
Additional Taxes on Qualified Plans (Including
IRAs) and Other Tax-Favored Accounts
Alternative Minimum Tax—Individuals
Noncash Charitable Contributions
Change of Address
Expenses for Business Use of Your Home
Nondeductible IRAs
Passive Activity Loss Limitations
1040
Sch A
Sch C
Sch C-EZ
Sch D
Sch E
Sch EIC
Sch F
Sch H Household Employment Taxes 
Sch R
Sch SE
1040EZ
1040A
1040-ES
1040X
2106 Employee Business Expenses
2106-EZ
2210
2441
2848
3903
4562
4868
4952
5329
6251
8283
8582
8606
8822
8829
Form Number and Title
Sch J Income Averaging for Farmers and Fishermen
Additional Child Tax Credit8812
Education Credits (American Opportunity,
Hope, and Lifetime Learning Credits)
8863
Form Number and Title
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get publications, including
by computer, phone, and mail.
970 Tax Benefits for Education
971 Innocent Spouse Relief
Sch D-1 Continuation Sheet for Schedule D
972 Child Tax Credit
Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and
Resident Aliens Abroad
54
Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
536
Tax-Sheltered Annuity Plans (403(b)
Plans) For Employees of Public
Schools and Certain Tax-Exempt
Organizations
571
Health Savings Accounts and Other
Tax-Favored Health Plans
969
Installment Agreement Request9465
Business Expenses535
Sch B Interest and Ordinary Dividends
Sch L Standard Deduction for Certain Filers
Sch M Making Work Pay and Government Retiree Credits
Hechos Fortuitos Desastres y Robos547SP

Page 305 of 305 of Publication 17 13:15 -  1-APR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
EPS File Name: 10311G5A Size: Width = 44.0 picas, Depth = page
Instructions 1040 -- 24811v17
Order Form
for Forms and
Publications
The most frequently ordered forms and publications are listed on the order form below.
You will receive two copies of each form, one copy of the instructions, and one copy of
each publication you order. To help reduce waste, please order only the items you need
to prepare your return.
For faster ways of getting the items you need, go to www.irs.gov/formspubs.
How To Use the Order
Form
Circle the items you need on the order form
below. Use the blank spaces to order items
not listed. If you need more space, attach a
separate sheet of paper.
Print or type your name and address
accurately in the space provided below to
ensure delivery of your order. Enclose the
order form in an envelope and mail it to the
IRS address shown on this page. You should
receive your order within 10 days after
receipt of your request.
Do not send your tax return to the address
listed below. Instead, see Where To File.
TIP
Mail Your Order Form To:
Internal Revenue Service
1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorway
Bloomington, IL 61705-6613
N
Circle the forms and
publications you need. The
instructions for any form
you order will be included.
Order Form
Please Print
Use the blank spaces to
order items not listed.
Cut here
Name
Postal mailing address
City
Apt./Suite/Room
Foreign country
Daytime phone number
State ZIP code
International postal code
()
/H17073/H17073
Save Money and Time by Going Online!
Download or order these and other tax products at www.irs.gov/formspubs
Schedule R
(1040A or
1040)
2441
1040
1040EZ
Schedule SE
(1040)
Pub. 590
8829
Schedule A
(1040)
1040-ES
(2010)
Pub. 1
1040A
Pub. 523
Pub. 910
Schedule C
(1040)
1040X
4562
Pub. 17
Pub. 526
Schedule D
(1040)
2106
Pub. 334
Pub. 527
4868
Schedule E
(1040)
6251
Pub. 463
Pub. 529
Schedule F
(1040)
Pub. 505Schedule EIC
(1040A or
1040)
Pub. 596
8822
Schedule
C-EZ (1040)
8283
8606
Pub. 501
Pub. 502 Pub. 550
Pub. 575
Pub. 554
Schedule H
(1040)
Pub. 915
1040-V
Schedule J
(1040)
8812
8863
Pub. 970
Schedule D-1
(1040)
9465
Pub. 972
4506 Pub. 535
4684
Pub. 525
Pub. 5474506-T
Pub. 587
Pub. 551
Pub. 583
Pub. 919
Pub. 9468917
5405
Pub. 4681
Schedule B
(1040A or
1040)
Schedule L
(1040A or
1040)
Schedule M
(1040A or
1040)