Userid: DXWOLF00 DTD tipx Leadpct: 0% Pt. size: 8 ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: D:\Users\xcgcb\documents\2008 Publications\Pub 463\08p463.xml (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 463 ContentsCat. No. 11081L
What's New .................... . 2Department
of the Reminder ..................... . 2Treasury Travel,
Introduction .................... . 2Internal
Revenue 1. Travel ...................... . 3Entertainment,Service Traveling Away From Home ........ . 3
Tax Home ................. . 3
Tax Home Different FromGift, and Car Family Home ........... . 4
Temporary Assignment or Job ...... . 4
What Travel Expenses AreExpenses Deductible? ............... . 4
Meals .................... . 5
Travel in the United States ...... . 6
Travel Outside the UnitedFor use in preparing States ................ . 7
Luxury Water Travel .......... . 8
Conventions ............... . 92008 Returns
2. Entertainment ................. . 9
Directly-Related Test ............ . 9
Associated Test ............... . 10
50% Limit ................... . 11
Exceptions to the 50% Limit .... . 11
What Entertainment Expenses
Are Deductible? ............ . 12
What Entertainment Expenses
Are Not Deductible? ......... . 13
3. Gifts ....................... . 13
4. Transportation ................ . 14
Car Expenses ................ . 15
Standard Mileage Rate ....... . 15
Actual Car Expenses ........ . 16
Leasing a Car ............. . 24
Disposition of a Car ............ . 25
5. Recordkeeping ................ . 25
How To Prove Expenses ......... . 25
What Are Adequate
Records? ............. . 25
What If I Have Incomplete
Records? ............. . 27
Separating and Combining
Expenses ............. . 27
How Long To Keep Records
and Receipts ........... . 27
Examples of Records ........ . 28
6. How To Report ................ . 28
Where To Report .............. . 28
Vehicle Provided by Your
Employer ............. . 28
Reimbursements .............. . 28
Accountable Plans .......... . 29
Nonaccountable Plans ....... . 32
Rules for Independent
Contractors and Clients .... . 32
Completing Forms 2106 and
2106-EZ ................. . 32
Special Rules ............. . 34
Illustrated Examples ......... . 35
7. How To Get Tax Help ........... . 41Get forms and other information
Appendices .................... . 42faster and easier by:
Index ......................... . 57
Internet www.irs.gov
Feb 04, 2009

Page 2 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
expense is one that is helpful and appropriate for If you meet these conditions and yourWhat's New employer included reimbursements onyour business. An expense does not have to be
your Form W-2 in error, ask your em-required to be considered necessary.
TIP
Standard mileage rate. For 2008, the stan- ployer for a corrected Form W-2.This publication explains:dard mileage rate for the cost of operating your
Volunteers. If you perform services as acar for business use is: • What expenses are deductible,
volunteer worker for a qualified charity, you may• 501/2 cents per mile for the period January • How to report them on your return, be able to deduct some of your costs as a1 through June 30, 2008, and charitable contribution. See Out-of-Pocket Ex-• What records you need to prove your ex-
penses in Giving Services in Publication 526,• 581/2 cents per mile for the period July 1 penses, and Charitable Contributions, for information on thethrough December 31, 2008.
• How to treat any expense reimbursements expenses you can deduct.
you may receive.Car expenses and use of the standard mile- Comments and suggestions. We welcomeage rate are explained in chapter 4. your comments about this publication and yourWho should use this publication. You suggestions for future editions.Depreciation limits on cars, trucks, and should read this publication if you are an em- You can write to us at the following address:vans. For 2008, the first-year limit on the total ployee or a sole proprietor who has busi-section 179 deduction, special depreciation al- ness-related travel, entertainment, gift, orlowance, and depreciation deduction for most Internal Revenue Servicetransportation expenses.cars has increased to $10,960 ($2,960 if you Individual Forms and Publications Branch
elect not to claim the special depreciation allow- Users of employer-provided vehicles. If SE:W:CAR:MP:T:I
ance). For trucks and vans, the first-year limit an employer-provided vehicle was available for 1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6526
has increased to $11,160 ($3,160 if you elect not your use, you received a fringe benefit. Gener- Washington, DC 20224
to claim the special depreciation allowance). De- ally, your employer must include the value of the
preciation limits are explained in chapter 4. use or availability in your income as pay. How- We respond to many letters by telephone.
ever, there are exceptions if the use of the vehi- Therefore, it would be helpful if you would in-Special depreciation allowance. Generally, cle qualifies as a working condition fringe benefit clude your daytime phone number, including thenew cars, trucks, and vans purchased and (such as the use of a qualified nonpersonal use area code, in your correspondence.placed in service in 2008 qualify for a special vehicle). You can email us at *taxforms@irs.gov. (Thedepreciation allowance. The special allowance asterisk must be included in the address.)A working condition fringe benefit is anyis a depreciation deduction equal to 50% of the Please put ªPublications Commentº on the sub-property or service provided to you by your em-adjusted basis of the vehicle. See Special De- ject line. Although we cannot respond individu-ployer for which you could deduct the cost as anpreciation Allowance in chapter 4. ally to each email, we do appreciate youremployee business expense if you had paid for
feedback and will consider your comments asMeal expenses when subject to ªhours of it. we revise our tax products.serviceº limits. Generally, you can deduct A qualified nonpersonal use vehicle is oneonly 50% of your business-related meal ex- Ordering forms and publications. Visitthat is not likely to be used more than minimallypenses while traveling away from home for busi- www.irs.gov/formspubs to download forms andfor personal purposes because of its design.ness purposes. You can deduct a higher publications, call 1-800-829-3676, or write to theSee Qualified nonpersonal use vehicles  underpercentage if the meals take place during or address below and receive a response within 10Actual Car Expenses in chapter 4.incident to the Department of Transportation's days after your request is received.For information on how to report your car(DOT) ªhours of serviceº limits. (These limits
expenses that your employer did not provide orapply to certain workers who are subject to cer-
Internal Revenue Servicereimburse you for (such as when you pay for gastain federal regulations.) For 2008, the percent-
1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorwayand maintenance for a car your employer pro-age is increased to 80%.
Bloomington, IL 61705-6613vides), see Vehicle Provided by Your Employer
in chapter 6.
Tax questions. If you have a tax question,
check the information available on www.irs.govReminder Who does not need to use this publication.
or call 1-800-829-1040. We cannot answer taxPartnerships, corporations, trusts, and employ-
questions sent to either of the above addresses.Photographs of missing children. The Inter- ers who reimburse their employees for business
nal Revenue Service is a proud partner with the expenses should refer to their tax form instruc-
Useful ItemsNational Center for Missing and Exploited Chil- tions and chapter 11 of Publication 535, Busi-
You may want to see:dren. Photographs of missing children selected ness Expenses, for information on deducting
by the Center may appear in this publication on travel, meals, and entertainment expenses. Publicationpages that would otherwise be blank. You can If you are an employee, you will not need tohelp bring these children home by looking at the ❏ 225 Farmer's Tax Guideread this publication if all of the following arephotographs and calling 1-800-THE-LOST true. ❏ 529 Miscellaneous Deductions(1-800-843-5678) if you recognize a child.
• You fully accounted to your employer for ❏ 535 Business Expenses
your work-related expenses.
❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property
• You received full reimbursement for your
Introduction ❏ 1542 Per Diem Ratesexpenses.
You may be able to deduct the ordinary and • Your employer required you to return any Form (and Instructions)necessary business-related expenses you have excess reimbursement and you did so.
for: ❏ Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized
• There is no amount shown with a code ªLº Deductions• Travel, in box 12 of your Form W-2, Wage and ❏ Schedule C (Form 1040) Profit or LossTax Statement.• Entertainment, From Business
If you meet all of these conditions, there is no• Gifts, or ❏ Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040) Net Profitneed to show the expenses or the reimburse-• Transportation. From Businessments on your return. If you would like more
information on reimbursements and accountingAn ordinary expense is one that is common and ❏ Schedule F (Form 1040) Profit or Loss
to your employer, see chapter 6.accepted in your trade or business. A necessary From Farming
Page 2 Publication 463 (2008)

Page 3 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
❏ 2106 Employee Business Expenses necessary sleep before starting the return trip. No main place of business or work. You
You are considered to be away from home. may have a tax home even if you do not have a❏ 2106-EZ Unreimbursed Employee regular or main place of work. Your tax homeBusiness Expenses Example 2. You are a truck driver. You may be the home where you regularly live.
leave your terminal and return to it later the❏ 4562 Depreciation and Amortization Factors used to determine tax home. Ifsame day. You get an hour off at your turn-See chapter 7, How To Get Tax Help , for you do not have a regular or main place ofaround point to eat. Because you are not off toinformation about getting these publications and business or work, use the following three factorsget necessary sleep and the brief time off is notforms. to determine where your tax home is.an adequate rest period, you are not traveling
away from home. 1. You perform part of your business in the
Members of the Armed Forces. If you are a area of your main home and use that
member of the U.S. Armed Forces on a perma- home for lodging while doing business in
nent duty assignment overseas, you are not the area.
traveling away from home. You cannot deduct
2. You have living expenses at your main1. your expenses for meals and lodging. You can-
home that you duplicate because yournot deduct these expenses even if you have to
business requires you to be away from thatmaintain a home in the United States for your
home.family members who are not allowed to accom-
Travel pany you overseas. If you are transferred from 3. You have not abandoned the area in whichone permanent duty station to another, you may both your historical place of lodging andhave deductible moving expenses, which areIf you temporarily travel away from your tax your claimed main home are located; youexplained in Publication 521, Moving Expenses.home, you can use this chapter to determine if have a member or members of your familyA naval officer assigned to permanent dutyyou have deductible travel expenses. living at your main home; or you often useaboard a ship that has regular eating and livingThis chapter discusses: that home for lodging.facilities has a tax home aboard ship for travel
expense purposes.• Traveling away from home, If you satisfy all three factors, your tax home
is the home where you regularly live. If you• Temporary assignment or job, and satisfy only two factors, you may have a taxTax Home• What travel expenses are deductible. home depending on all the facts and circum-
To determine whether you are traveling away stances. If you satisfy only one factor, you are anIt also discusses the standard meal allowance, from home, you must first determine the location itinerant; your tax home is wherever you workrules for travel inside and outside the United of your tax home. and you cannot deduct travel expenses.States, luxury water travel, and deductible con- Generally, your tax home is your regularvention expenses. place of business or post of duty, regardless of Example 1. You are single and live in Bos-
where you maintain your family home. It in- ton in an apartment you rent. You have workedTravel expenses defined. For tax purposes, cludes the entire city or general area in which for your employer in Boston for a number oftravel expenses are the ordinary and necessary your business or work is located. years. Your employer enrolls you in a 12-monthexpenses of traveling away from home for your If you have more than one regular place of executive training program. You do not expect tobusiness, profession, or job. business, your tax home is your main place of return to work in Boston after you complete yourAn ordinary expense is one that is common business. See Main place of business or work , training.and accepted in your trade or business. A nec- later.essary expense is one that is helpful and appro- During your training, you do not do any workIf you do not have a regular or a main placepriate for your business. An expense does not in Boston. Instead, you receive classroom andof business because of the nature of your work,have to be required to be considered necessary. on-the-job training throughout the United States.then your tax home may be the place where you
You will find examples of deductible travel You keep your apartment in Boston and return toregularly live. See No main place of business or
expenses in Table 1-1, later. it frequently. You use your apartment to conductwork, later.
your personal business. You also keep up your If you do not have a regular or main place of
community contacts in Boston. When you com-business or post of duty and there is no place
where you regularly live, you are considered an plete your training, you are transferred to Los
itinerant (a transient) and your tax home is wher- Angeles.Traveling Away From
ever you work. As an itinerant, you cannot claim You do not satisfy factor (1) because you dida travel expense deduction because you areHome not work in Boston. You satisfy factor (2) be-never considered to be traveling away from cause you had duplicate living expenses. Youhome.You are traveling away from home if: also satisfy factor (3) because you did not aban-
• Your duties require you to be away from Main place of business or work. If you have don your apartment in Boston as your main
the general area of your tax home (defined more than one place of work, consider the fol- home, you kept your community contacts, and
later) substantially longer than an ordinary lowing when determining which one is your main you frequently returned to live in your apartment.
day's work, and place of business or work. You have a tax home in Boston.
• You need to sleep or rest to meet the • The total time you ordinarily spend in each Example 2. You are an outside salespersondemands of your work while away from place. with a sales territory covering several states.home. • The level of your business activity in each Your employer's main office is in Newark, but
This rest requirement is not satisfied by merely place. you do not conduct any business there. Your
napping in your car. You do not have to be away work assignments are temporary, and you have• Whether your income from each place isfrom your tax home for a whole day or from dusk no way of knowing where your future assign-significant or insignificant.to dawn as long as your relief from duty is long ments will be located. You have a room in yourenough to get necessary sleep or rest. married sister's house in Dayton. You stay thereExample. You live in Cincinnati where you for one or two weekends a year, but you do noExample 1. You are a railroad conductor. have a seasonal job for 8 months each year and work in the area. You do not pay your sister forYou leave your home terminal on a regularly earn $40,000. You work the other 4 months in the use of the room.scheduled round-trip run between two cities and Miami, also at a seasonal job, and earn $15,000.
You do not satisfy any of the three factorsreturn home 16 hours later. During the run, you Cincinnati is your main place of work because
listed earlier. You are an itinerant and have nohave 6 hours off at your turnaround point where you spend most of your time there and earn
you eat two meals and rent a hotel room to get most of your income there. tax home.
Chapter 1 Travel Page 3

Page 4 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If your assignment is indefinite, you must to changed circumstances occurring after 8Tax Home Different From
include in your income any amounts you receive months, it was no longer realistic for you toFamily Home from your employer for living expenses, even if expect that the job in Fresno would last for 1
they are called travel allowances and you ac- year or less. You can only deduct your travelIf you (and your family) do not live at your tax count to your employer for them. You may be expenses for the first 8 months. You cannothome (defined earlier), you cannot deduct the able to deduct the cost of relocating to your new deduct any travel expenses you had after thatcost of traveling between your tax home and tax home as a moving expense. See Publication time because Fresno became your tax homeyour family home. You also cannot deduct the 521 for more information. when the job became indefinite.cost of meals and lodging while at your tax
home. See Example 1 that follows. Going home on days off. If you go back toException for federal crime investigations orIf you are working temporarily in the same your tax home from a temporary assignment onprosecutions. If you are a federal employeecity where you and your family live, you may be your days off, you are not considered away fromparticipating in a federal crime investigation orconsidered as traveling away from home. See home while you are in your hometown. Youprosecution, you are not subject to the 1-yearExample 2, below. cannot deduct the cost of your meals and lodg-rule. This means you may be able to deduct
ing there. However, you can deduct your traveltravel expenses even if you are away from yourExample 1. You are a truck driver and you expenses, including meals and lodging, whiletax home for more than 1 year provided youand your family live in Tucson. You are em- traveling between your temporary place of workmeet the other requirements for deductibility.ployed by a trucking firm that has its terminal in and your tax home. You can claim these ex-For you to qualify, the Attorney General (orPhoenix. At the end of your long runs, you return penses up to the amount it would have cost youhis or her designee) must certify that you areto your home terminal in Phoenix and spend one to stay at your temporary place of work.traveling:night there before returning home. You cannot If you keep your hotel room during your visit
deduct any expenses you have for meals and • For the federal government, home, you can deduct the cost of your hotel
lodging in Phoenix or the cost of traveling from room. In addition, you can deduct your ex-• In a temporary duty status, andPhoenix to Tucson. This is because Phoenix is penses of returning home up to the amount you
your tax home. • To investigate or prosecute, or provide would have spent for meals had you stayed at
support services for the investigation or your temporary place of work.Example 2. Your family home is in Pitts- prosecution of a federal crime.
Probationary work period. If you take a jobburgh, where you work 12 weeks a year. The
that requires you to move, with the understand-rest of the year you work for the same employer Determining temporary or indefinite. You ing that you will keep the job if your work isin Baltimore. In Baltimore, you eat in restaurants must determine whether your assignment is satisfactory during a probationary period, the joband sleep in a rooming house. Your salary is the temporary or indefinite when you start work. If is indefinite. You cannot deduct any of yoursame whether you are in Pittsburgh or Balti- you expect an assignment or job to last for one expenses for meals and lodging during the pro-more. year or less, it is temporary unless there are bationary period.Because you spend most of your working facts and circumstances that indicate otherwise.time and earn most of your salary in Baltimore, An assignment or job that is initially temporarythat city is your tax home. You cannot deduct may become indefinite due to changed circum-any expenses you have for meals and lodging stances. A series of assignments to the samethere. However, when you return to work in What Travel Expenseslocation, all for short periods but that togetherPittsburgh, you are away from your tax home cover a long period, may be considered an in- Are Deductible?even though you stay at your family home. You definite assignment.can deduct the cost of your roundtrip between
The following examples illustrate whether an Once you have determined that you are travel-Baltimore and Pittsburgh. You can also deduct
assignment or job is temporary or indefinite. ing away from your tax home, you can determineyour part of your family's living expenses for
what travel expenses are deductible.meals and lodging while you are living and work- Example 1. You are a construction worker. You can deduct ordinary and necessary ex-ing in Pittsburgh. You live and regularly work in Los Angeles. You penses you have when you travel away from
are a member of a trade union in Los Angeles home on business. The type of expense you can
that helps you get work in the Los Angeles area. deduct depends on the facts and your circum-
Because of a shortage of work, you took a job on stances.Temporary a construction project in Fresno. Your job was Table 1-1 summarizes travel expenses you
scheduled to end in 8 months. The job actually may be able to deduct. You may have otherAssignment or Job lasted 10 months. deductible travel expenses that are not covered
You realistically expected the job in Fresno there, depending on the facts and your circum-You may regularly work at your tax home and
to last 8 months. The job actually did last less stances.also work at another location. It may not be
than 1 year. The job is temporary and your taxpractical to return to your tax home from this When you travel away from home onhome is still in Los Angeles.other location at the end of each work day. business, you should keep records of
all the expenses you have and any
RECORDSExample 2. The facts are the same as inTemporary assignment vs. indefinite assign- advances you receive from your employer. YouExample 1, except that you realistically ex-ment. If your assignment or job away from can use a log, diary, notebook, or any otherpected the work in Fresno to last 18 months. Theyour main place of work is temporary, your tax written record to keep track of your expenses.job actually was completed in 10 months.home does not change. You are considered to The types of expenses you need to record,Your job in Fresno is indefinite because yoube away from home for the whole period you are along with supporting documentation, are de-realistically expected the work to last longer thanaway from your main place of work. You can scribed in Table 5-1 (see chapter 5).1 year, even though it actually lasted less than 1deduct your travel expenses if they otherwise
year. You cannot deduct any travel expensesqualify for deduction. Generally, a temporary Separating costs. If you have one expenseyou had in Fresno because Fresno became yourassignment in a single location is one that is that includes the costs of meals, entertainment,tax home.realistically expected to last (and does in fact and other services (such as lodging or transpor-last) for 1 year or less. tation), you must allocate that expense betweenExample 3. The facts are the same as inHowever, if your assignment or job is indefi- the cost of meals and entertainment and the costExample 1, except that you realistically ex-nite, the location of the assignment or job be- of other services. You must have a reasonablepected the work in Fresno to last 9 months. Aftercomes your new tax home and you cannot basis for making this allocation. For example,8 months, however, you were asked to remaindeduct your travel expenses while there. An you must allocate your expenses if a hotel in-for 7 more months (for a total actual stay of 15assignment or job in a single location is consid- cludes one or more meals in its room charge.months).ered indefinite if it is realistically expected to last
Initially, you realistically expected the job infor more than 1 year, whether or not it actually Travel expenses for another individual. If a
Fresno to last for only 9 months. However, duelasts for more than one year. spouse, dependent, or other individual goes with
Page 4 Chapter 1 Travel

Page 5 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Lavish or extravagant. You cannot deductTable 1-1.  Travel Expenses You Can Deduct
expenses for meals that are lavish or extrava-
gant. An expense is not considered lavish orThis chart summarizes expenses you can deduct when you travel away from home
extravagant if it is reasonable based on the factsfor business purposes.
and circumstances. Expenses will not be disal-
IF you have lowed merely because they are more than a
expenses for... THEN you can deduct the cost of... fixed dollar amount or take place at deluxe res-
taurants, hotels, nightclubs, or resorts.transportation travel by airplane, train, bus, or car between your home and your
business destination. If you were provided with a ticket or you are
50% limit on meals. You can figure yourriding free as a result of a frequent traveler or similar program, your
meals expense using either of the followingcost is zero. If you travel by ship, see Luxury Water Travel and Cruise
Ships (under Conventions) for additional rules and limits. methods.
• Actual cost.taxi, commuter fares for these and other types of transportation that take you between:
bus, and airport • The airport or station and your hotel, and • The standard meal allowance.limousine • The hotel and the work location of your customers or clients, your
Both of these methods are explained below. But,business meeting place, or your temporary work location.
regardless of the method you use, you generally
baggage and sending baggage and sample or display material between your regular can deduct only 50% of the unreimbursed cost
shipping and temporary work locations. of your meals.
car operating and maintaining your car when traveling away from home on If you are reimbursed for the cost of your
business. You can deduct actual expenses or the standard mileage meals, how you apply the 50% limit depends onrate, as well as business-related tolls and parking. If you rent a car whether your employer's reimbursement planwhile away from home on business, you can deduct only the was accountable or nonaccountable. If you arebusiness-use portion of the expenses. not reimbursed, the 50% limit applies whether
the unreimbursed meal expense is for businesslodging and meals your lodging and meals if your business trip is overnight or long
enough that you need to stop for sleep or rest to properly perform your travel or business entertainment. Chapter 2 dis-
duties. Meals include amounts spent for food, beverages, taxes, and cusses the 50% Limit in more detail, and chapter
related tips. See Meals for additional rules and limits. 6 discusses accountable and nonaccountable
plans.cleaning dry cleaning and laundry.
telephone business calls while on your business trip. This includes business
communication by fax machine or other communication devices. Actual Cost
tips tips you pay for any expenses in this chart. You can use the actual cost of your meals to
figure the amount of your expense before reim-other other similar ordinary and necessary expenses related to your
bursement and application of the 50% deductionbusiness travel. These expenses might include transportation to or
limit. If you use this method, you must keepfrom a business meal, public stenographer's fees, computer rental
records of your actual cost.fees, and operating and maintaining a house trailer.
Standard Meal Allowanceyou (or your employee) on a business trip or to a Example. Jerry drives to Chicago on busi-
ness and takes his wife, Linda, with him. Linda isbusiness convention, you generally cannot de- Generally, you can use the ªstandard meal al-not Jerry's employee. Linda occasionally typesduct his or her travel expenses. lowanceº method as an alternative to the actualnotes, performs similar services, and accompa- cost method. It allows you to use a set amountEmployee. You can deduct the travel ex- nies Jerry to luncheons and dinners. The per- for your daily meals and incidental expensespenses of someone who goes with you if that formance of these services does not establish (M&IE), instead of keeping records of your ac-person: that her presence on the trip is necessary to the tual costs. The set amount varies depending onconduct of Jerry's business. Her expenses are1. Is your employee, where and when you travel. In this publication,not deductible. ªstandard meal allowanceº refers to the federal2. Has a bona fide business purpose for the Jerry pays $199 a day for a double room. A rate for M&IE, discussed later under Amount oftravel, and single room costs $149 a day. He can deduct the standard meal allowance . If you use the stan-total cost of driving his car to and from Chicago,3. Would otherwise be allowed to deduct the dard meal allowance, you still must keep rec-but only $149 a day for his hotel room. If he usestravel expenses. ords to prove the time, place, and businesspublic transportation, he can deduct only his
purpose of your travel. See the recordkeepingfare.Business associate. If a business associ- rules for travel in chapter 5.
ate travels with you and meets the conditions in
Meals(2) and (3) above, you can deduct the travel Incidental expenses. The term ªincidental ex-
expenses you have for that person. A business pensesº means:You can deduct the cost of meals in either of theassociate is someone with whom you could rea- following situations. • Fees and tips given to porters, baggagesonably expect to actively conduct business. A
carriers, bellhops, hotel maids, stewards• It is necessary for you to stop for substan-business associate can be a current or prospec-
or stewardesses and others on ships, andtial sleep or rest to properly perform yourtive (likely to become) customer, client, supplier,
hotel servants in foreign countries,duties while traveling away from home onemployee, agent, partner, or professional advi-
business.sor. • Transportation between places of lodging
or business and places where meals are• The meal is business-related entertain-Bona fide business purpose. A bona fide
taken, if suitable meals can be obtained atment.business purpose exists if you can prove a real
the temporary duty site, andbusiness purpose for the individual's presence. Business-related entertainment is discussed in
Incidental services, such as typing notes or as- • Mailing costs associated with filing travelchapter 2. The following discussion deals only
sisting in entertaining customers, are not vouchers and payment of em-with meals that are not business-related enter-
enough to make the expenses deductible. ployer-sponsored charge card billings.tainment.
Chapter 1 Travel Page 5

Page 6 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Incidental expenses do not include expenses for in effect before October 1, 2008, for expenses of attend a planning seminar. She left her home in
laundry, cleaning and pressing of clothing, lodg- all travel within the United States for 2008 in- New Orleans at 10 a.m. on Wednesday and
ing taxes, or the costs of telegrams or telephone stead of the updated rates. You must consist- arrived in Washington, DC, at 5:30 p.m. After
calls. ently use either the rates for the first 9 months of spending two nights there, she flew back to New
2008 or the updated rates for the period of Octo- Orleans on Friday and arrived back home at
Incidental expenses only method. You can ber 1, 2008, through December 31, 2008. 8:00 p.m. Jen's employer gave her a flat amount
use an optional method (instead of actual cost) to cover her expenses and included it with herIf you travel to more than one location in one
for deducting incidental expenses only. The wages.day, use the rate in effect for the area where you
amount of the deduction is $3 a day for inciden- Under Method 1, Jen can claim 2 1/2 days ofstop for sleep or rest. If you work in the transpor-
tal expenses paid or incurred for travel away the standard meal allowance for Washington,tation industry, however, see Special rate for
from home in 2008. You can use this method DC: 3/4 of the daily rate for Wednesday andtransportation workers, later.
only if you did not pay or incur any meal ex- Friday (the days she departed and returned),Standard meal allowance for areas outsidepenses. You cannot use this method on any day and the full daily rate for Thursday.the continental United States. The standardthat you use the standard meal allowance. This Under Method 2 , Jen could also use anymeal allowance rates above do not apply tomethod is subject to the proration rules for par- method that she applies consistently and that istravel in Alaska, Hawaii, or any other locationtial days. See Travel for days you depart and in accordance with reasonable business prac-outside the continental United States. The De-return, later in this chapter. tice. For example, she could claim 3 days of thepartment of Defense establishes per diem rates
standard meal allowance even though a federalFederal employees should refer to the for Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, American Sa-
employee would have to use Method 1 and beFederal Travel Regulations at www. moa, Guam, Midway, the Northern Mariana Is-
limited to only 21/2 days.gsa.gov. Click on ªFederal Travel Reg-
CAUTION
! lands, the U.S. Virgin Islands, Wake Island, and
ulation (FTR)º for changes affecting claims for other non-foreign areas outside the continental
reimbursement of these expenses. Travel in the United StatesUnited States. The Department of State estab-
lishes per diem rates for all other foreign areas.50% limit may apply. If you use the standard The following discussion applies to travel in the
You can access per diem rates formeal allowance method for meal expenses and United States. For this purpose, the United
non-foreign areas outside the conti-you are not reimbursed or you are reimbursed States includes the 50 states and the District of
nental United States at:under a nonaccountable plan, you can generally
 Columbia. The treatment of your travel ex-
http://perdiem.hqda.pentagon.mil/perdiem/deduct only 50% of the standard meal allow- penses depends on how much of your trip was
perdiemrates.html. You can access all other for-ance. If you are reimbursed under an accounta- business related and on how much of your trip
eign per diem rates at:ble plan and you are deducting amounts that are occurred within the United States. See Part of
www.state.gov/travelandbusiness.more than your reimbursements, you can de- Trip Outside the United States, later.
duct only 50% of the excess amount. The 50% Special rate for transportation workers.limit is discussed in more detail in chapter 2, and You can use a special standard meal allowanceaccountable and nonaccountable plans are dis- Trip Primarily for Businessif you work in the transportation industry. Youcussed in chapter 6. are in the transportation industry if your work: You can deduct all of your travel expenses ifThere is no optional standard lodging your trip was entirely business related. If your• Directly involves moving people or goodsamount similar to the standard meal trip was primarily for business and, while at yourby airplane, barge, bus, ship, train, orallowance. Your allowable lodging ex-
CAUTION
! business destination, you extended your stay fortruck, andpense deduction is your actual cost. a vacation, made a personal side trip, or had
• Regularly requires you to travel away from other personal activities, you can deduct yourWho can use the standard meal allowance. home and, during any single trip, usually business-related travel expenses. These ex-You can use the standard meal allowance involves travel to areas eligible for differ- penses include the travel costs of getting to andwhether you are an employee or self-employed, ent standard meal allowance rates. from your business destination and any busi-and whether or not you are reimbursed for your ness-related expenses at your business desti-If this applies to you, you can claim a standardtraveling expenses. nation.meal allowance of $52 a day ($58 for travelUse of the standard meal allowance for other outside the continental United States) from Jan-travel. You can use the standard meal allow- Example. You work in Atlanta and take auary 1, 2008, through December 31, 2008.ance to figure your meal expenses when you business trip to New Orleans. On your way
Using the special rate for transportation work-travel in connection with investment and other home, you stop in Mobile to visit your parents.
ers eliminates the need for you to determine theincome-producing property. You can also use it You spend $1,920 for the 9 days you are away
standard meal allowance for every area whereto figure your meal expenses when you travel for from home for travel, meals, lodging, and other
you stop for sleep or rest. If you choose to usequalifying educational purposes. You cannot travel expenses. If you had not stopped in Mo-
the special rate for any trip, you must use theuse the standard meal allowance to figure the bile, you would have been gone only 6 days, and
special rate (and not use the regular standardcost of your meals when you travel for medical your total cost would have been $1,620. You can
meal allowance rates) for all trips you take thator charitable purposes. deduct $1,620 for your trip, including the cost of
year. round-trip transportation to and from New Orle-Amount of standard meal allowance. The ans. The deduction for your meals is subject tostandard meal allowance is the federal M&IE Travel for days you depart and return. For the 50% limit on meals mentioned earlier.rate. For travel in 2008, the rate for most small both the day you depart for and the day you
localities in the United States is $39 a day from return from a business trip, you must prorate the
January 1, 2008, through December 31, 2008. standard meal allowance (figure a reduced Trip Primarily forMost major cities and many other localities in amount for each day). You can do so by one of Personal Reasonsthe United States are designated as high-cost two methods.
areas, qualifying for higher standard meal al- If your trip was primarily for personal reasons,• Method 1: You can claim 3/4 of the stan-lowances. These rates are listed in Publication such as a vacation, the entire cost of the trip is adard meal allowance.1542, which is available on the Internet at www. nondeductible personal expense. However, you
irs.gov. • Method 2: You can prorate using any can deduct any expenses you have while at your
method that you consistently apply and destination that are directly related to your busi-You can also find this information (or- that is in accordance with reasonable busi- ness.ganized by state) on the Internet at ness practice.www.gsa.gov . Click on ªPer Diem A trip to a resort or on a cruise ship may be a
Rates,º then select ª2008º for the period January vacation even if the promoter advertises that it is
1, 2008 ± September 30, 2008, and select Example. Jen is employed in New Orleans primarily for business. The scheduling of inci-
ª2009º for the period October 1, 2008 ± Decem- as a convention planner. In March, her employer dental business activities during a trip, such as
ber 31, 2008. However, you can apply the rates sent her on a 3-day trip to Washington, DC, to viewing videotapes or attending lectures dealing
Page 6 Chapter 1 Travel

Page 7 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
with general subjects, will not change what is entire time on business activities, you can de- Example. You flew from Seattle to Tokyo,
duct all of your travel expenses.really a vacation into a business trip. where you spent 14 days on business and 5
days on personal matters. You then flew back to
Travel considered entirely for business. Seattle. You spent 1 day flying in each direction.
Even if you did not spend your entire time onPart of Trip Outside Because only 5/21 (less than 25%) of yourbusiness activities, your trip is considered en-the United States total time abroad was for nonbusiness activities,tirely for business if you meet at least one of the you can deduct as travel expenses what it wouldIf part of your trip is outside the United States, following four exceptions. have cost you to make the trip if you had notuse the rules described later in this chapter Exception 1 - No substantial control. engaged in any nonbusiness activity. Theunder Travel Outside the United States  for that Your trip is considered entirely for business if amount you can deduct is the cost of thepart of the trip. For the part of your trip that is you did not have substantial control over arrang- round-trip plane fare and 16 days of meals (sub-inside the United States, use the rules for travel ing the trip. The fact that you control the timing of ject to the 50% limit), lodging, and other relatedin the United States. Travel outside the United your trip does not, by itself, mean that you have expenses.States does not include travel from one point in substantial control over arranging your trip. Exception 4 - Vacation not a major consid-the United States to another point in the United You do not have substantial control over eration. Your trip is considered entirely forStates. The following discussion can help you your trip if you: business if you can establish that a personaldetermine whether your trip was entirely within
• Are an employee who was reimbursed or vacation was not a major consideration, even ifthe United States.
paid a travel expense allowance, you have substantial control over arranging the
Public transportation. If you travel by public trip.• Are not related to your employer, andtransportation, any place in the United States
• Are not a managing executive.where that vehicle makes a scheduled stop is a
Travel Primarily for Businesspoint in the United States. Once the vehicle
ªRelated to your employerº is defined later inleaves the last scheduled stop in the United
If you travel outside the United States primarilychapter 6 under Per Diem and Car Allowances.States on its way to a point outside the United
for business but spend some of your time onA ªmanaging executiveº is an employee whoStates, you apply the rules under Travel Outside
other activities, you generally cannot deduct allhas the authority and responsibility, without be-the United States.
of your travel expenses. You can only deduct theing subject to the veto of another, to decide on
business portion of your cost of getting to andthe need for the business travel.Example. You fly from New York to Puerto
from your destination. You must allocate theA self-employed person generally has sub-Rico with a scheduled stop in Miami. You return
costs between your business and other activitiesstantial control over arranging business trips.to New York nonstop. The flight from New York
to determine your deductible amount. Seeto Miami is in the United States, so only the flight Exception 2 - Outside United States no Travel allocation rules, later.from Miami to Puerto Rico is outside the United more than a week. Your trip is consideredStates. Because there are no scheduled stops You do not have to allocate your travelentirely for business if you were outside the
between Puerto Rico and New York, all of the expenses if you meet one of the fourUnited States for a week or less, combining
return trip is outside the United States. exceptions listed earlier under Travelbusiness and nonbusiness activities. One week
TIP
considered entirely for business. In those cases,means 7 consecutive days. In counting thePrivate car. Travel by private car in the United you can deduct the total cost of getting to anddays, do not count the day you leave the UnitedStates is travel between points in the United from your destination.States, but do count the day you return to theStates, even though you are on your way to a United States.destination outside the United States. Travel allocation rules. If your trip outside theExample. You traveled to Brussels primarily United States was primarily for business, youExample. You travel by car from Denver to for business. You left Denver on Tuesday and must allocate your travel time on a day-to-dayMexico City and return. Your travel from Denver flew to New York. On Wednesday, you flew from basis between business days and nonbusinessto the border and from the border back to Den- New York to Brussels, arriving the next morning. days. The days you depart from and return to thever is travel in the United States, and the rules in On Thursday and Friday, you had business dis- United States are both counted as days outsidethis section apply. The rules under Travel cussions, and from Saturday until Tuesday, you the United States.Outside the United States apply to your trip from were sightseeing. You flew back to New York, To figure the deductible amount of yourthe border to Mexico City and back to the border. arriving Wednesday afternoon. On Thursday, round-trip travel expenses, use the followingyou flew back to Denver. fraction. The numerator (top number) is the totalTravel Outside Although you were away from your home in number of business days outside the UnitedDenver for more than a week, you were notthe United States States. The denominator (bottom number) is theoutside the United States for more than a week. total number of travel days outside the UnitedThis is because the day you depart does notIf any part of your business travel is outside the States.count as a day outside the United States.United States, some of your deductions for the
You can deduct your cost of the round-tripcost of getting to and from your destination may
Counting business days. Your businessflight between Denver and Brussels. You canbe limited. For this purpose, the United States
days include transportation days, days youralso deduct the cost of your stay in Brussels forincludes the 50 states and the District of Colum-
presence was required, days you spent on busi-Thursday and Friday while you conducted busi-bia.
ness, and certain weekends and holidays.ness. However, you cannot deduct the cost ofHow much of your travel expenses you can
your stay in Brussels from Saturday throughdeduct depends in part upon how much of your Transportation day. Count as a business
Tuesday because those days were spent ontrip outside the United States was business re- day any day you spend traveling to or from a
nonbusiness activities.lated. business destination. However, if because of a
nonbusiness activity you do not travel by a directException 3 - Less than 25% of time on
route, your business days are the days it wouldpersonal activities. Your trip is considered
Travel Entirely for Business or take you to travel a reasonably direct route toentirely for business if:
Considered Entirely for Business your business destination. Extra days for side• You were outside the United States for trips or nonbusiness activities cannot bemore than a week, andYou can deduct all your travel expenses of get- counted as business days.ting to and from your business destination if your • You spent less than 25% of the total time Presence required. Count as a businesstrip is entirely for business or considered entirely you were outside the United States on day any day your presence is required at afor business. nonbusiness activities. particular place for a specific business purpose.
Count it as a business day even if you spendTravel entirely for business. If you travel For this purpose, count both the day your trip
most of the day on nonbusiness activities.outside the United States and you spend the began and the day it ended.
Chapter 1 Travel Page 7

Page 8 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Day spent on business. If your principal would have cost you to travel round-trip between program, you can deduct your registration fees
activity during working hours is pursuit of your New York and Dublin. and other expenses you have that are directly
trade or business, count the day as a business You paid $750 to fly from New York to Paris, related to your business.
day. Also, count as a business day any day you $400 to fly from Paris to Dublin, and $700 to fly
Example. The university from which youare prevented from working because of circum- from Dublin back to New York. Round trip airfare
graduated has a continuing education programstances beyond your control. from New York to Dublin would have been
for members of its alumni association. This pro-$1,250.Certain weekends and holidays. Count You figure the deductible part of your air gram consists of trips to various foreign coun-weekends, holidays, and other necessary travel expenses by subtracting 7/18 of the tries where academic exercises andstandby days as business days if they fall be- round-trip fare and other expenses you would conferences are set up to acquaint individuals intween business days. But if they follow your have had in traveling directly between New York most occupations with selected facilities in sev-business meetings or activity and you remain at and Dublin ($1,250 ×  7/18 = $486) from your total eral regions of the world. However, none of theyour business destination for nonbusiness or expenses in traveling from New York to Paris to conferences are directed toward specific occu-personal reasons, do not count them as busi- Dublin and back to New York ($750 + $400 + pations or professions. It is up to each partici-ness days. $700 = $1,850). pant to seek out specialists and organizational
Your deductible air travel expense is $1,364 settings appropriate to his or her occupationalExample 1. Your tax home is New York ($1,850 − $486). interests.City. You travel to Quebec, where you have a
Three-hour sessions are held each day overbusiness appointment on Friday. You have an- Nonbusiness activity at, near, or beyond a 5-day period at each of the selected overseasother appointment on the following Monday. Be- business destination. If you had a vacation facilities where participants can meet with indi-cause your presence was required on both or other nonbusiness activity at, near, or beyond vidual practitioners. These sessions are com-Friday and Monday, they are business days. your business destination, you must allocate posed of a variety of activities includingBecause the weekend is between business part of your travel expenses to the nonbusiness workshops, mini-lectures, role playing, skill de-days, Saturday and Sunday are counted as activity. velopment, and exercises. Professional confer-business days. This is true even though you use The part you must allocate is the amount it ence directors schedule and conduct thethe weekend for sightseeing, visiting friends, or would have cost you to travel between the point sessions. Participants can choose those ses-other nonbusiness activity. where travel outside the United States begins sions they wish to attend.and your business destination and a return to
You can participate in this program since youExample 2. If, in Example 1, you had no the point where travel outside the United States
are a member of the alumni association. Youbusiness in Quebec after Friday, but stayed until ends.
and your family take one of the trips. You spendMonday before starting home, Saturday and You determine the nonbusiness portion of
about 2 hours at each of the planned sessions.Sunday would be nonbusiness days. that expense by multiplying it by a fraction. The
The rest of the time you go touring and sightsee-numerator of the fraction is the number of non-Nonbusiness activity on the way to or from ing with your family. The trip lasts less than 1business days during your travel outside theyour business destination. If you stopped week.United States and the denominator is the totalfor a vacation or other nonbusiness activity ei- Your travel expenses for the trip are notnumber of days you spend outside the Unitedther on the way from the United States to your deductible since the trip was primarily a vaca-States.business destination, or on the way back to the tion. However, registration fees and any otherNone of your travel expenses for nonbusi-United States from your business destination, incidental expenses you have for the fiveness activities at, near, or beyond your businessyou must allocate part of your travel expenses to planned sessions you attended that are directlydestination are deductible.the nonbusiness activity. related and beneficial to your business are de-
The part you must allocate is the amount it ductible business expenses. These expensesExample. Assume that the dates are the
would have cost you to travel between the point should be specifically stated in your records tosame as in the previous example but that in-
where travel outside the United States begins ensure proper allocation of your deductible busi-stead of going to Dublin for your vacation, you fly
and your nonbusiness destination and a return ness expenses.to Venice, Italy, for a vacation.
to the point where travel outside the United You cannot deduct any part of the cost of
States ends. your trip from Paris to Venice and return to Paris. Luxury Water Travel
You determine the nonbusiness portion of In addition, you cannot deduct 7/18 of the airfare
that expense by multiplying it by a fraction. The and other expenses from New York to Paris and If you travel by ocean liner, cruise ship, or other
numerator of the fraction is the number of non- back to New York. form of luxury water transportation for business
business days during your travel outside the You can deduct 11/18 of the round-trip plane purposes, there is a daily limit on the amount
United States and the denominator is the total fare and other travel expenses from New York to you can deduct. The limit is twice the highest
number of days you spend outside the United Paris, plus your meals (subject to the 50% limit), federal per diem rate allowable at the time of
States. lodging, and any other business expenses you your travel. (Generally, the federal per diem is
had in Paris. (Assume these expenses total the amount paid to federal government employ-
Example. You live in New York. On May 4 $6,050). If the round-trip plane fare and other ees for daily living expenses when they travel
you flew to Paris to attend a business confer- travel-related expenses (such as food during the away from home, but in the United States, for
ence that began on May 5. The conference trip) are $1,750, you can deduct travel costs of business purposes.)
ended at noon on May 14. That evening you flew $1,069 (11/18 ×  $1,750), plus the full $6,050 for
to Dublin where you visited with friends until the the expenses you had in Paris. Daily limit on luxury water travel. The high-
afternoon of May 21, when you flew directly est federal per diem rate allowed and the dailyOther methods. You can use another methodhome to New York. The primary purpose for the limit for luxury water travel in 2008 is shown inof counting business days if you establish that ittrip was to attend the conference. the following table.more clearly reflects the time spent on otherIf you had not stopped in Dublin, you would than business activities outside the United Highest Daily Limithave arrived home the evening of May 14. You States. 2008 Federal on Luxurydid not meet any of the exceptions that would Dates Per Diem Water Travelallow you to consider your travel entirely for
Jan. 1 ± Jan. 31 $381 $762business. May 4 through May 14 (11 days) are Travel Primarily for Personalbusiness days and May 15 through May 21 (7 Feb. 1 ± March 31 316 632Reasonsdays) are nonbusiness days.
April 1 ± June 30 308 616You can deduct the cost of your meals (sub- If you travel outside the United States primarily
July 1 ± August 31 319 638ject to the 50% limit), lodging, and other busi- for vacation or for investment purposes, the en-
ness-related travel expenses while in Paris. tire cost of the trip is a nondeductible personal Sept. 1 ± Sept. 30 375 750
You cannot deduct your expenses while in expense. If you spend some time attending brief Oct. 1 ± Dec. 31 424 848Dublin. You also cannot deduct 7/18 of what it professional seminars or a continuing education
Page 8 Chapter 1 Travel

Page 9 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. Caroline, a travel agent, traveled does not have to deal specifically with your offi- 2. The cruise ship is a vessel registered in
by ocean liner from New York to London, Eng- cial duties and responsibilities; it will be enough the United States.
land, on business in May. Her expense for the if the agenda is so related to your position that it 3. All of the cruise ship's ports of call are in6-day cruise was $4,200. Caroline's deduction shows your attendance was for business pur- the United States or in possessions of thefor the cruise cannot exceed $3,696 (6 days × poses. United States.$616 daily limit).
4. You attach to your return a written state-
Meals and entertainment. If your expenses Conventions Held Outside ment signed by you that includes informa-
for luxury water travel include separately stated the North American Area tion about:amounts for meals or entertainment, those
You cannot deduct expenses for attending aamounts are subject to the 50% limit on meals a. The total days of the trip (not including
convention, seminar, or similar meeting heldand entertainment before you apply the daily the days of transportation to and from
outside the North American area unless:limit. For a discussion of the 50% Limit , see the cruise ship port),
chapter 2. • The meeting is directly related to your b. The number of hours each day that you
trade or business, and devoted to scheduled business activi-Example. In the previous example, Caro-
ties, and• It is as reasonable to hold the meetingline's luxury water travel had a total cost of
outside the North American area as in it.$4,200. Of that amount, $1,900 was separately c. A program of the scheduled business
stated as meals and entertainment. Caroline, activities of the meeting.If the meeting meets these requirements, youwho is self-employed, is not reimbursed for any also must satisfy the rules for deducting ex-of her travel expenses. Caroline figures her de- 5. You attach to your return a written state-penses for business trips in general, discussedductible travel expenses as follows. ment signed by an officer of the organiza-earlier under Travel Outside the United States.
tion or group sponsoring the meeting thatMeals and entertainment ..... . $1,900 North American area. The North American includes:50% limit ............... . ×  .50
area includes the following locations.Allowable meals & entertainment $  950 a. A schedule of the business activities ofOther travel expenses ...... . + 2,300
American Samoa Jarvis Island each day of the meeting, andAllowable cost before the daily limit ... . $3,250
Antigua and Barbuda Johnston Island b. The number of hours you attended theDaily limit for May 2008 ..... . $ 616 Aruba Kingman Reef
Times number of days ...... . ×  6 scheduled business activities.Bahamas Marshall Islands
Maximum luxury water travel deduction $3,696 Baker Island Mexico
Barbados MicronesiaAmount of allowable deduction .... . $3,250
Bermuda Midway Islands
Caroline's deduction for her cruise is limited to Canada Netherlands Antilles
$3,250, even though the limit on luxury water Costa Rica Northern Mariana
Dominica Islandstravel is higher.
Dominican Republic Palau
Not separately stated. If your meal or en- Grenada Palmyra Atoll
tertainment charges are not separately stated or Guam Puerto Rico 2.
are not clearly identifiable, you do not have to Guyana Trinidad and Tobago
Honduras USAallocate any portion of the total charge to meals
Howland Island U.S. Virgin Islandsor entertainment.
Jamaica Wake Island Entertainment
The North American area also includes U.S.Exceptions islands, cays, and reefs that are possessions of You may be able to deduct business-relatedthe United States and not part of the fifty statesThe daily limit on luxury water travel (discussed entertainment expenses you have for entertain-or the District of Columbia.earlier) does not apply to expenses you have to ing a client, customer, or employee. The rules
attend a convention, seminar, or meeting on and definitions are summarized in Table 2-1.Reasonableness test. The following factorsboard a cruise ship. See Cruise Ships  under You can deduct entertainment expensesare taken into account to determine if it wasConventions Held Outside the North American only if they are both ordinary and necessary andreasonable to hold the meeting outside theArea. meet one of the following tests.North American area.
• Directly-related test.• The purpose of the meeting and the activi-Conventions
ties taking place at the meeting. • Associated test.
You can deduct your travel expenses when you • The purposes and activities of the spon- Both of these tests are explained later.attend a convention if you can show that your soring organizations or groups.attendance benefits your trade or business. You An ordinary expense is one that is common
• The homes of the active members of thecannot deduct the travel expenses for your fam- and accepted in your trade or business. A nec-sponsoring organizations and the placesily. essary expense is one that is helpful and appro-at which other meetings of the sponsoringIf the convention is for investment, political, priate for your business. An expense does notorganizations or groups have been or willsocial, or other purposes unrelated to your trade have to be required to be considered necessary.be held.or business, you cannot deduct the expenses.
The amount you can deduct for enter-• Other relevant factors you may present.Your appointment or election as a dele- tainment expenses may be limited.gate does not, in itself, determine Generally, you can deduct only 50% of
CAUTION
!whether you can deduct travel ex-
CAUTION
! your unreimbursed entertainment expenses.Cruise Shipspenses. You can deduct your travel expenses This limit is discussed later under 50% Limit.only if your attendance is connected to your own You can deduct up to $2,000 per year of your
trade or business. expenses of attending conventions, seminars,
or similar meetings held on cruise ships. All
Convention agenda. The convention agenda ships that sail are considered cruise ships.
Directly-Related Testor program generally shows the purpose of the You can deduct these expenses only if all of
convention. You can show your attendance at the following requirements are met. To meet the directly-related test for entertain-the convention benefits your trade or business
ment expenses (including entertainment-relatedby comparing the agenda with the official duties 1. The convention, seminar, or meeting is di-
and responsibilities of your position. The agenda rectly related to your trade or business. meals), you must show that:
Chapter 2 Entertainment Page 9

Page 10 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 2-1.  When Are Entertainment Expenses Deductible?
Associated TestGeneral rule You can deduct ordinary and necessary expenses to entertain a client,
customer, or employee if the expenses meet the directly-related test or Even if your expenses do not meet the di-the associated test. rectly-related test, they may meet the associ-
ated test.Definitions • Entertainment includes any activity generally considered to provide
To meet the associated test for entertain-entertainment, amusement, or recreation, and includes meals
ment expenses (including entertainment-relatedprovided to a customer or client.
meals), you must show that the entertainment is:• An ordinary expense is one that is common and accepted in your
trade or business. • Associated with the active conduct of your
• A necessary expense is one that is helpful and appropriate. trade or business, and
Tests to be met Directly-related test • Directly before or after a substantial busi-
ness discussion (defined later).• Entertainment took place in a clear business setting, or
• Main purpose of entertainment was the active conduct of business,
and Associated with trade or business. Gener-You did engage in business with the person during the entertainment ally, an expense is associated with the activeperiod, and conduct of your trade or business if you canYou had more than a general expectation of getting income or some show that you had a clear business purpose forother specific business benefit. having the expense. The purpose may be to get
new business or to encourage the continuationAssociated test
of an existing business relationship.• Entertainment is associated with your trade or business, and
• Entertainment directly precedes or follows a substantial business Substantial business discussion. Whetherdiscussion. a business discussion is substantial depends on
the facts of each case. A business discussionOther rules • You cannot deduct the cost of your meal as an entertainment will not be considered substantial unless youexpense if you are claiming the meal as a travel expense.
can show that you actively engaged in the dis-• You cannot deduct expenses that are lavish or extravagant under the cussion, meeting, negotiation, or other businesscircumstances.
transaction to get income or some other specific• You generally can deduct only 50% of your unreimbursed business benefit.entertainment expenses (see 50% Limit).
The meeting does not have to be for any
specified length of time, but you must show that
the business discussion was substantial in rela-• The main purpose of the combined busi- • Entertainment in a hospitality room at a tion to the meal or entertainment. It is not neces-ness and entertainment was the active convention where business goodwill is sary that you devote more time to business thanconduct of business, created through the display or discussion to entertainment. You do not have to discussof business products.• You did engage in business with the per- business during the meal or entertainment.
son during the entertainment period, and • Entertainment that is mainly a price rebate Meetings at conventions. You are consid-on the sale of your products (such as a• You had more than a general expectation ered to have a substantial business discussion ifrestaurant owner providing an occasionalof getting income or some other specific you attend meetings at a convention or similarfree meal to a loyal customer).business benefit at some future time. event, or at a trade or business meeting spon-
sored and conducted by a business or profes-• Entertainment of a clear business nature
Business is generally not considered to be the sional organization. However, your reason foroccurring under circumstances where
attending the convention or meeting must be tomain purpose when business and entertainment there is no meaningful personal or social
further your trade or business. The organizationare combined on hunting or fishing trips, or on relationship between you and the persons
that sponsors the convention or meeting mustyachts or other pleasure boats. Even if you show entertained. An example is entertainment
schedule a program of business activities that isthat business was the main purpose, you gener- of business and civic leaders at the open- the main activity of the convention or meeting.ally cannot deduct the expenses for the use of ing of a new hotel or play when the pur-
an entertainment facility. See Entertainment fa- pose is to get business publicity rather Directly before or after business discussion.cilities under What Entertainment Expenses Are than to create or maintain the goodwill of If the entertainment is held on the same day asNot Deductible? later in this chapter. the persons entertained. the business discussion, it is considered to beYou must consider all the facts, including the held directly before or after the business discus-nature of the business transacted and the rea- sion.Expenses not considered directly related.sons for conducting business during the enter- If the entertainment and the business discus-Entertainment expenses generally are not con-tainment. It is not necessary to devote more time sion are not held on the same day, you mustsidered directly related if you are not there or into business than to entertainment. However, if consider the facts of each case to see if thesituations where there are substantial distrac-the business discussion is only incidental to the associated test is met. Among the facts to con-tions that generally prevent you from activelyentertainment, the entertainment expenses do sider are the place, date, and duration of theconducting business. The following are exam-not meet the directly-related test. business discussion. If you or your businessples of situations where there are substantial
associates are from out of town, you must alsodistractions.
consider the dates of arrival and departure, andYou do not have to show that business • A meeting or discussion at a nightclub, the reasons the entertainment and the discus-income or other business benefit actu-
theater, or sporting event. sion did not take place on the same day.ally resulted from each entertainment
TIP
expense. • A meeting or discussion during what is
Example. A group of business associatesessentially a social gathering, such as a comes from out of town to your place of busi-cocktail party.Clear business setting. If the entertainment ness to hold a substantial business discussion.
• A meeting with a group that includes per-takes place in a clear business setting and is for If you entertain those business guests on the
sons who are not business associates atyour business or work, the expenses are consid- evening before the business discussion, or on
places such as cocktail lounges, countryered directly related to your business or work. the evening of the day following the business
The following situations are examples of enter- clubs, golf clubs, athletic clubs, or vacation discussion, the entertainment generally is con-
tainment in a clear business setting. resorts. sidered to be held directly before or after the
Page 10 Chapter 2 Entertainment

Page 11 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
also applies to the cost of meals included in
deductible educational expenses.
When to apply the 50% limit. You apply the
50% limit after determining the amount that
would otherwise qualify for a deduction. You first
have to determine the amount of meal and en-
tertainment expenses that would be deductible
under the other rules discussed in this publica-
tion.
Example 1. You spend $200 for a busi-
ness-related meal. If $110 of that amount is not
allowable because it is lavish and extravagant,
the remaining $90 is subject to the 50% limit.
Your deduction cannot be more than $45 (50% ×
$90).
Example 2. You purchase two tickets to a
concert and give them to a client. You pur-
chased the tickets through a ticket agent. You
paid $200 for the two tickets, which had a face
value of $80 each ($160 total). Your deduction
cannot be more than $80 (50% ×  $160).
Exceptions to the 50% Limit
Generally, business-related meal and entertain-
ment expenses are subject to the 50% limit.
Figure A can help you determine if the 50% limit
applies to you.
Expenses not subject to 50% limit. Your
meal or entertainment expense is not subject to
the 50% limit if the expense meets one of the
following exceptions.
1 - Employee's reimbursed expenses. If
you are an employee, you are not subject to the
50% limit on expenses for which your employer
reimburses you under an accountable plan. Ac-
countable plans are discussed in chapter 6.
2 - Self-employed. If you are
self-employed, your deductible meal and enter-
Figure A. Does the 50% Limit Apply to Your Expenses?
All employees and self-employed persons can use this chart.
Were your meal and entertainment expenses reimbursed?
(Count only reimbursements your employer did not
include in box 1 of your Form W-2. If self-employed,
count only reimbursements from clients or customers that
are not included on Form 1099-MISC, Miscellaneous
Income.)
If an employee, did you adequately account
to your employer under an accountable plan?
If self-employed, did you provide the payer
with adequate records? (See chapter 6.)
Did your expenses exceed the reimbursement?
For the amount reimbursed... For the excess amount...
Your meal and entertainment
expenses are NOT subject to
the 50% limit. However, since
the reimbursement was not
treated as wages or as other
taxable income, you cannot
deduct the expenses.
Your meal and
entertainment expenses
ARE subject to
the 50% limit.
/H17074
/H17074
/H17076
/H17074
/H17074
/H17075
/H17074
/H17074
Yes
No
No
Yes
YesNo
There are exceptions to these rules. See Exceptions to the 50% Limit.
Start Here
tainment expenses are not subject to the 50%
limit if all of the following requirements are met.discussion. The expense meets the associated • Attending a business convention or recep-
tion, business meeting, or business lunch-test. • You have these expenses as an indepen-eon at a club. dent contractor.
• Your customer or client reimburses you orIncluded expenses. Expenses subject to the gives you an allowance for these ex-50% limit include:50% Limit penses in connection with services you
• Taxes and tips relating to a business meal perform.In general, you can deduct only 50% of your or entertainment activity, • You provide adequate records of these ex-business-related meal and entertainment ex-
• Cover charges for admission to a night- penses to your customer or client. (Seepenses. (If you are subject to the Department of
club, chapter 5.)Transportation's ªhours of serviceº limits, you
can deduct a higher percentage. See Individuals • Rent paid for a room in which you hold a In this case, your client or customer is subjectsubject to ªhours of serviceº limits, later.) dinner or cocktail party, and to the 50% limit on the expenses.
The 50% limit applies to employees or their • Amounts paid for parking at a sports
employers, and to self-employed persons (in- Example. You are a self-employed attorneyarena.
cluding independent contractors) or their clients, who adequately accounts for meal and enter-However, the cost of transportation to and fromdepending on whether the expenses are reim- tainment expenses to a client who reimbursesa business meal or a business-related entertain- you for these expenses. You are not subject tobursed. ment activity is not subject to the 50% limit. the directly-related or associated test, nor are  Figure A  summarizes the general rules you subject to the 50% limit. If the client canexplained in this section. Application of 50% limit. The 50% limit on deduct the expenses, the client is subject to the
The 50% limit applies to business meals or meal and entertainment expenses applies if the 50% limit.
entertainment expenses you have while: expense is otherwise deductible and is not cov- If you (the contractor) have expenses for
ered by one of the exceptions discussed later. meals and entertainment related to providing• Traveling away from home (whether eat-
The 50% limit also applies to certain meal services for a client but do not adequately ac-ing alone or with others) on business, and entertainment expenses that are not busi- count for and seek reimbursement from the cli-
• Entertaining customers at your place of ness related. It applies to meal and entertain- ent for those expenses, you are subject to the
business, a restaurant, or other location, ment expenses you have for the production of directly-related or associated test and to the
or income, including rental or royalty income. It 50% limit.
Chapter 2 Entertainment Page 11

Page 12 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
3 - Advertising expenses. You are not sub- A meal as a form of entertainment. Enter- Trade association meetings. You can de-
ject to the 50% limit if you provide meals, enter- duct entertainment expenses that are directlytainment includes the cost of a meal you provide
tainment, or recreational facilities to the general related to and necessary for attending businessto a customer or client, whether the meal is a
public as a means of advertising or promoting meetings or conventions of certain exempt orga-part of other entertainment or by itself. A meal
goodwill in the community. For example, neither nizations if the expenses of your attendance areexpense includes the cost of food, beverages,
the expense of sponsoring a television or radio related to your active trade or business. Thesetaxes, and tips for the meal. To deduct an enter-
show nor the expense of distributing free food organizations include business leagues, cham-tainment-related meal, you or your employee
and beverages to the general public is subject to bers of commerce, real estate boards, trademust be present when the food or beverages are
the 50% limit. associations, and professional associations.provided.
4 - Sale of meals or entertainment. You You cannot claim the cost of your meal Entertainment tickets. Generally, you cannot
are not subject to the 50% limit if you actually both as an entertainment expense and deduct more than the face value of an entertain-
sell meals, entertainment, goods and services, as a travel expense. ment ticket, even if you paid a higher price. For
CAUTION
!
or use of facilities to the public. For example, if example, you cannot deduct service fees you
you run a nightclub, your expense for the enter- Meals sold in the normal course of your pay to ticket agencies or brokers or any amount
tainment you furnish to your customers, such as business are not considered entertain- over the face value of the tickets you pay to
a floor show, is not subject to the 50% limit. ment. scalpers.
TIP
5 - Charitable sports event. You are not Exception for events that benefit charita-Deduction may depend on your type ofsubject to the 50% limit if you pay for a package ble organizations. Different rules apply whenbusiness. Your kind of business may deter-deal that includes a ticket to a qualified charita- the cost of a ticket to a sports event benefits amine if a particular activity is considered enter-ble sports event. For the conditions the sports charitable organization. You can take into ac-tainment. For example, if you are a dressevent must meet, see Exception for events that count the full cost you pay for the ticket, even if itdesigner and have a fashion show to introducebenefit charitable organizations under What En- is more than the face value, if all of the followingyour new designs to store buyers, the showtertainment Expenses Are Deductible?, later. conditions apply.generally is not considered entertainment. This
is because fashion shows are typical in your • The event's main purpose is to benefit aIndividuals subject to ªhours of serviceº lim-
business. But, if you are an appliance distributor qualified charitable organization.its. You can deduct a higher percentage of
and hold a fashion show for the spouses of youryour meal expenses while traveling away from • The entire net proceeds go to the charity.retailers, the show generally is considered en-your tax home if the meals take place during or
tertainment. • The event uses volunteers to perform sub-incident to any period subject to the Department
stantially all the event's work.of Transportation's ªhours of serviceº limits. The
Separating costs. If you have one expensepercentage is 80% for 2008.
that includes the costs of entertainment, andIndividuals subject to the Department of The 50% limit on entertainment doesother services (such as lodging or transporta-Transportation's ªhours of serviceº limits include not apply to any expense for a packagetion), you must allocate that expense betweenthe following persons. deal that includes a ticket to such a
TIPthe cost of entertainment and the cost of other
charitable sports event.• Certain air transportation workers (such as services. You must have a reasonable basis for
pilots, crew, dispatchers, mechanics, and making this allocation. For example, you must
control tower operators) who are under Example 1. You purchase tickets to a golfallocate your expenses if a hotel includes enter-
Federal Aviation Administration regula- tournament organized by the local volunteer firetainment in its lounge on the same bill with your
tions. company. All net proceeds will be used to buyroom charge.
new fire equipment. The volunteers will run the• Interstate truck operators and bus drivers Taking turns paying for meals or entertain- tournament. You can deduct the entire cost ofwho are under Department of Transporta- ment. If a group of business acquaintances the tickets as a business expense if they other-tion regulations. take turns picking up each others' meal or enter- wise qualify as an entertainment expense.
• Certain railroad employees (such as engi- tainment checks without regard to whether any
neers, conductors, train crews, dispatch- Example 2.  You purchase tickets to a col-business purposes are served, no member of
ers, and control operations personnel) lege football game through a ticket broker. Afterthe group can deduct any part of the expense.
who are under Federal Railroad Adminis- having a business discussion, you take a client
Lavish or extravagant expenses. You can-tration regulations. to the game. Net proceeds from the game go to
not deduct expenses for entertainment that are colleges that qualify as charitable organizations.• Certain merchant mariners who are under lavish or extravagant. An expense is not consid- However, since the colleges also pay individualsCoast Guard regulations. ered lavish or extravagant if it is reasonable to perform services, such as coaching and
considering the facts and circumstances. Ex- recruiting, you can only use the face value of the
penses will not be disallowed just because they tickets in determining your business deduction.
are more than a fixed dollar amount or take
Skyboxes and other private luxury boxes. Ifplace at deluxe restaurants, hotels, nightclubs,What Entertainment you rent a skybox or other private luxury box foror resorts.
more than one event at the same sports arena,Expenses
Allocating between business and nonbusi- you generally cannot deduct more than the price
ness. If you entertain business and nonbusi- of a nonluxury box seat ticket.Are Deductible?
ness individuals at the same event, you must To determine whether a skybox has been
divide your entertainment expenses between rented for more than one event, count eachThis section explains different types of entertain-
business and nonbusiness. You can deduct only game or other performance as one event. Forment expenses that you may be able to deduct.
the business part. If you cannot establish the example, renting a skybox for a series of playoff
Entertainment. Entertainment includes any part of the expense for each person participat- games is considered renting it for more than one
activity generally considered to provide enter- ing, allocate the expense to each participant on event. All skyboxes you rent in the same arena,
tainment, amusement, or recreation. Examples a pro rata basis. along with any rentals by related parties, are
include entertaining guests at nightclubs; at so- considered in making this determination.
Example. You entertain a group of individu-cial, athletic, and sporting clubs; at theaters; at Related parties include:
als that includes yourself, three business pros-sporting events; on yachts; or on hunting, fish- • Family members (spouses, ancestors, andpects, and seven social guests. Only 4/11 of theing, vacation, and similar trips. lineal descendants),expense qualifies as a business entertainmentEntertainment also may include meeting per-
expense. You cannot deduct the expenses forsonal, living, or family needs of individuals, such • Parties who have made a reciprocal ar-
the seven social guests because those costs areas providing meals, a hotel suite, or a car to rangement involving the sharing of
nonbusiness expenses.customers or their families. skyboxes,
Page 12 Chapter 2 Entertainment

Page 13 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Related corporations, An entertainment facility is any property you company that is intended for the eventual per-
own, rent, or use for entertainment. Examples sonal use or benefit of a particular person or a• A partnership and its principal partners, include a yacht, hunting lodge, fishing camp, limited class of people will be considered anand swimming pool, tennis court, bowling alley, car, indirect gift to that particular person or to the
airplane, apartment, hotel suite, or home in a individuals within that class of people who re-• A corporation and a partnership with com-
vacation resort. ceive the gift.mon ownership.
If you give a gift to a member of a customer'sOut-of-pocket expenses. You can deduct family, the gift is generally considered to be anExample. You pay $3,000 to rent a 10-seat out-of-pocket expenses, such as for food and indirect gift to the customer. This rule does notskybox at Team Stadium for three baseball beverages, catering, gas, and fishing bait, that apply if you have a bona fide, independent busi-you provided during entertainment at a facility.games. The cost of regular nonluxury box seats ness connection with that family member andThese are not expenses for the use of an enter-at each event is $30 a seat. You can deduct the gift is not intended for the customer's even-tainment facility. However, these expenses are(subject to the 50% limit) $900 ((10 seats ×  $30 tual use.subject to the directly-related and associatedeach) ×  3 events). If you and your spouse both give gifts, both oftests and to the 50% limit, all discussed earlier. you are treated as one taxpayer. It does notFood and beverages in skybox seats. If
matter whether you have separate businesses,Expenses for spouses. You generally cannotexpenses for food and beverages are separately
are separately employed, or whether each ofdeduct the cost of entertainment for your spousestated, you can deduct these expenses in addi-
you has an independent connection with theor for the spouse of a customer. However, yoution to the amounts allowable for the skybox,
recipient. If a partnership gives gifts, the partner-can deduct these costs if you can show that yousubject to the requirements and limits that apply.
ship and the partners are treated as one tax-had a clear business purpose, rather than aThe amounts separately stated for food and
payer.personal or social purpose, for providing thebeverages must be reasonable. You cannot in-
entertainment.flate the charges for food and beverages to
Example. Bob Jones sells products to Localavoid the limited deduction for skybox rentals.
Company. He and his wife, Jan, gave LocalExample. You entertain a customer. The
Company three cheese packages to thank themcost is an ordinary and necessary business ex-
for their business. They paid $80 for each pack-pense and is allowed under the entertainment
age, or $240 total. Three of Local Company'srules. The customer's spouse joins you becauseWhat Entertainment executives took the packages home for theirit is impractical to entertain the customer without
families' use. Bob and Jan have no independentthe spouse. You can deduct the cost of enter-Expenses Are Not business relationship with any of the executives'taining the customer's spouse. If your spouse
other family members. They can deduct a totaljoins the party because the customer's spouseDeductible? of $75 ($25 limit ×  3) for the cheese packages.is present, the cost of the entertainment for your
spouse is also deductible.This section explains different types of entertain- Incidental costs. Incidental costs, such as
ment expenses that you generally may not be Gift or entertainment. Any item that might be engraving on jewelry, or packaging, insuring,
able to deduct. considered either a gift or entertainment gener- and mailing, are generally not included in deter-
ally will be considered entertainment. However, mining the cost of a gift for purposes of the $25
if you give a customer packaged food or bever-Club dues and membership fees. You can- limit.
ages that you intend the customer to use at a A cost is incidental only if it does not addnot deduct dues (including initiation fees) for
later date, treat it as a gift. substantial value to the gift. For example, themembership in any club organized for:
If you give a customer tickets to a theater cost of gift wrapping is an incidental cost. How-• Business, performance or sporting event and you do not go ever, the purchase of an ornamental basket for
with the customer to the performance or event, packaging fruit is not an incidental cost if the• Pleasure,
you have a choice. You can treat the tickets as value of the basket is substantial compared to• Recreation, or either a gift or entertainment, whichever is to the value of the fruit.
your advantage.• Other social purpose. Exceptions. The following items are not con-You can change your treatment of the ticketsThis rule applies to any membership organiza- sidered gifts for purposes of the $25 limit. at a later date by filing an amended return.tion if one of its principal purposes is either: Generally, an amended return must be filed 1. An item that costs $4 or less and:
within 3 years from the date the original return• To conduct entertainment activities for
was filed or within 2 years from the time the taxmembers or their guests, or a. Has your name clearly and permanently
was paid, whichever is later. imprinted on the gift, and• To provide members or their guests with If you go with the customer to the event, youaccess to entertainment facilities, dis- b. Is one of a number of identical itemsmust treat the cost of the tickets as an entertain- you widely distribute. Examples includecussed later. ment expense. You cannot choose, in this case, pens, desk sets, and plastic bags andto treat the tickets as a gift.The purposes and activities of a club, not its cases.
name, will determine whether or not you can
2. Signs, display racks, or other promotionaldeduct the dues. You cannot deduct dues paid
material to be used on the business prem-to:
ises of the recipient.• Country clubs,
• Golf and athletic clubs, Gift or entertainment. Any item that might be3. considered either a gift or entertainment gener-• Airline clubs, ally will be considered entertainment. However,
• Hotel clubs, and if you give a customer packaged food or bever-
ages that you intend the customer to use at aGifts• Clubs operated to provide meals under cir- later date, treat it as a gift.cumstances generally considered to be If you give a customer tickets to a theaterIf you give gifts in the course of your trade orconducive to business discussions. performance or sporting event and you do not gobusiness, you can deduct all or part of the cost. with the customer to the performance or event,This chapter explains the limits and rules forEntertainment facilities. Generally, you can- you have a choice. You can treat the cost of thededucting the costs of gifts.not deduct any expense for the use of an enter- tickets as either a gift expense or an entertain-
tainment facility. This includes expenses for $25 limit. You can deduct no more than $25 ment expense, whichever is to your advantage.
depreciation and operating costs such as rent, for business gifts you give directly or indirectly to You can change your treatment of the tickets
utilities, maintenance, and protection. each person during your tax year. A gift to a at a later date by filing an amended return.
Chapter 3 Gifts Page 13

Page 14 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
home overnight. Those expenses are travel ex-
penses which are discussed in chapter 1. How-
ever, if you use your car while traveling away
from home overnight, use the rules in this chap-
ter to figure your car expense deduction. See
Car Expenses, later.
Illustration of transportation expenses.
Figure B illustrates the rules that apply for de-
ducting transportation expenses when you have
a regular or main job away from your home. You
may want to refer to it when deciding whether
you can deduct your transportation expenses.
Temporary work location. If you have one or
more regular work locations away from your
home and you commute to a temporary work
location in the same trade or business, you can
deduct the expenses of the daily round-trip
transportation between your home and the tem-
porary location, regardless of distance.
If your employment at a work location is
realistically expected to last (and does in fact
last) for 1 year or less, the employment is tempo-
rary unless there are facts and circumstances
that would indicate otherwise.
If your employment at a work location is
realistically expected to last for more than 1 year
or if there is no realistic expectation that the
employment will last for 1 year or less, the em-
ployment is not temporary, regardless of
whether it actually lasts for more than 1 year.
If employment at a work location initially is
realistically expected to last for 1 year or less,
but at some later date the employment is realisti-
cally expected to last more than 1 year, that
employment will be treated as temporary (un-
less there are facts and circumstances that
would indicate otherwise) until your expectation
changes. It will not be treated as temporary after
the date you determine it will last more than 1
year.
If the temporary work location is beyond the
general area of your regular place of work and
you stay overnight, you are traveling away from
home. You may have deductible travel ex-
penses as discussed in chapter 1.
No regular place of work. If you have no
Figure B. When Are Transportation Expenses Deductible?
/H17074
/H17076 /H17075
/H17073
/H17074
/H17073
/H17073
/H17074/H17075
/H17073
/H17074
/H17073
Temporary
work location
Home Regular or
main job
Always
deductible
Always
deductible
Second job
Never deductible
Never deductible
on a day off from
regular or main job
Deductible if you have a
regular or main job
at another location Always deductib
le
Most employees and self-employed persons can use this chart.
(Do not use this chart if your home is your principal place of business.
See Office in the home. )
Home: The place where you reside. Transportation expenses between your home and
your main or regular place of work are personal commuting expenses.
Regular or main job: Your principal place of business. If you have more than one job,
you must determine which one is your regular or main job. Consider the time you
spend at each, the activity you have at each, and the income you earn at each.
Temporary work location: A place where your work assignment is realistically
expected to last (and does in fact last) one year or less. Unless you have a regular
place of business, you can only deduct your transportation expenses to a temporary
work location outside your metropolitan area.
Second job: If you regularly work at two or more places in one day, whether or not
for the same employer, you can deduct your transportation expenses of getting from
one workplace to another. You cannot deduct your transportation costs between your
home and a second job on a day off from your main job.
regular place of work but ordinarily work in the
metropolitan area where you live, you can de-
Generally, an amended return must be filed transportation by air, rail, bus, taxi, etc., and the duct daily transportation costs between home
within 3 years from the date the original return cost of driving and maintaining your car. and a temporary work site outside that metropol-
was filed or within 2 years from the time the tax Transportation expenses include the ordi- itan area.
was paid, whichever is later. nary and necessary costs of all of the following. Generally, a metropolitan area includes the
 If you go with the customer to the event, you area within the city limits and the suburbs that• Getting from one workplace to another inmust treat the cost of the tickets as an entertain- are considered part of that metropolitan area.the course of your business or professionment expense. You cannot choose, in this case, You cannot deduct daily transportation costswhen you are traveling within the city orto treat the cost of the tickets as a gift expense. between your home and temporary work sitesgeneral area that is your tax home. Tax
within your metropolitan area. These are nonde-home is defined in chapter 1.
ductible commuting expenses.• Visiting clients or customers.
Two places of work. If you work at two places• Going to a business meeting away from
in one day, whether or not for the same em-your regular workplace.
ployer, you can deduct the expense of getting
• Getting from your home to a temporary4. from one workplace to the other. However, if for
workplace when you have one or more some personal reason you do not go directly
regular places of work. These temporary from one location to the other, you cannot de-
workplaces can be either within the area duct more than the amount it would have cost
Transportation of your tax home or outside that area. you to go directly from the first location to the
second.Transportation expenses do not include ex-
Transportation expenses you have in goingThis chapter discusses expenses you can de- penses you have while traveling away from
between home and a part-time job on a day offduct for business transportation when you are
from your main job are commuting expenses.not traveling away from home  as defined in
You cannot deduct them.chapter 1. These expenses include the cost of
Page 14 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 15 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Armed Forces reservists. A meeting of an Hauling tools or instruments. Hauling In this publication, ªcarº includes a van,
pickup, or panel truck. For the definition of ªcarºtools or instruments in your car while commutingArmed Forces reserve unit is a second place of
for depreciation purposes, see Car definedto and from work does not make your car ex-business if the meeting is held on a day on which
under Actual Car Expenses, later.penses deductible. However, you can deductyou work at your regular job. You can deduct the
any additional costs you have for hauling tools orexpense of getting from one workplace to the
instruments (such as for renting a trailer you towother as just discussed under Two places of
with your car).work. You may be entitled to a tax credit for
You usually cannot deduct the expense if the an alternative motor vehicle that youUnion members' trips from a union hall. If
reserve meeting is held on a day on which you place in service during the year. Theyou get your work assignments at a union hall
TIP
do not work at your regular job. In this case, your vehicle must meet certain requirements, andand then go to your place of work, the costs of
transportation generally is a nondeductible com- you do not have to use it in your business togetting from the union hall to your place of work
qualify for the credit. However, you must reducemuting expense. However, you can deduct your are nondeductible commuting expenses. Al-
your basis for depreciation of the alternativetransportation expenses if the location of the though you need the union to get your work
motor vehicle by the amount of the credit youmeeting is temporary and you have one or more assignments, you are employed where you
claim. See Depreciation Deduction, later, underregular places of work. work, not where the union hall is located.
Actual Car Expenses.If you ordinarily work in a particular metropol-
 For more information on alternative motor vehi-itan area but not at any specific location and the Office in the home. If you have an office in cles, see Form 8910, Alternative Motor Vehiclereserve meeting is held at a temporary location your home that qualifies as a principal place of Credit.outside that metropolitan area, you can deduct business, you can deduct your daily transporta-
your transportation expenses. tion costs between your home and another work
Rural mail carriers. If you are a rural maillocation in the same trade or business. (SeeIf you travel away from home overnight to carrier, you may be able to treat the qualifiedPublication 587, Business Use of Your Home,attend a guard or reserve meeting, you can reimbursement you received as your allowablefor information on determining if your home of-deduct your travel expenses. These expenses expense. Because the qualified reimbursementfice qualifies as a principal place of business.)are discussed in chapter 1. is treated as paid under an accountable plan,If you travel more than 100 miles away from your employer should not include the reimburse-Examples of deductible transportation. Thehome in connection with your performance of ment in your income.following examples show when you can deductservices as a member of the reserves, you may If your vehicle expenses are more than thetransportation expenses based on the locationbe able to deduct some of your reserve-related amount of your reimbursement, you can deductof your work and your home.travel costs as an adjustment to gross income the unreimbursed expenses as an itemized de-rather than as an itemized deduction. For more duction on Schedule A (Form 1040). You mustExample 1. You regularly work in an officeinformation, see Armed Forces Reservists Trav- complete Form 2106 and attach it to your Formin the city where you live. Your employer sendseling More Than 100 Miles From Home  under 1040, U.S. Individual Income Tax Return.you to a 1-week training session at a differentSpecial Rules, in chapter 6. A ªqualified reimbursementº is the reim-office in the same city. You travel directly from bursement you receive that meets both of theyour home to the training location and returnCommuting expenses. You cannot deduct following conditions.each day. You can deduct the cost of your dailythe costs of taking a bus, trolley, subway, or taxi, round-trip transportation between your home • It is given as an equipment maintenanceor of driving a car between your home and your and the training location. allowance (EMA) to employees of the U.S.main or regular place of work. These costs are
Postal Service.personal commuting expenses. You cannot de- Example 2. Your principal place of businessduct commuting expenses no matter how far • It is at the rate contained in the 1991 col-is in your home. You can deduct the cost ofyour home is from your regular place of work. lective bargaining agreement. Any laterround-trip transportation between your qualify-You cannot deduct commuting expenses even if agreement cannot increase the qualifieding home office and your client's or customer'syou work during the commuting trip. reimbursement amount by more than theplace of business.
rate of inflation.
Example. You sometimes use your cell Example 3. You have no regular office, and See your employer for information on your reim-phone to make business calls while commuting you do not have an office in your home. In this bursement.to and from work. Sometimes business associ- case, the location of your first business contactates ride with you to and from work, and you is considered your office. Transportation ex- If you are a rural mail carrier and re-have a business discussion in the car. These penses between your home and this first contact ceived a qualified reimbursement, youactivities do not change the trip from personal to are nondeductible commuting expenses. Trans- cannot use the standard mileage rate.
CAUTION
!business. You cannot deduct your commuting portation expenses between your last businessexpenses. contact and your home are also nondeductible
commuting expenses. Although you cannot de- Standard Mileage RateParking fees. Fees you pay to park your car
duct the costs of these trips, you can deduct theat your place of business are nondeductible
You may be able to use the standard mileagecosts of going from one client or customer tocommuting expenses. You can, however, de-
rate to figure the deductible costs of operatinganother.duct business-related parking fees when visiting
your car for business purposes. For 2008, thea customer or client.
standard mileage rate for the cost of operating
Advertising display on car. Putting display your car for business use is:
material that advertises your business on your • 501/2 cents per mile for the period JanuaryCar Expensescar does not change the use of your car from 1 through June 30, 2008, andpersonal use to business use. If you use this car If you use your car for business purposes, youfor commuting or other personal uses, you still • 581/2 cents per mile for the period July 1ordinarily can deduct car expenses. You gener-cannot deduct your expenses for those uses. through December 31, 2008.ally can use one of the two following methods to
Car pools. You cannot deduct the cost of figure your deductible expenses.
using your car in a nonprofit car pool. Do not If you use the standard mileage rate for• Standard mileage rate.include payments you receive from the passen- a year, you cannot deduct your actual
gers in your income. These payments are con- • Actual car expenses. car expenses for that year. You cannot
CAUTION
!
sidered reimbursements of your expenses. deduct depreciation, lease payments, mainte-
However, if you operate a car pool for a profit, If you use actual expenses to figure your de- nance and repairs, gasoline (including gasoline
you must include payments from passengers in duction for a car you lease, there are rules that taxes), oil, insurance, or vehicle registration
your income. You can then deduct your car affect the amount of your lease payments that fees. See Choosing the standard mileage rate
expenses (using the rules in this publication). you can deduct. See Leasing a Car, later. and Standard mileage rate not allowed, later.
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 15

Page 16 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You generally can use the standard mileage the standard mileage rate for the business mile- Actual Car Expenses
rate whether or not you are reimbursed and age of the three cars and the two vans because
whether or not any reimbursement is more or she does not use them at the same time. If you do not use the standard mileage rate, you
less than the amount figured using the standard may be able to deduct your actual car expenses.
Example 2. Tony and his employees usemileage rate. See chapter 6 for more information If you qualify to use both methods, youhis four pickup trucks in his landscaping busi-on reimbursements. may want to figure your deduction bothness. During the year, he traded in two of his old ways to see which gives you a larger
TIPChoosing the standard mileage rate. If you trucks for two newer ones. Tony can use the deduction.want to use the standard mileage rate for a car standard mileage rate for the business mileage
Actual car expenses include:you own, you must choose to use it in the first of all six of the trucks he owned during the year.
year the car is available for use in your business.
Depreciation Lease Registration Example 3. Chris owns a repair shop andThen in later years, you can choose to use either Licenses payments feesan insurance business. He and his employeesthe standard mileage rate or actual expenses. Gas Insurance Repairsuse his two pickup trucks and van for the repairIf you want to use the standard mileage rate Oil Garage rent Tiresshop. Chris alternates using his two cars for thefor a car you lease, you must use it for the entire Tolls Parking fees
insurance business. No one else uses the carslease period. For leases that began on or before If you have fully depreciated a car that youfor business purposes. Chris can use the stan-December 31, 1997, the standard mileage rate still use in your business, you can continue todard mileage rate for the business use of themust be used for the entire portion of the lease claim your other actual car expenses. Continuepickup trucks, van, and the cars because heperiod (including renewals) that is after 1997. to keep records, as explained later in chapter 5.never has more than four vehicles used for busi-You must make the choice to use the stan- ness at the same time.dard mileage rate by the due date (including Business and personal use. If you use your
extensions) of your return. You cannot revoke car for both business and personal purposes,Example 4. Maureen owns a car and fourthe choice. However, in later years, you can you must divide your expenses between busi-vans that are used in her housecleaning busi-switch from the standard mileage rate to the ness and personal use. You can divide yourness. Her employees use the vans and she usesactual expenses method. If you change to the expense based on the miles driven for eachthe car to travel to various customers. Maureenactual expenses method in a later year, but purpose.cannot use the standard mileage rate for the carbefore your car is fully depreciated, you have to or the vans. This is because all five vehicles are Example. You are a sales representativeestimate the remaining useful life of the car and used in Maureen's business at the same time. for a clothing firm and drive your car 20,000use straight line depreciation. She must use actual expenses for all vehicles. miles during the year: 12,000 miles for businessFor more information about depreciation in-
and 8,000 miles for personal use. You can claimcluded in the standard mileage rate, see Excep- Interest. If you are an employee, you cannot
only 60% (12,000 ÷  20,000) of the cost of oper-tion under Methods of depreciation  under deduct any interest paid on a car loan. This
ating your car as a business expense.Depreciation Deduction, later. applies even if you use the car 100% for busi-
ness as an employee. Employer-provided vehicle. If you use a ve-Standard mileage rate not allowed. You However, if you are self-employed and use hicle provided by your employer for businesscannot use the standard mileage rate if you: your car in your business, you can deduct that purposes, you can deduct your actual un-
part of the interest expense that represents your reimbursed car expenses. You cannot use the• Use the car for hire (such as a taxi), business use of the car. For example, if you use standard mileage rate. See Vehicle Provided by• Use five or more cars at the same time (as your car 60% for business, you can deduct 60% Your Employer in chapter 6.in fleet operations), of the interest on Schedule C (Form 1040). You
Interest on car loans. If you are an employee,cannot deduct the part of the interest expense• Claimed a depreciation deduction for the you cannot deduct any interest paid on a carthat represents your personal use of the car.car using any method other than straight loan. This interest is treated as personal interestline, for example, MACRS (as discussed If you use a home equity loan to and is not deductible. If you are self-employedlater under Depreciation Deduction), purchase your car, you may be able to and use your car in that business, see Interest,deduct the interest. See Publication
TIP• Claimed a section 179 deduction (dis- earlier, under Standard Mileage Rate.936, Home Mortgage Interest Deduction, forcussed later) on the car, Taxes paid on your car. If you are an em-more information.
• Claimed the special depreciation allow- ployee, you can deduct personal property taxes
ance on the car, Personal property taxes. If you itemize your paid on your car if you itemize deductions. Enter
deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040), you can the amount paid on line 7 of Schedule A (Form• Claimed actual car expenses after 1997 deduct on line 7 state and local personal prop- 1040).for a car you leased, or erty taxes on motor vehicles. You can take this Sales taxes. Generally, sales taxes on your• Are a rural mail carrier who received a deduction even if you use the standard mileage car are part of your car's basis and are recov-qualified reimbursement. (See Rural mail rate or if you do not use the car for business. ered through depreciation, discussed later.carriers, earlier.) If you are self-employed and use your car in However, to the extent the car is not used in youryour business, you can deduct the business part trade or business, you can choose to deduct theFive or more cars. If you own or lease five of state and local personal property taxes on nonbusiness part of the sales tax deduction onor more cars that are used for business at the motor vehicles on Schedule C, Schedule C-EZ, Schedule A (Form 1040). You can only choosesame time, you cannot use the standard mile- or Schedule F (Form 1040). If you itemize your to deduct state and local sales taxes as anage rate for the business use of any car. How- deductions, you can include the remainder of itemized deduction if you choose not to deductever, you may be able to deduct your actual your state and local personal property taxes on state and local income taxes.expenses for operating each of the cars in your the car on Schedule A (Form 1040).
business. See Actual Car Expenses , later, for Fines and collateral. You cannot deduct finesParking fees and tolls. In addition to usinginformation on how to figure your deduction. you pay or collateral you forfeit for traffic viola-the standard mileage rate, you can deduct anyYou are not using five or more cars for busi- tions.business-related parking fees and tolls. (Parkingness at the same time if you alternate using (use fees that you pay to park your car at your place Casualty and theft losses. If your car is dam-at different times) the cars for business. of work are nondeductible commuting ex- aged, destroyed, or stolen, you may be able toThe following examples illustrate the rules penses.) deduct part of the loss that is not covered byfor when you can and cannot use the standard insurance. See Publication 547, Casualties, Di-Sale, trade-in, or other disposition. If youmileage rate for five or more cars. sasters, and Thefts, for information on deductingsell, trade in, or otherwise dispose of your car, a loss on your car.Example 1. Marcia, a salesperson, owns you may have a gain or loss on the transaction
three cars and two vans that she alternates or an adjustment to the basis of your new car. Depreciation and section 179 deductions.
using for calling on her customers. She can use See Disposition of a Car, later. Generally, the cost of a car, plus sales tax and
Page 16 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 17 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
improvements, is a capital expense. Because There is a limit on the total section 179 If you are married and file a joint return, you
deduction, special depreciation allow- and your spouse are treated as one taxpayer inthe benefits last longer than 1 year, you gener-
ance, and depreciation deduction for determining any reduction to the dollar limit,ally cannot deduct a capital expense. However,
TIP
cars, trucks, and vans, that may reduce or elimi- regardless of which of you purchased the prop-you can recover this cost through the section
nate any benefit from claiming the section 179 erty or placed it in service.179 deduction (the deduction allowed by section
deduction. See Depreciation Limits , later.179 of the Internal Revenue Code), special de- If you and your spouse file separate returns,You can claim the section 179 deductionpreciation allowance, and depreciation deduc- you are treated as one taxpayer for the dollaronly in the year you place the car in service. Fortions. Depreciation allows you to recover the limit. You must allocate the dollar limit (after anythis purpose, a car is placed in service when it iscost over more than 1 year by deducting part of it reduction) between you.ready and available for a specific use, whether ineach year. The section 179 deduction , special
a trade or business, a tax-exempt activity, a For more information on the above sectiondepreciation allowance , and depreciation de-
personal activity, or for the production of in- 179 deduction limits, see Publication 946.ductions are discussed later. come. Even if you are not using the property, it is Limit for sport utility and certain other ve-Generally, there are limits on these deduc- in service when it is ready and available for its hicles. For sport utility and certain other vehi-tions. Special rules apply if you use your car specific use. cles placed in service in 2008, the portion of the50% or less in your work or business. A car first used for personal purposes cannot vehicle's cost taken into account in figuring yourqualify for the deduction in a later year when itsYou can claim a section 179 deduction and section 179 deduction is limited to $25,000. Thisuse changes to business.use a depreciation method other than straight rule applies to any four-wheeled vehicle prima-
line only if you do not use the standard mileage rily designed or used to carry passengers overExample. In 2007 you bought a new car andrate to figure your business-related car ex- public streets, roads, or highways, that is notused it for personal purposes. In 2008, you be-penses in the year you first place a car in serv- subject to any of the passenger automobile lim-gan to use it for business. Changing its use toice. its explained under Depreciation Limits , later,business use does not qualify the cost of your and that is rated at no more than 14,000 poundsIf you claim either a section 179 deduction or car for a section 179 deduction in 2008. How- gross vehicle weight. However, the $25,000 limituse a depreciation method other than straight ever, you can claim a depreciation deduction for does not apply to any vehicle:line in the year you first place a car in service, the business use of the car. See Depreciation
you cannot use the standard mileage rate on Deduction, later. • Designed to have a seating capacity of
that car in any future year. more than nine persons behind the
driver's seat,More than 50% business use requirement.
You must use the property more than 50% forCar defined. For depreciation purposes, a car • Equipped with a cargo area of at least 6
business to claim any section 179 deduction. Ifis any four-wheeled vehicle (including a truck or feet in interior length that is an open area
you used the property more than 50% for busi- or is designed for use as an open area butvan) that is made primarily for use on public ness, multiply the cost of the property by the is enclosed by a cap and is not readilystreets, roads, and highways. Its unloaded gross percentage of business use. The result is the accessible directly from the passengervehicle weight must not be more than 6,000 cost of the property that can qualify for the sec- compartment, orpounds. A car includes any part, component, or tion 179 deduction.other item that is physically attached to it or is • That has an integral enclosure, fully en-
usually included in the purchase price. closing the driver compartment and loadExample. Peter purchased a car in April
carrying device, does not have seatingA car does not include: 2008 for $19,500 and he used it 60% for busi-
rearward of the driver's seat, and has noness. The total cost of Peter's car that qualifies• An ambulance, hearse, or combination body section protruding more than 30 in-for the section 179 deduction is $11,700ambulance-hearse used directly in a busi- ches ahead of the leading edge of the($19,500 cost ×  60% business use). But seeness, windshield.Limit on total section 179, special depreciation
allowance, and depreciation deduction , dis-• A vehicle used directly in the business of
Limit on total section 179, special depreci-cussed later.transporting persons or property for pay or ation allowance, and depreciation deduc-hire, or tion. Generally, the total amount of sectionLimits. There are limits on:• A truck or van that is a qualified nonper- 179, special depreciation allowance, and depre-
sonal use vehicle. ciation deduction that you can claim for a quali-• The amount of the section 179 deduction,
fied car that you placed in service in 2008 is• The section 179 deduction for sport utilityQualified nonpersonal use vehicles. $10,960. The limit is reduced if your businessand certain other vehicles, andThese are vehicles that by their nature are not use of the car is less than 100%. See Deprecia-
tion Limits, later, for more information.likely to be used more than a minimal amount for • The total amount of the section 179 de-
duction, special depreciation allowance,personal purposes. They include trucks and
Example. In the earlier example  underand depreciation deduction (discussedvans that have been specially modified so that
More than 50% business use requirement, Peterlater) you can claim for a qualified prop-they are not likely to be used more than a mini-
had a car with a qualifying cost (for purposes oferty.mal amount for personal purposes, such as by
the section 179 deduction) of $11,700. How-installation of permanent shelving and painting ever, Peter's total section 179, special deprecia-Limit on the amount of the section 179the vehicle to display advertising or the com- tion allowance, and depreciation deduction isdeduction. For 2008, the total amount youpany's name. Delivery trucks with seating only limited to $6,576 ($10,960 limit x 60% businesscan choose to deduct under section 179 gener-for the driver, or only for the driver plus a folding use).ally cannot be more than $250,000.jump seat are qualified nonpersonal use vehi- If the cost of your qualifying section 179cles. property placed in service in 2008 is over Cost of car. For purposes of the section 179$800,000, you must reduce the $250,000 dollarMore information. See Depreciation De- deduction, the cost of the car does not includelimit (but not below zero) by the amount of costduction, later, for more information on how to any amount figured by reference to any otherover $800,000. If the cost of your section 179depreciate your vehicle. property held by you at any time. For example, ifproperty placed in service during 2008 is you buy (for cash and a trade-in) a new car to$1,050,000 or more, you cannot take a section use in your business, your cost for purposes of179 deduction.Section 179 Deduction the section 179 deduction does not include yourThe total amount you can deduct under sec- adjusted basis in the car you trade in for the newThe section 179 deduction allows you to treat tion 179 each year after you apply the limits car. Your cost includes only the cash you paid.part or all of the business cost of a car as a listed above cannot be more than the taxable
current expense rather than taking depreciation income from the active conduct of any trade or Basis of car for depreciation. The amount
deductions over a number of years. business during the year. of the section 179 deduction reduces your basis
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 17

Page 18 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
in your car. If you choose the section 179 deduc- 2008. The allowance is an additional deprecia- Depreciation Deduction
tion, you must subtract the amount of the deduc- tion deduction of 50% of the car's depreciable
If you use actual car expenses to figure yourtion from the cost of your car. The resulting basis (after any section 179 deduction, but
deduction for a car you own and use in youramount is the basis in your car that you use to before figuring your regular depreciation deduc-
business, you can claim a depreciation deduc-figure your depreciation deduction. tion under MACRS). The special depreciation tion: that is, you can deduct a certain amountallowance applies only for the first year the car isWhen to choose. If you want to take the sec- each year as a recovery of your cost or otherplaced in service. To qualify for the allowancetion 179 deduction, you must make the choice in basis in your car.more than 50% of the use of the car must be in athe tax year you both purchase the car and place You generally need to know the followingqualified business use (as defined under Depre-it in service for business or work. things about the car you intend to depreciate.ciation Deduction, later.
How to choose. Employees use Form 2106 to • Your basis in the car.Your combined section 179 deduction, spe-make this choice and report the section 179 cial depreciation allowance, and regular • The date you place the car in service.deduction. All others use Form 4562. MACRS depreciation deduction is limited to theFile the appropriate form with either of the • The method of depreciation and recoverymaximum allowable depreciation deduction forfollowing. period you will use.cars of $10,960 ($2,960 if you elect not to claim
• Your original tax return filed for the year the special depreciation allowance). For trucks
the property was placed in service Basis. Your basis in a car for figuring depreci-and vans the limit is $11,160 ($3,160 if you elect
(whether or not you file it timely). ation is generally its cost. This includes anynot to claim the special depreciation allowance).
amount you borrow or pay in cash, other prop-See Depreciation Limits, later in this chapter.• An amended return filed within the time erty, or services.prescribed by law. An election made on an Generally, you figure depreciation on yourQualified car. To be a qualified car (includingamended return must specify the item of car, truck, or van, using your unadjusted basistrucks and vans), the car must meet all of thesection 179 property to which the election (see Unadjusted basis, later). However, in someapplies and the part of the cost of each following tests. situations you will use your adjusted basis (yoursuch item to be taken into account. The • You purchased the car new on or after basis reduced by depreciation allowed or allow-amended return must also include any re- January 1, 2008, but only if no binding able in earlier years). For one of these situationssulting adjustments to taxable income. written contract to acquire the car existed see Exception under Methods of depreciation,
before January 1, 2008, later.
You must keep records that show the If you change the use of a car from personal• You placed the car in service in your tradespecific identification of each piece of to business, your basis for depreciation is theor business in 2008,qualifying section 179 property. These lesser of the fair market value or your adjusted
CAUTION
!
records must show how you acquired the prop- • You used the car more than 50% in a basis in the car on the date of conversion. Addi-
erty, the person you acquired it from, and when tional rules concerning basis are discussed laterqualified business use.
you placed it in service. in this chapter under Unadjusted basis.
Example. Dan purchased a new car forRevoking an election. An election (or any Placed in service. You generally place a car
$20,500 in June 2008, and used it 100% in hisspecification made in the election) to take a in service when it is available for use in your
business. The car is qualified property. Dan'ssection 179 deduction for 2008 can be revoked work or business, in an income-producing activ-
without IRS approval by filing an amended re- unadjusted basis is $20,500. Dan chooses not ity, or in a personal activity. Depreciation begins
turn. The amended return must be filed within to claim any section 179 deduction but he does when the car is placed in service for use in your
the time prescribed by law. The amended return choose to claim the special depreciation allow- work or business or for the production of income.
must also include any resulting adjustment to ance. Dan figures his special allowance to be For purposes of computing depreciation, if
taxable income. Once made, the revocation is you first start using the car only for personal use$10,250 ($20,500 x 50%).
irrevocable. and later convert it to business use, you placeDan chooses the MACRS 200% declining
the car in service on the date of conversion.balance method and figures his regular depreci-Recapture of section 179 deduction. To be
ation deduction under MACRS (discussed later)eligible to claim the section 179 deduction, you Car placed in service and disposed of in
to be $2,050 (($20,500 − $10,250) x 20%). Themust use your car more than 50% for business the same year. If you place a car in service
total section 179, special depreciation allow-or work in the year you acquired it. If your busi- and dispose of it in the same tax year, you
ance, and MACRS depreciation deduction isness use of the car is 50% or less in a later tax cannot claim any depreciation deduction for that
$12,300 ($10,250 + $2,050). However, Dan'syear during the recovery period, you have to car.
recapture (include in income) in that later year depreciation deduction is limited to $10,960.
Methods of depreciation. Generally, you fig-any excess depreciation. Any section 179 de- Therefore, Dan reports $10,960 as depreciation
ure depreciation on cars using the Modified Ac-duction claimed on the car is included in calcu- for his car in 2008. See Depreciation Limits , celerated Cost Recovery System (MACRS).lating the excess depreciation. For information later. MACRS is discussed later in this chapter.on this calculation, see Excess depreciation ,
later in this chapter under Car Used 50% or Less Election not to claim the special depreciation Exception. If you used the standard mile-
for Business. allowance. You can elect not to claim the spe- age rate in the first year of business use and
cial depreciation allowance for your car, truck, or change to the actual expenses method in a laterDispositions. If you dispose of a car on which
year, you cannot depreciate your car under thevan, that is qualified property. If you make thisyou had claimed the section 179 deduction, the
MACRS rules. You must use straight line depre-election, it applies to all 5-year property placedamount of that deduction is treated as a depreci-
ciation over the estimated remaining useful lifein service during the year.ation deduction for recapture purposes. You
of the car.To make the election, attach a statement totreat any gain on the disposition of the property
To figure depreciation under the straight lineyour timely filed return (including extensions)as ordinary income up to the amount of the
method, you must reduce your basis in the carsection 179 deduction and any allowable depre- indicating the class of property (5-year for cars)
(but not below zero) by a set rate per mile for allciation (unless you establish the amount actually for which you are making the election and that miles for which you used the standard mileageallowed). For information on the disposition of a you are electing not to claim the special depreci- rate. The rate per mile varies depending on thecar, see Disposition of a Car, later. ation allowance for qualified property acquired year(s) you used the standard mileage rate. Forafter December 31, 2007. the rate(s) to use, see Depreciation adjustment
Unless you elect not to claim the spe- when you used the standard mileage rate underSpecial Depreciation Allowance
cial depreciation allowance, you must Disposition of a Car, later.
reduce the car's adjusted basis by theYou may be able to claim the special deprecia- This reduction of basis is in addition to those
CAUTION
!
amount of the allowance, even if the allowancetion allowance for your car, truck, or van, if it is basis adjustments described later under Unad-
was not claimed.qualified property and was placed in service in justed basis. You must use your adjusted basis
Page 18 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 19 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
in your car to figure your depreciation deduction. Example. You use a car only for personal basis of the old car (figured as if 100% of
For additional information on the straight line purposes during the first 6 months of the year. the car's use had been for business pur-
method of depreciation, see Publication 946. During the last 6 months of the year, you drive poses) plus any additional amount you
the car a total of 15,000 miles of which 12,000 paid for the new car. You then figure your
miles are for business. This gives you a busi- depreciation deduction for the new car be-More-than-50%-use test. Generally, you
ness use percentage of 80% (12,000 ÷  15,000) ginning with the date you placed it in serv-must use your car more than 50% for qualified
for that period. Your business use for the year is ice. You make this election by completingbusiness use (defined next) during the year to
40% (80% ×  6/12). Form 2106, Part II, Section D. This methoduse MACRS. You must meet this
is explained later, beginning at Effect ofmore-than-50%-use test each year of the recov- Limits. The amount you can claim for section trade-in on basis.ery period (6 years under MACRS) for your car. 179, the special depreciation allowance, andIf your business use is 50% or less, you must 2. If you do not make the election describeddepreciation deductions may be limited. Theuse the straight line method to depreciate your in (1), you must figure depreciation sepa-maximum amount you can claim depends on thecar. This is explained later under Car Used 50% rately for the remaining basis of the old caryear in which you placed your car in service. Youor Less for Business. and for any additional amount you paid forhave to reduce the maximum amount if you did
the new car. You must apply two deprecia-not use the car exclusively for business. SeeQualified business use. A qualified business tion limits (see Depreciation Limits, later).Depreciation Limits, later.use is any use in your trade or business. It does The limit that applies to the remaining ba-
not include use for the production of income Unadjusted basis. You use your unadjusted sis of the old car generally is the amount
(investment use). However, you do combine basis (often referred to as your basis or your that would have been allowed had you not
your business and investment use to compute basis for depreciation) to figure your deprecia- traded in the old car. The limit that applies
your depreciation deduction for the tax year. tion using the MACRS depreciation chart, ex- to the additional amount you paid for the
plained later under Modified Accelerated Cost new car generally is the limit that appliesUse of your car by another person. Do not
Recovery System (MACRS) . Your unadjusted for the tax year, reduced by the deprecia-treat any use of your car by another person as
basis for figuring depreciation is your original tion allowance for the remaining basis ofuse in your trade or business unless that use
basis increased or decreased by certain the old car. You must use Form 4562 tomeets one of the following conditions.
amounts. compute your depreciation deduction. You
• It is directly connected with your business. To figure your unadjusted basis, begin with cannot use Form 2106, Part II, Section D.
your car's original basis, which generally is its This method is explained in Publication• It is properly reported by you as income to
cost. Cost includes sales taxes (see Sales taxes 946.the other person (and, if you have to, you
earlier), destination charges, and dealer prepa-withhold tax on the income). If you elect to use the method described inration. Increase your basis by any substantial (1), you must do so on a timely filed tax return• It results in a payment of fair market rent. improvements you make to your car, such as (including extensions). Otherwise, you must useThis includes any payment to you for the adding air conditioning or a new engine. De- the method described in (2).use of your car. crease your basis by any section 179 deduction,
special depreciation allowance, gas guzzler tax, Effect of trade-in on basis. The discussion
clean fuel vehicle deduction, and alternative mo- that follows applies to trade-ins of cars in 2008,Business use changes. If you used your car
tor vehicle credit. where the election was made to treat the trans-more than 50% in qualified business use in the
See Form 8910 for information on the alter- action as a tax-free disposition of the old car andyear you placed it in service, but 50% or less in a
native motor vehicle credit. the purchase of the new car. For information onlater year (including the year of disposition), you
how to figure depreciation for cars involved in ahave to change to the straight line method of If your business use later falls to 50% like-kind exchange (trade-in) in 2008, for whichdepreciation. See Qualified business use 50% or less, you may have to recapture the election was not made, see Publication 946or less in a later year  under Car Used 50% or (include in your income) any excess
CAUTION
! and Temporary Regulations sectionLess for Business, later. depreciation. See Car Used 50% or Less for 1.168(i)-6(d)(3).Business, later, for more information.Property does not cease to be used
Traded car used only for business. If youmore than 50% in qualified business If you acquired the car by gift or inheritance,
trade in a car that you used only in your businessuse by reason of a transfer at death. see Publication 551, Basis of Assets, for infor-
TIP
for another car that will be used only in yourmation on your basis in the car.
business, your original basis in the new car isImprovements. A major improvement to aUse for more than one purpose. If you use your adjusted basis in the old car, plus anycar is treated as a new item of 5-year recoveryyour car for more than one purpose during the additional amount you pay for the new car.property. It is treated as placed in service in thetax year, you must allocate the use to the vari-
year the improvement is made. It does not mat-ous purposes. You do this on the basis of mile- Example 1. Paul trades in a car that has an
ter how old the car is when the improvement isage. Figure the percentage of qualified business adjusted basis of $5,000 for a new car. In addi-
added. Follow the same steps for depreciatinguse by dividing the number of miles you drive tion, he pays cash of $20,000 for the new car.
the improvement as you would for depreciatingyour car for business purposes during the year His original basis of the new car is $25,000 (his
the original cost of the car. However, you mustby the total number of miles you drive the car $5,000 adjusted basis in the old car plus the
treat the improvement and the car as a wholeduring the year for any purpose. $20,000 cash paid). Paul's unadjusted basis is
when applying the limits on the depreciation $25,000 unless he claims the section 179 de-
deductions. Your car's depreciation deductionChange from personal to business use. If duction, special depreciation allowance, or has
for the year (plus any section 179 deduction,you change the use of a car from 100% personal other increases or decreases to his original ba-
special depreciation allowance, and deprecia-use to business use during the tax year, you sis, discussed under Unadjusted basis, earlier.
tion on any improvements) cannot be more thanmay not have mileage records for the time
the depreciation limit that applies for that year.before the change to business use. In this case, Example 2. In September 2005, Marcia pur-
See Depreciation Limits, later.you figure the percentage of business use for chased a car for $26,000 and placed it in service
the year as follows. for 100% use in her business. Marcia did notCar trade-in. If you traded one car (the ªold claim a section 179 deduction. Marcia's unad-carº) in on another car (the ªnew carº) in 2008,1. Determine the percentage of business use justed basis for the car was $26,000. For 2005there are two ways you can treat the transaction.for the period following the change. Do this through 2007, Marcia figured her depreciation
by dividing business miles by total miles deduction using the MACRS depreciation chart1. You can elect to treat the transaction as adriven during that period. for those years.tax-free disposition of the old car and the
2. Multiply the percentage in (1) by a fraction. purchase of the new car. If you make this In September 2008, Marcia traded that car in
The numerator (top number) is the number election, you treat the old car as disposed and paid $14,200 cash for a new car to be used
of months the car is used for business and of at the time of the trade-in. The deprecia- 100% in her business. Marcia is allowed
the denominator (bottom number) is 12. ble basis of the new car is the adjusted one-half of the MACRS depreciation amount
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 19

Page 20 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
figured for 2008 for her old car. (See Disposition Mark figures the unadjusted basis for depre-
Unadjusted basis of part of new car of a Car, later.) ciating his new van as shown next.
that can be treated as newly Marcia figures her basis in the new car as purchased MACRS property $12,310Cost of old van $19,500follows. Less: Total depreciation allowed on 
Additional basis (cash paid) for newthe business cost of old van Cost of old car $26,000 car that is treated as newly from 2004±2008 −12,965Less total depreciation allowed: purchased MACRS property  $10,000Adjusted basis of old van before2008Ð($26,000 ×  .1152) ×  1/2
trade-in adjustment $ 6,535(Limit: $1,675) $1,498
2007Ð($26,000 ×  .192) Trade-in adjustment: Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery System(Limit: $2,850) 2,850 Depreciation at 100% business use:2006Ð($26,000 ×  .32) (MACRS). The Modified Accelerated Cost Re-2008Ð($9,750 ×  .1152) ×  1/2(Limit: $4,700) 4,700 covery System (MACRS) is the name given to(Limit: $1,675) $  5622005Ð($26,000 ×  .20) the tax rules for getting back (recovering)2007Ð($9,750 ×  .1152)(Limit: $2,960) 2,960 (Limit: $1,675) 1,123 through depreciation deductions the cost ofTotal depreciation allowed ±12,008 2006Ð($9,750 ×  .192) property used in a trade or business or to pro-
(Limit: $2,850) 1,872 duce income.Adjusted basis of old car and basis of 2005Ð($9,750 ×  .32)part of new car that can be treated as The maximum amount you can deduct is(Limit: $4,800) 3,120newly purchased MACRS property $ 13,992 limited, depending on the year you placed your2004Ð($19,500 ×  .50)1
($9,750 x .20) car in service. See Depreciation Limits, later.Additional basis (cash paid) for new (Limit: $10,610) 10,610car that is treated as newly purchased Recovery period. Under MACRS, cars areTotal $17,287MACRS property +14,200 classified as 5-year property. You actually de-Less: Actual depreciation 
allowed −12,965 preciate the cost of a car, truck, or van over aTotal basis of new car $28,192 Excess of 100% over actual $ 4,322 period of 6 calendar years. This is because your
car is generally treated as placed in service inLess: Lesser of excess amount
($4,322) or adjusted basis the middle of the year and you claim deprecia-Traded car used partly in business. If you
of old van ($6,535) − 4,322 tion for one-half of both the first year and thetrade in a car that you used partly in your busi-
sixth year.ness for a new car that you will use in your Unadjusted basis of part of new van business, you must make a ªtrade-inº adjust- Depreciation deduction for certain Indianthat can be treated as newly ment for the personal use of the old car. This purchased MACRS property $ 2,213 reservation property. Shorter recovery peri-adjustment has the effect of reducing your basis ods are provided under MACRS for qualifiedin your old car, but not below zero, for purposes Additional basis (cash paid) for new Indian reservation property placed in service onof figuring your depreciation deduction for the van that is treated as newly Indian reservations after 1993 and before 2009.purchased MACRS property $12,500new car. (This adjustment is not used, however, The recovery period that applies for a busi-when you determine the gain or loss on the later ness-use car is 3 years instead of 5 years. How-150% special depreciation allowance ($19,500 x 50% =disposition of the new car. See Publication 544, $9,750). Unadjusted basis of the car: ($19,500 − $9,750 ever, the depreciation limits, discussed later, willSales and Other Dispositions of Assets, for in- = $9,750). Regular depreciation: ($9,750 x .20 = still apply.$1,950). Total depreciation ($9,750 + $1,950 =formation on how to report the disposition of
$11,700) cannot exceed first year limit ($10,610). For more information on the qualifications foryour car.)
this shorter recovery period and the percent-To figure the unadjusted basis of your new
ages to use in figuring the depreciation deduc-car for depreciation, first add to your adjusted Example 2. Rob paid $21,000 for a new car
tion, see chapter 4 of Publication 946.basis in the old car any additional amount you that he placed in service in 2005. He used it
pay for the new car. Then subtract from that total partly for business in 2005 (9,600 business Depreciation methods. You can use onethe excess, if any, of: miles of 15,000 total miles), 2006 (12,000 busi- of the following methods to depreciate your car.
ness miles of 16,000 total miles), and 20071. The total of the amounts that would have • The 200% declining balance method(14,400 miles of 18,000 total miles). He used thebeen allowable as depreciation during the (200% DB) over a 5-year recovery periodstandard mileage rate in those years to claim thetax years before the trade if 100% of the that switches to the straight line methodbusiness use of his car. (See Depreciation ad-use of the car had been business and in- when that method provides an equal orjustment when you used the standard mileagevestment use, over greater deduction.rate under Disposition of a Car, later.)
2. The total of the amounts actually allowed On January 3, 2008, Rob traded in this car • The 150% declining balance methodas depreciation during those years. and paid an additional $10,000 for his new car. (150% DB) over a 5-year recovery period
Rob figures the unadjusted basis for his new car that switches to the straight line methodFor information about figuring depreciation, see
as shown next.Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery System when that method provides an equal or
(MACRS), which follows Example 2, later. greater deduction.Cost of old car $21,000
Less: Total depreciation allowed: • The straight line method (SL) over aExample 1. In March, Mark traded his 2004 2007Ð14,400 mi. ×  .19 $2,736 5-year recovery period.van (placed in service in June 2004) for a new 2006Ð12,000 mi. ×  .17 2,040
2008 model. He used the old van 75% for busi- 2005Ð 9,600 mi. ×  .17 1,632 − 6,408
ness and he used the new van 75% for business Adjusted basis of old car If you use Table 4-1  (discussed later
before trade-in adjustment $14,592in 2008. Mark claimed actual expenses (includ- under MACRS depreciation chart ) to
ing $12,965 depreciation expense) for the busi- determine your depreciation rate for
TIP
Trade-in adjustment:ness use of the old van since 2004. He did not 2008, you do not need to determine in what yearDepreciation at 100% business use:claim a section 179 deduction for the old or the using the straight line method provides an equal2007Ð18,000 mi. ×  .19 $3,420new van. or greater deduction. This is because the chart2006Ð16,000 mi. ×  .17 2,720
Mark paid $19,500 for the 2004 van in June has the switch to the straight line method built2005Ð15,000 mi. ×  .17 2,550
2004. He paid an additional $12,500 when he Total $8,690 into its rates.
acquired the 2008 van. Mark was allowed 1/2 of Less: Actual depreciation Before choosing a method, you may wish toallowed − 6,408the depreciation deduction amount (which is in- consider the following facts.Excess of 100% over actual $2,282cluded in the $12,965 depreciation expense to-
• Using the straight line method providestal) for his old van for 2008, the year of Less: Lesser of excess amount
equal yearly deductions throughout the re-disposition, as explained later under Disposition ($2,282) or adjusted basis
 of old car ($14,592) − 2,282of a Car. covery period.
Page 20 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 21 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 4-1.  2008 MACRS Depreciation Chart
(Use to Figure Depreciation for 2008.)
If you claim actual expenses for your car, use the chart below to find the For cars placed in service before 2008, you must use the same
depreciation method and percentage to use for your 2008 return. method you used on last year's return unless a decline in your
business use requires you to change to the straight line method. (See
First, using the left column, find the date you first placed the car in service. Car Used 50% or Less for Business.)
Then select the depreciation method and percentage from column (a), (b),
or (c) following the rules explained in this chapter. Multiply the unadjusted basis of your car by your business use
percentage. Multiply the result by the percentage you found in the
chart to find the amount of your depreciation deduction for 2008. (Also
see Depreciation Limits.)
If you placed your car in service after September of any year and you placed other business property in service during the same
year, you may have to use the Jan. 1 ÐSept. 30 percentage instead of the Oct. 1ÐDec. 31 percentage for your car.
CAUTION
!
To find out if this applies to you, determine: 1) the basis of all business property you placed in service after September of that year and 2) the basis
of all business property you placed in service during that entire year. If the basis of the property placed in service after September is not more than
40% of the basis of all property (certain property is excluded) placed in service for the entire year, use the percentage for Jan. 1 ÐSept. 30 for
figuring depreciation for your car. See Which Convention Applies? in chapter 4 of Publication 946 for more details.
Example. You buy machinery (basis of $32,000) in May 2008 and a new van (basis of $20,000) in October 2008, both used 100% in your
business. You use the percentage for Jan. 1ÐSept. 30, 2008, to figure the depreciation for your van. This is because the $20,000 basis of the
property (van) placed in service after September is not more than 40% of the basis of all property placed in service during the year (40% ×
($32,000 + 20,000) = $20,800).
(a) (b) (c)
200% Declining 150% Declining Straight Line Date Placed In Service Balance (200% DB)1 Balance (150% DB)1 (SL)
Oct. 1 Ð Dec. 31, 2008 200 DB  5.0% 150 DB  3.75% SL  2.5%
Jan. 1 Ð Sept. 30, 2008 200 DB 20.0 150 DB 15.0 SL 10.0
Oct. 1 Ð Dec. 31, 2007 200 DB 38.0 150 DB 28.88 SL 20.0
Jan. 1 Ð Sept. 30, 2007 200 DB 32.0 150 DB 25.5 SL 20.0
Oct. 1 Ð Dec. 31, 2006 200 DB 22.8 150 DB 20.21 SL 20.0
Jan. 1 Ð Sept. 30, 2006 200 DB 19.2 150 DB 17.85 SL 20.0
Oct. 1 Ð Dec. 31, 2005 200 DB 13.68 150 DB 16.4 SL 20.0
Jan. 1 Ð Sept. 30, 2005 200 DB 11.52 150 DB 16.66 SL 20.0
Oct. 1 Ð Dec. 31, 2004 200 DB 10.94 150 DB 16.41 SL 20.0
Jan. 1 Ð Sept. 30, 2004 200 DB 11.52 150 DB 16.66 SL 20.0
Oct. 1 Ð Dec. 31, 2003 200 DB  9.58 150 DB 14.35 SL 17.5
Jan. 1 Ð Sept. 30, 2003 200 DB  5.76 150 DB  8.33 SL 10.0
 Prior to 20032
1 You can use this column only if the business use of your car is more than 50%.
2 If your car was subject to the maximum limits for depreciation and you have unrecovered basis in the car, you can continue to claim depreciation. See 
Deductions in years after the recovery period under Depreciation Limits.
• Using the declining balance methods pro- Depreciation Chart in this publication if any one property placed in service and disposed
vides greater deductions during the earlier of in the same year) was more thanof the following four conditions applies to you.
recovery years with the deductions gener- 40% of your total bases in all property
1. You file your return on a fiscal year basis.ally getting smaller each year. you placed in service during the year.
2. You file your return for a short tax year
4. You placed qualified property in service on(less than 12 months).MACRS depreciation chart. A 2008 MACRS an Indian reservation.Depreciation Chart and instructions are included 3. During the year, all of the following condi-in this chapter as Table 4-1. Using this table will tions apply. Depreciation in future years. If you usemake it easy for you to figure the 2008 deprecia- the percentages from the chart, you generallytion deduction for your car. A similar chart ap- a. You placed some property in service must continue to use them for the entire recov-pears in the Instructions for Form 2106. from January through September. ery period of your car. However, you cannot
You may have to use the tables in continue to use the chart if your basis in your carb. You placed some property in service
Publication 946 instead of using this is adjusted because of a casualty. In that case,from October through December.MACRS Depreciation Chart. for the year of the adjustment and the remaining
CAUTION
!
c. Your basis in the property you placed in recovery period, figure the depreciation withoutYou must use the Depreciation Tables  in service from October through Decem- the chart using your adjusted basis in the car atPublication 946 rather than the 2008 MACRS ber (excluding nonresidential real prop- the end of the year of the adjustment and over
erty, residential rental property, and the remaining recovery period. See Figuring the
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 21

Page 22 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
MaximumDeduction Without Using the Tables in chapter 4 and investment purposes. See Reduction for
 Depreciation Deduction personal use later.of Publication 946.
 for Cars
In future years, do not use the chart in Example. Marie purchased a car in JuneDate 4th &this edition of the publication. Instead, 2008 for $20,000 to use exclusively in her busi-Placed 1st 2nd 3rd Lateruse the chart in the publication or the
TIP ness. She does not claim the section 179 deduc-In Service Year Year Year Yearsform instructions for those future years. tion, but she does claim the special depreciation
2008 $10,9601 $4,800 $2,850 $1,775 allowance, and she chooses the 200% DBDisposition of car during recovery period. method of depreciation.2007 3,060 4,900 2,850 1,775If you dispose of the car before the end of the Marie first figures her special depreciation2006 2,960 4,800 2,850 1,775recovery period, you are generally allowed a half allowance to be $10,000 ($20,000 x 50%). Marieyear of depreciation in the year of disposition 2005 2,960 4,700 2,850 1,675 next figures her car's unadjusted basis to be
unless you purchased the car during the last $10,000 ($20,000 ± $10,000).2004 10,6101 4,800 2,850 1,675quarter of a year. See Depreciation deduction Marie's MACRS depreciation (using the rate5/06/2003± 10,7102 4,900 2,950 1,775for the year of disposition under Disposition of a from Table 4-1) is $2,000 ($10,000 (unadjusted12/31/2003Car, later, for information on how to figure the basis) ×  20%). Marie's total section 179, special
1/01/2003± 7,6603 4,900 2,950 1,775 depreciation allowance, and MACRS deprecia-depreciation allowed in the year of disposition. 5/05/2003 tion deduction is $12,000 ($10,000 + $2,000).How to use the 2008 chart. To figure your However, the maximum amount she can deduct2001±2002 7,6603 4,900 2,950 1,775
depreciation deduction for 2008, find the per- for depreciation is $10,960. (See the Maximum2000 3,060 4,900 2,950 1,775centage in the column of the chart based on the Depreciation Deduction for Cars table earlier.)
1999 3,060 5,000 2,950 1,775date that you first placed the car in service and
Reduction for personal use. The deprecia-the depreciation method that you are using. Mul- 1998 3,160 5,000 2,950 1,775
tion limits are reduced based on your percent-tiply the unadjusted basis of your car (defined 1997 3,160 5,000 3,050 1,775 age of personal use. If you use a car less thanearlier) by that percentage to determine the 1995±1996 3,060 4,900 2,950 1,775 100% in your business or work, you must deter-amount of your depreciation deduction. If you mine the depreciation deduction limit by multi-1$2,960 if the car is not qualified property or if you electprefer to figure your depreciation deduction with- plying the limit amount by the percentage ofnot to claim the special depreciation allowance.
out the help of the chart, see Publication 946. business and investment use during the tax2$7,660 if you acquired the car before 5/6/2003. $3,060 if
year.the car is not qualified property or if you elect not toYour deduction cannot be more than claim any special depreciation allowance.
the maximum depreciation limit for Example. In April 2008, Karl purchased a3$3,060 if you acquired the car before 9/11/2001, the carcars. See Depreciation Limits, later.
CAUTION
! is not qualified property, or you elect not to claim the new car for $27,500 to make sales calls in a
special depreciation allowance. territory that extends 200 miles around his home
Example. Phil bought a used truck in Febru- base. He uses his car 85% for his business. Karl
Trucks and vans. For 2008, the maximum does not claim the section 179 deduction, but heary 2007 to use exclusively in his landscape
depreciation deductions for trucks and vans are does claim the special depreciation allowance,business. He paid $9,200 for the truck with no generally higher than those for cars. A truck or and he chooses the 200% DB method to figuretrade-in. Phil did not claim any section 179 de- van is a passenger automobile that is classified his depreciation deduction.duction, the truck did not qualify for the special by the manufacturer as a truck or van, and that is Karl first figures his special depreciation al-depreciation allowance, and he chose to use the rated at 6,000 pounds gross vehicle weight or lowance to be $11,688 ($27,500 x 85% x 50%).200% DB method to get the largest depreciation less. For trucks and vans placed in service He then figures his depreciation limit for 2008 todeduction in the early years. before 2003, use the Maximum Depreciation be $9,316 (2008 depreciation limit ($10,960)
Deduction for Cars table.Phil used the MACRS depreciation chart in multiplied by the business use percentage
(85%)). Karl notes that his special allowance is2007 to find his percentage. The unadjusted Maximum
limited to $9,316. He then figures his unadjustedDepreciation Deductionbasis of his truck equals its cost because Phil
for Trucks and Vans basis to be $14,059 ($27,500 ×  85% − $9,316).used it exclusively for business. He multiplied
Karl figures his MACRS depreciation deduc-the unadjusted basis of his truck, $9,200, by the Date 4th & tion to be $2,812 ($14,059 (unadjusted basis) xpercentage that applied, 20%, to figure his 2007  Placed 1st 2nd 3rd Later 20%). Karl figures his total section 179, specialdepreciation deduction of $1,840. In Service Year Year Year Years depreciation allowance, and MACRS deprecia-
In 2008, Phil used the truck for personal 2008 $11,1601 $5,100 $3,050 $1,875 tion deduction to be $12,128 ($9,316 (special
purposes when he repaired his father's cabin. allowance) + $2,812 (MACRS depreciation)).2007 3,260 5,200 3,050 1,875
However, Karl's deduction is limited to $9,316.His records show that the business use of his 2005±2006 3,260 5,200 3,150 1,875 This is the depreciation limit ($10,960) multipliedtruck was 90% in 2008. Phil used Table 4-1 to
2004 10,9101 5,300 3,150 1,875 by the business use percentage (85%).find his percentage. Reading down the first col-
Karl continues to use his car 85% for busi-umn for the date placed in service and across to 2003 11,0102,3 5,400 3,250 1,975
ness. Depreciation in the next 4 years continuesthe 200% DB column, he locates his percent- 1If the special depreciation allowance does not apply or to be subject to deduction limits. Karl figures hisyou make the election not to claim the specialage, 32%. He multiplies the unadjusted basis of depreciation limits for those years as follows.depreciation allowance, the first year limit is $3,160 forhis truck, $8,280 ($9,200 cost ×  90% business 2008 and $3,260 for 2004.
use), by 32% to figure his 2008 depreciation Year Limit x Business Use Depreciation2If the special depreciation allowance does not apply or
deduction of $2,650. you make the election not to claim the special 2009 $4,800 ×  85% $4,080
depreciation allowance, the first year limit is $3,360. 2010 2,850 ×  85% 2,423
2011, 2012 1,775 ×  85% 1,5093If the truck or van was acquired before 5/06/03, the truck
Depreciation Limits or van is qualified property, and you claim the special
In 2013, using the rate from Table 4-1 , Karl'sdepreciation allowance for the truck or van, the
maximum deduction is $7,960. MACRS deduction is $810 ($14,059 (unad-There are limits on the amount you can deduct
justed basis) ×  5.76%). Since that amount is lessfor depreciation of your car, truck, or van. The
Car used less than full year. The deprecia- than the depreciation limit of $1,509 ($1,775 ×section 179 deduction and special depreciation
tion limits are not reduced if you use a car for 85%), Karl's depreciation deduction for 2013 isallowance are treated as depreciation for pur-
less than a full year. This means that you do not $810.poses of the limits. The maximum amount you reduce the limit when you either place a car in If Karl continues to use his car for businesscan deduct each year depends on the year you service or dispose of a car during the year. after 2013, he can continue to claim a deprecia-place the car in service. These limits are shown However, the depreciation limits are reduced if tion deduction for his unrecovered basis. How-in the following tables. you do not use the car exclusively for business ever, he cannot deduct more than $1,775
Page 22 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 23 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
multiplied by his business use percentage. See Example. In May 2002, Bob bought and straight line method even if your percent-
Deductions in years after the recovery period , age of business use increases to moreplaced in service a car that he used exclusively
later. than 50% in a later year.in his business. The car cost $31,500. Bob did
not claim a section 179 deduction, but he did
Section 179 deduction. The section 179 de- Instead of making the computation yourself,claim the special depreciation allowance, for the
duction is treated as a depreciation deduction. If you can use column (c) of Table 4-1 to find thecar. He continued to use the car 100% in his
you place a car that is not a truck or van in percentage to use.business throughout the recovery period (2002service in 2008, use it only for business, and through 2007). For those years, Bob used Tablechoose the section 179 deduction, the combined Example. On May 22, 2008, Dan bought a4-1 and the Maximum Depreciation Deductionsection 179, special depreciation allowance, car for $17,500. He used it 40% for his consult-for Cars table (as explained earlier) to computeand depreciation deduction for that car for 2008 ing business. Because he did not use the carhis depreciation deductions during the regularis limited to $10,960. more than 50% for business, Dan cannot takerecovery period. Bob's depreciation deductions any section 179 deduction or special deprecia-were subject to the depreciation limits so he willExample. On September 4, 2008, Jack tion allowance, and he must use the straight linehave unrecovered basis at the end of the recov-bought a used car for $10,000 and placed it in method over a 5-year recovery period to recoverery period as shown in the following table.service. He used it 80% for his business and he the cost of his car.
chooses to take a section 179 deduction for the Dan deducts $700 in 2008. This is the lesserMACRS Deprec.car. The car is not qualified property for pur- of:Year % Amount Limit Allowed
poses of the special depreciation allowance.
2002 30.00* $ 9,450 1. $700 (($17,500 cost ×  40% business use)Before applying the limit, Jack figures his 20.00 4,410 $7,660 $ 7,660 ×  10% recovery percentage (from columnmaximum section 179 deduction to be $8,000. 2003 32.00 7,056 4,900 4,900 (c), Table 4-1)), orThis is the cost of his qualifying property (up to 2004 19.20 4,234 2,950 2,950the maximum $250,000 amount) multiplied by 2005 11.52 2,540 1,775 1,775 2. $1,184 ($2,960 maximum limit ×  40% busi-his business use ($10,000 ×  80%). 2006 11.52 2,540 1,775 1,775 ness use).Jack then figures that his section 179 deduc- 2007 5.76 1,270 1,775 1,373
tion for 2008 is limited to $2,368 (80% of Total $31,500 $20,433 Qualified business use 50% or less in a later$2,960). He then figures his unadjusted basis of *30-percent special depreciation allowance. year. If you use your car more than 50% in$5,632 (($10,000 ×  80%) − $2,368) for determin- qualified business use in the tax year it is placeding his depreciation deduction. Jack has At the end of 2007, Bob had an unrecovered in service but the business use drops to 50% orreached his maximum depreciation deduction basis in the car of $11,067 ($31,500 ± $20,433). less in a later year, you can no longer use anfor 2008. For 2009, Jack will use his unadjusted If Bob continued to use the car 100% for busi- accelerated depreciation method for that car.basis of $5,632 to figure his depreciation deduc- ness in 2008 and later years, he can claim a For the year the business use drops to 50%tion. depreciation deduction equal to the lesser of or less and all later years in the recovery period,$1,775 or his remaining unrecovered basis. you must use the straight line depreciationDeductions in years after the recovery pe- If Bob's business use of the car was less method over a 5-year recovery period. In addi-riod. If the depreciation deductions for your than 100% during any year, his depreciation tion, for the year your business use drops tocar are reduced under the passenger automo- deduction would be less than the maximum 50% or less, you must recapture (include in yourbile limits (discussed earlier), you will have unre- amount allowable for that year. However, in de- gross income) any excess depreciation  (dis-covered basis in your car at the end of the termining his unrecovered basis in the car, he cussed later). You also increase the adjustedrecovery period. If you continue to use your car would still reduce his original basis by the maxi- basis of your car by the same amount.for business, you can deduct that unrecovered
mum amount allowable as if the business usebasis (subject to depreciation limits) after the
had been 100%. For example, if Bob had used Example. In June 2005, you purchased arecovery period ends.
his car 60% for business instead of 100%, his car for exclusive use in your business. You met
Unrecovered basis. This is your cost or allowable depreciation deductions would have the more-than-50%-use test for the first 3 years
other basis in the car reduced by any clean-fuel of the recovery period (2005 through 2007) butbeen $12,260 ($20,433 ×  60%), but he still
vehicle deduction, alternative motor vehicle failed to meet it in the fourth year (2008). Youwould have to reduce his basis by $20,433 to
credit, electric vehicle credit, gas guzzler tax, determine your depreciation for 2008 using 20%determine his unrecovered basis.and depreciation (including any special depreci- (from column (c) of Table 4-1 ). You also will
ation allowance unless you elect not to claim it) have to determine and include in your gross
and section 179 deductions that would have income any excess depreciation, discussedCar Used 50% or Less
been allowable if you had used the car 100% for next.for Businessbusiness and investment use.
Excess depreciation. You must includeIf you use your car 50% or less for qualifiedThe recovery period. For 5-year property, any excess depreciation in your gross incomebusiness use  (defined earlier under Deprecia-your recovery period is 6 calendar years. A part and add it to your car's adjusted basis for thetion Deduction ) either in the year the car isyear's depreciation is allowed in the first calen- first tax year in which you do not use the carplaced in service or in a later year, special rulesdar year, a full year's depreciation is allowed in more than 50% in qualified business use. Useapply. The rules that apply in these two situa-each of the next 4 calendar years, and a part Form 4797, Sales of Business Property, to fig-tions are explained in the following paragraphs.year's depreciation is allowed in the 6th calen- ure and report the excess depreciation in your(For this purpose, ªcarº was defined earlierdar year. gross income.under Actual Car Expenses and includes certainUnder MACRS, your recovery period is the Excess depreciation is: trucks and vans.)same whether you use declining balance or
straight line depreciation. You determine your 1. The amount of the depreciation deductions
Qualified business use 50% or less in yearunrecovered basis in the 7th year after you allowable for the car (including any section
placed in service. If you use your car 50% orplaced the car in service. 179 deduction claimed and any special de-
less for qualified business use, the following preciation allowance claimed) for tax yearsHow to treat unrecovered basis. If you rules apply. in which you used the car more than 50%continue to use your car for business after the in qualified business use, minus• You cannot take the section 179 deduc-recovery period, you can claim a depreciation
tion.deduction in each succeeding tax year until you 2. The amount of the depreciation deductions
recover your basis in the car. The maximum that would have been allowable for those• You cannot take the special depreciationamount you can deduct each year is determined years if you had not used the car moreallowance.by the date you placed the car in service and than 50% in qualified business use for the
• You must figure depreciation using theyour business-use percentage. For example, no year you placed it in service. This means
straight line method over a 5-year recov-deduction is allowed for a year you use your car the amount of depreciation figured using
ery period. You must continue to use the100% for personal purposes. the straight line method.
Chapter 4 Transportation Page 23

Page 24 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. On September 25, 2004, you similar to the limit on the depreciation deduction 2. Prorate the dollar amount from (1)(b) for
bought a car for $20,500 and placed it in service. you would have on the car if you owned it.) the number of days of the lease term in-
You did not claim the section 179 deduction but cluded in the tax year.The inclusion amount is a percentage of part
you did claim the special depreciation allow- of the fair market value of the leased car multi- 3. Multiply the prorated amount from (2) byance. You used the car exclusively in qualified plied by the percentage of business and invest- the percentage of business and investmentbusiness use for 2004, 2005, 2006 and 2007. ment use of the car for the tax year. It is prorated use for the tax year. This is your inclusionFor those years, you used the appropriate for the number of days of the lease term in the amount.MACRS Depreciation Chart to figure deprecia- tax year.
tion deductions totaling $17,039 ($10,610 for The inclusion amount applies to each tax Example. On January 17, 2008, you leased2004, $3,280 for 2005, $1,968 for 2006, and year that you lease the car if the fair market a car for 3 years and placed it in service for use$1,181 for 2007) under the 200% DB method. value (defined next) of the car when the lease in your business. The car had a fair market valueDuring 2008, you used the car 30% for busi- began was more than the amounts shown in the of $32,250 on the first day of the lease term. Youness and 70% for personal purposes. Since you following table. use the car 75% for business and 25% for per-did not meet the more-than-50%-use test, you
sonal purposes during each year of the lease.must switch from the 200% DB depreciation Year Lease Began Fair Market Value* Assuming you continue to use the car 75% formethod to the straight line depreciation method
business, you use Appendix A-6 to arrive at the2008 $18,500for 2008, and include in gross income for 2008
2007 15,500 following inclusion amounts for each year of theyour excess depreciation determined as follows.
2005±2006 15,200 lease:
2004 17,500Total depreciation claimed: $17,039
2003  18,000 Tax Dollar Business Inclusion(MACRS 200% DB method)
1999±2002  15,500 year amount Proration use amountMinus total depreciation allowable:
1997±1998 15,800(Straight line method) 2008 $ 88 349/366 75% $ 631995±1996 15,5002004Ð10% of $20,500 ... . $2,050 2009 192 365/365 75% 1441994 14,600(Limit: $2,960) 2010 284 365/365 75% 2131993 14,3002005Ð20% of $20,500 ... . 4,100 2011 284 16/365 75% 91992 13,700(Limit: $4,800)
1991 13,4002006Ð20% of $20,500 ... . 2,850 For each year of the lease that you deduct lease
1987±1990 12,800(Limit: $2,850) payments, you must reduce your deduction by
2007Ð20% of $20,500 ... . 1,675 10,675 the inclusion amount computed for that year.*For 2008, the fair market value for trucks and vans is(Limit: $1,675) $19,000.Excess depreciation $6,364 Leased car changed from business to per-
sonal use. If you lease a car for business useIn 2008, using Form 4797, you figure and Fair market value. Fair market value is the and, in a later year, change it to personal use,report the $6,364 excess depreciation you must price at which the property would change hands follow the rules explained earlier under Figuringinclude in your gross income. Your adjusted between a buyer and a seller, neither having to the inclusion amount. For the tax year in whichbasis in the car is also increased by $6,364. buy or sell, and both having reasonable knowl- you stop using the car for business, use theYour 2008 depreciation deduction is $615 edge of all the necessary facts. Sales of similar dollar amount for the previous tax year. Prorate($20,500 (unadjusted basis) ×  30% (business property around the same date may be helpful in the dollar amount for the number of days in theuse percentage) ×  20% (from column (c) of Ta- figuring the fair market value of the property. lease term that fall within the tax year.ble 4-1 on the line for Jan. 1Ð Sept. 30, 2004).
Figure the fair market value on the first day ofHowever, your depreciation deduction is limited Example. On August 16, 2007, Will leasedthe lease term. If the capitalized cost of a car isto $503 ($1,675 x 30% business use)). a car with a fair market value of $38,500 for 3specified in the lease agreement, use that
years. He used the car exclusively in his ownamount as the fair market value.Leasing a Car data processing business. On November 5,
Figuring the inclusion amount. Inclusion 2008, Will closed his business and went to workIf you lease a car, truck, or van that you use in amounts are listed in Appendix A  for cars, in for a company where he is not required to use ayour business, you can use the standard mile- Appendix B for trucks and vans, and in Appendix car for business. Using Appendix A-5, Will com-age rate or actual expenses to figure your de- C for electric cars leased after August 5, 1997, puted his inclusion amount for 2007 and 2008 asductible expense. This section explains how to and before 2007. If the fair market value of the shown in the following table and reduced hisfigure actual expenses for a leased car, truck, or car is $100,000 or less, use the appropriate deductions for lease payments by thosevan. appendix (depending on the year you first amounts.
placed the car in service) to determine the inclu-Deductible payments. If you choose to use Tax Dollar Business Inclusionsion amount. If the fair market value is more thanactual expenses, you can deduct the part of year amount Proration use amount$100,000, see the Revenue Procedure(s) identi-each lease payment that is for the use of the car fied in the footnote of the appendices for the 2007 $159 138/365 100% $ 60in your business. You cannot deduct any part of 2008 348 309/366 100% 294inclusion amount. Revenue Procedures area lease payment that is for personal use of the available at most IRS offices and many localcar, such as commuting. libraries. You can also find them on the Internet Leased car changed from personal to busi-You must spread any advance payments at www.irs.gov. ness use. If you lease a car for personal useover the entire lease period. You cannot deduct
For each tax year during which you lease the and, in a later year, change it to business use,any payments you make to buy a car, even if the
car for business, determine your inclusion you must determine the car's fair market valuepayments are called lease payments.
amount by following these three steps. on the date of conversion. Then figure the inclu-If you lease a car for 30 days or more, you
sion amount using the rules explained earliermay have to reduce your lease payment deduc- 1. Locate the appendix that applies to you. under Figuring the inclusion amount . Use thetion by an ªinclusion amount.º To find the inclusion amount, do the follow- fair market value on the date of conversion.
ing.
Example. In March 2006, Janice leased aInclusion Amounts a. Find the line that includes the fair mar- car for 4 years for personal use. On June 1,ket value of the car on the first day ofIf you lease a car that you use in your business 2008, she started working as a self-employedthe lease term.for a lease term of 30 days or more, you may advertising consultant and started using the
have to include an inclusion amount in your b. Go across the line to the column for the leased car for business purposes. Her records
income for each tax year you lease the car. To tax year in which the car is used under show that her business use for June 1 through
do this, you do not add an amount to income. the lease to find the dollar amount. For December 31 was 60%. To figure her inclusion
Instead, you reduce your deduction for your the last tax year of the lease, use the amount for 2008, Janice obtained an appraisal
lease payment. (This reduction has an effect dollar amount for the preceding year. from an independent car leasing company that
Page 24 Chapter 4 Transportation

Page 25 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2000 .14showed the fair market value of her 2006 car on
1994±1999 .12June 1, 2008, was $21,650. Using Appendix
1992±1993 .111/2A-6, Janice computed her inclusion amount for 1989±1991 .11 5.2008 as shown in the following table. 1988 .101/2
Tax Dollar Business Inclusion
For tax years after 1989, the depreciationyear amount Proration use amount
rates apply to all business miles. For tax years Recordkeeping2008 $34 214/366 60% $12 before 1990, the depreciation rates apply to the
first 15,000 miles.Reporting inclusion amounts.    For informa- If you deduct travel, entertainment, gift, or trans-
tion on reporting inclusion amounts, employees portation expenses, you must be able to proveExample. In 2003, you bought a car for ex-should see Car rentals under Completing Forms (substantiate) certain elements of expense. Thisclusive use in your business. The car cost2106 and 2106-EZ in chapter 6. Sole proprietors chapter discusses the records you need to keep$22,500. From 2003 through 2008, you used theshould see the instructions for Schedule C to prove these expenses.standard mileage rate to figure your car expense(Form 1040) and farmers should see the instruc- deduction. You drove your car 14,100 miles in If you keep timely and accurate rec-tions for Schedule F (Form 1040). 2003, 16,300 miles in 2004, 15,600 miles in ords, you will have support to show the2005, 16,700 miles in 2006, 15,100 miles in IRS if your tax return is ever examined.
RECORDS2007, and 14,900 miles in 2008. Your deprecia- You will also have proof of expenses that yourtion is figured as follows. employer may require if you are reimbursedDisposition of a Car under an accountable plan. These plans areYear Miles x Rate Depreciation
discussed in chapter 6 under Reimbursements.If you dispose of your car, you may have a 2003 14,100 ×  .16 $ 2,256
taxable gain or a deductible loss. The portion of 2004 16,300 ×  .16 2,608
any gain that is due to depreciation (including 2005 15,600 ×  .17 2,652
any section 179 deduction, clean-fuel vehicle 2006 16,700 ×  .17 2,839
2007 15,100 ×  .19 2,869deduction, and special depreciation allowance) How To Prove
2008 14,900 ×  .21 3,129that you claimed on the car will be treated as
Total depreciation $16,353ordinary income. However, you may not have to Expenses
recognize a gain or loss if you dispose of the car At the end of 2008, your adjusted basis in the car
because of a casualty, theft, or trade-in. Table 5-1 is a summary of records you need tois $6,147 ($22,500 − $16,353).
This section gives some general information prove each expense discussed in this publica-Depreciation deduction for the year of dispo-about dispositions of cars. For information on tion. You must be able to prove the elementssition. If you deduct actual car expenses andhow to report the disposition of your car, see listed across the top portion of the chart. Youyou dispose of your car before the end of itsPublication 544. prove them by having the information and re-recovery period, you are allowed a reduced de- ceipts (where needed) for the expenses listed inCasualty or theft. For a casualty or theft, a preciation deduction for the year of disposition. the first column.gain results when you receive insurance or other To figure the reduced depreciation deduction
reimbursement that is more than your adjusted for a car disposed of in 2008, first determine the You cannot deduct amounts that you
basis in your car. If you then spend all of the depreciation deduction for the full year using approximate or estimate.
proceeds to acquire replacement property (a Table 4-1.
CAUTION
!
new car or repairs to the old car) within a speci- If you used a Date Placed in Service line for
fied period of time, you do not recognize any Jan. 1 ÐSept. 30, you can deduct one-half of You should keep adequate records to provegain. Your basis in the replacement property is the depreciation amount figured for the full year. your expenses or have sufficient evidence thatits cost minus any gain that is not recognized. Figure your depreciation deduction for the full will support your own statement. You must gen-See Publication 547 for more information. year using the rules explained in this chapter erally prepare a written record for it to be consid-and deduct 50% of that amount with your otherTrade-in. When you trade in an old car for a ered adequate. This is because written evidenceactual car expenses.new one, the transaction is considered a is more reliable than oral evidence alone. How-If you used a Date Placed in Service line forlike-kind exchange. Generally, no gain or loss is ever, if you prepare a record on a computer, it isOct. 1 ÐDec. 31, you can deduct a percentagerecognized. (For exceptions, see chapter 1 of considered an adequate record.of the depreciation amount figured for the fullPublication 544.) In a trade-in situation, your year. The percentage you use is determined bybasis in the new property is generally your ad- What Are Adequatethe month you disposed of the car. Figure yourjusted basis in the old property plus any addi- depreciation deduction for the full year using the Records?tional amount you pay. (See Unadjusted basis, rules explained in this chapter and multiply theearlier.) You should keep the proof you need in an ac-result by the percentage from the following table
count book, diary, statement of expense, or sim-Depreciation adjustment when you used the for the month that you disposed of the car.
ilar record. You should also keep documentarystandard mileage rate. If you used the stan-
Month Percentage evidence that, together with your record, willdard mileage rate for the business use of your
support each element of an expense.car, depreciation was included in that rate. The Jan., Feb., March ........... . 12.5%
rate of depreciation that was allowed in the stan- April, May, June ............ . 37.5%
July, Aug., Sept. ............ . 62.5%dard mileage rate is shown in the chart that Documentary evidence. You generally must
Oct., Nov., Dec. ............ . 87.5%follows. You must reduce your basis in your car have documentary evidence, such as receipts,
(but not below zero) by the amount of this depre- canceled checks, or bills, to support your ex-
Do not use this table if you are a fiscalciation. penses.
year filer. See Sale or Other Disposi-
These rates do not apply for any year in Exception. Documentary evidence is nottion Before the Recovery Period Ends
CAUTION
!
which the actual expenses method needed if any of the following conditions apply.in chapter 4 of Publication 946.
was used.
TIP • You have meals or lodging expenses
while traveling away from home for whichDepreciation
you account to your employer under anYear(s) Rate per Mile
accountable plan, and you use a per diem2008 $.21 allowance method that includes meals2007 .19
and/or lodging. (Accountable plans and2005±2006 .17
per diem allowances are discussed in2003±2004 .16
chapter 6.)2001±2002 .15
Chapter 5 Recordkeeping Page 25

Page 26 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Your expense, other than lodging, is less If a charge is made for items other than food and statement prepared later when generally there is
beverages, the receipt must show that this is the a lack of accurate recall.than $75.
case. You do not need to write down the elements• You have a transportation expense for of every expense on the day of the expense. IfCanceled check. A canceled check, to-which a receipt is not readily available. you maintain a log on a weekly basis that ac-gether with a bill from the payee, ordinarily es- counts for use during the week, the log is consid-tablishes the cost. However, a canceled checkAdequate evidence. Documentary evi- ered a timely-kept record.by itself does not prove a business expensedence ordinarily will be considered adequate if it If you give your employer, client, or customerwithout other evidence to show that it was for ashows the amount, date, place, and essential an expense account statement, it can also bebusiness purpose.character of the expense. considered a timely-kept record. This is true if
you copy it from your account book, diary, state-For example, a hotel receipt is enough to Duplicate information. You do not have to ment of expense, or similar record.support expenses for business travel if it has all record information in your account book or other
record that duplicates information shown on aof the following information. Proving business purpose. You must gener-
receipt as long as your records and receipts ally provide a written statement of the business• The name and location of the hotel. complement each other in an orderly manner. purpose of an expense. However, the degree of
• The dates you stayed there. You do not have to record amounts your proof varies according to the circumstances in
employer pays directly for any ticket or other each case. If the business purpose of an ex-• Separate amounts for charges such as travel item. However, if you charge these items pense is clear from the surrounding circum-lodging, meals, and telephone calls. to your employer, through a credit card or other- stances, then you do not need to give a written
wise, you must keep a record of the amounts explanation.A restaurant receipt is enough to prove an you spend.expense for a business meal if it has all of the Example. If you are a sales representativefollowing information. Timely-kept records. You should record the who calls on customers on an established sales
• The name and location of the restaurant. elements of an expense or of a business use at route, you do not have to give a written explana-
or near the time of the expense or use and tion of the business purpose for traveling that• The number of people served. support it with sufficient documentary evidence. route. You can satisfy the requirements by re-
• The date and amount of the expense. A timely-kept record has more value than a cording the length of the delivery route once, the
Table 5-1.  How to Prove Certain Business Expenses
If you have THEN you must keep records that show details of the following elements . . .
expenses for . .
.
Amount Time Place or Business Purpose
Description Business Relationship
Travel Cost of each separate Dates you left Destination or area of Purpose: Business purpose for the expense or the
expense for travel, and returned your travel (name of business benefit gained or expected to be gained.
lodging, and meals. for each trip city, town, or other  
Incidental expenses may and number designation). Relationship: N/A
be totaled in reasonable of days spent
categories such as taxis, on business.
fees and tips, etc.
Entertainment Cost of each separate Date of Name and address or Purpose: Business purpose for the expense or the
expense. Incidental entertainment. location of place of business benefit gained or expected to be gained. 
expenses such as taxis, (Also see entertainment. Type of For entertainment, the nature of the business
telephones, etc., may be Business entertainment if not discussion or activity. If the entertainment was directly
totaled on a daily basis. Purpose.) otherwise apparent. before or after a business discussion: the date, place,
(Also see Business nature, and duration of the business discussion, and
Purpose.) the identities of the persons who took part in both the
business discussion and the entertainment activity.
 
Relationship: Occupations or other information (such as
names, titles, or other designations) about the
recipients that shows their business relationship to you.
For entertainment, you must also prove that you or your
employee was present if the entertainment was a
business meal.
Gifts Cost of the gift. Date of the Description of the gift.
gift.
Transportation Cost of each separate Date of the Your business Purpose: Business purpose for the expense.
expense. For car expense. For destination.  
expenses, the cost of the car expenses, Relationship: N/A
car and any the date of
improvements, the date the use of the
you started using it for car.
business, the mileage for
each business use, and
the total miles for the
year.
Page 26 Chapter 5 Recordkeeping

Page 27 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
date of each trip at or near the time of the trips, • You were unable to obtain evidence for an between two deliveries. You can account for
and the total miles you drove the car during the element of the expense or use that com- these using a single record of miles driven.
tax year. You could also establish the date of pletely satisfies the requirements ex- Gift expenses. You do not always have toeach trip with a receipt, record of delivery, or plained earlier under What Are Adequate record the name of each recipient of a gift. Aother documentary evidence. Records. general listing will be enough if it is evident that
• You are unable to obtain evidence for an you are not trying to avoid the $25 annual limitConfidential information. You do not need to
element that completely satisfies the two on the amount you can deduct for gifts to anyput confidential information relating to an ele-
rules listed earlier under What if I Have one person. For example, if you buy a largement of a deductible expense (such as the
Incomplete Records. number of tickets to local high school basketballplace, business purpose, or business relation-
games and give one or two tickets to each ofship) in your account book, diary, or other re- • You have presented other evidence for the many customers, it is usually enough to record acord. However, you do have to record the element that is the best proof possible general description of the recipients.information elsewhere at or near the time of the under the circumstances.expense and have it available to fully prove that Allocating total cost. If you can prove theelement of the expense. total cost of travel or entertainment but you can-Destroyed records. If you cannot produce a not prove how much it cost for each person whoreceipt because of reasons beyond your control,What If I Have Incomplete participated in the event, you may have to allo-you can prove a deduction by reconstructing cate the total cost among you and your guestsRecords? your records or expenses. Reasons beyond on a pro rata basis. To do so, you must establishyour control include fire, flood, and other casu-If you do not have complete records to prove an the number of persons who participated in thealty.element of an expense, then you must prove the event.
element with: An allocation would be needed, for example,Separating and Combining if you did not have a business relationship with• Your own written or oral statement con- Expenses all of your guests. See Allocating between busi-taining specific information about the ele- ness and nonbusiness in chapter 2.ment, and This section explains when expenses must be
If your return is examined. If your return iskept separate and when expenses can be com-• Other supporting evidence that is sufficient
examined, you may have to provide additionalbined.to establish the element.
information to the IRS. This information could be
Separating expenses. Each separate pay- needed to clarify or to establish the accuracy orIf the element is the description of a gift, or the ment is generally considered a separate ex- reliability of information contained in your rec-cost, time, place, or date of an expense, the pense. For example, if you entertain a customer ords, statements, testimony, or documentarysupporting evidence must be either direct evi- or client at dinner and then go to the theater, the evidence before a deduction is allowed.dence or documentary evidence. Direct evi- dinner expense and the cost of the theater tick-dence can be written statements, or the oral ets are two separate expenses. You must recordtestimony of your guests or other witnesses set- How Long To Keepthem separately in your records.ting forth detailed information about the element. Records and Receipts
Documentary evidence can be receipts, paid Season or series tickets. If you buy sea-
bills, or similar evidence. son or series tickets for business use, you must You must keep records as long as they may be
If the element is either the business relation- treat each ticket in the series as a separate item. needed for the administration of any provision of
ship of your guests or the business purpose of To determine the cost of individual tickets, divide the Internal Revenue Code. Generally, this
the amount spent, the supporting evidence can the total cost (but not more than face value) by means you must keep records that support your
be circumstantial, rather than direct. For exam- the number of games or performances in the deduction (or an item of income) for 3 years from
ple, the nature of your work, such as making series. You must keep records to show whether the date you file the income tax return on which
deliveries, provides circumstantial evidence of you use each ticket as a gift or entertainment. the deduction is claimed. A return filed early is
the use of your car for business purposes. In- Also, you must be able to prove the cost of considered filed on the due date. For a more
voices of deliveries establish when you used nonluxury box seat tickets if you rent a skybox or complete explanation of how long to keep rec-
the car for business. other private luxury box for more than one event. ords, get Publication 583, Starting a Business
See Entertainment tickets in chapter 2. and Keeping Records.Sampling. You can keep an adequate record You must keep records of the business usefor parts of a tax year and use that record to Combining items. You can make one daily of your car for each year of the recovery period.prove the amount of business or investment use entry in your record for reasonable categories of See More-than-50%-use test in chapter 4 underfor the entire year. You must demonstrate by expenses. Examples are taxi fares, telephone Depreciation Deduction.other evidence that the periods for which an calls, or other incidental travel costs. Meals
adequate record is kept are representative of Reimbursed for expenses. Employees whoshould be in a separate category. You can in-
the use throughout the tax year. give their records and documentation to theirclude tips for meal-related services with the
employers and are reimbursed for their ex-costs of the meals.
Example. You use your car to visit the of- penses generally do not have to keep copies ofExpenses of a similar nature occurring dur-
fices of clients, meet with suppliers and other this information. However, you may have toing the course of a single event are considered a
subcontractors, and pick up and deliver items to prove your expenses if any of the following con-single expense. For example, if during entertain-
clients. There is no other business use of the ditions apply.ment at a cocktail lounge, you pay separately for
car, but you and your family use the car for each serving of refreshments, the total expense • You claim deductions for expenses thatpersonal purposes. You keep adequate records for the refreshments is treated as a single ex- are more than reimbursements.during the first week of each month that show pense.
that 75% of the use of the car is for business. • Your expenses are reimbursed under aCar expenses. You can account for severalInvoices and bills show that your business use nonaccountable plan.uses of your car that can be considered part of acontinues at the same rate during the later • Your employer does not use adequate ac-single use, such as a round trip or uninterruptedweeks of each month. Your weekly records are counting procedures to verify expense ac-business use, with a single record. Minimal per-representative of the use of the car each month counts.sonal use, such as a stop for lunch on the wayand are sufficient evidence to support the per- between two business stops, is not an interrup-centage of business use for the year. • You are related to your employer as de-tion of business use. fined under Per Diem and Car Allowances,Exceptional circumstances. You can satisfy in chapter 6.the substantiation requirements with other evi- Example. You make deliveries at several
dence if, because of the nature of the situation in different locations on a route that begins and Reimbursements, adequate accounting , and
which an expense is made, you cannot get a ends at your employer's business premises and nonaccountable plans are discussed in chapter
receipt. This applies if all the following are true. that includes a stop at the business premises 6.
Chapter 5 Recordkeeping Page 27

Page 28 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Report all other business expenses dis- For example, if you have rental real estateExamples of Records
cussed in this publication on line 34. You income and expenses, report your expenses on
can only include 50% of your meals and Schedule E, Supplemental Income and Loss.Examples of records that show the information
entertainment on that line. See Publication 527, Residential Rental Prop-you need to keep for different types of expenses
erty, for more information on the rental of realare included in this publication as Table 6-2 and See your forms instructions for more information estate. If you have deductible invest-Table 6-3. They are part of the illustrated exam- on how to complete your tax return. ment-related transportation expenses, reportples shown at the end of chapter 6.
them on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 23.Both self-employed and an employee. If
you are both self-employed and an employee,
Vehicle Provided byyou must keep separate records for each busi-
ness activity. Report your business expenses for Your Employer
self-employment on Schedule C, C-EZ, or F
If your employer provides you with a car, you(Form 1040), as discussed earlier. Report your
6. may be able to deduct the actual expenses ofbusiness expenses for your work as an em-
operating that car for business purposes. Theployee on Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, as discussed
amount you can deduct depends on the amountnext.
that your employer included in your income and
How To Report Employees. If you are an employee, you gen- the business and personal miles you drove dur-
erally must complete Form 2106 to deduct your ing the year. You cannot use the standard mile-
travel, transportation, and entertainment ex- age rate.This chapter explains where and how to report
penses. However, you can use the shorter Formthe expenses discussed in this publication. It
Value reported on Form W-2. Your employer2106-EZ instead of Form 2106 if you meet all ofdiscusses reimbursements and how to treat
can figure and report either the actual value ofthe following conditions.them under accountable and nonaccountable
your personal use of the car or the value of theplans. It also explains rules for independent con- • You are an employee deducting expenses car as if you used it only for personal purposestractors and clients, fee-basis officials, certain attributable to your job. (100% income inclusion). Your employer mustperforming artists, Armed Forces reservists, and
separately state the amount if 100% of the an-• You were not reimbursed by your em-certain disabled employees. The chapter ends
nual lease value was included in your income. Ifployer for your expenses (amounts in-with illustrations of how to report travel, enter-
you are unsure of the amount included in yourcluded in box 1 of your Form W-2 are nottainment, gift, and car expenses on Forms 2106
Form W-2, ask your employer.considered reimbursements).and 2106-EZ.
• If you claim car expenses, you use the Full value included in your income. You canstandard mileage rate. deduct the value of the business use of an em-
ployer-provided car if your employer reportedWhere To Report For more information on how to report your 100% of the value of the car in your income. Onexpenses on Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ, see your 2008 Form W-2, the amount of the valueThis section provides general information on Completing Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ, later. will be included in box 1, Wages, tips, otherwhere to report the expenses discussed in this compensation, and box 12.Gifts. If you did not receive any reimburse-publication. To claim your expenses, complete Part II,ments (or the reimbursements were all included
Sections A and C, of Form 2106. Enter yourin box 1 of your Form W-2), the only businessSelf-employed. You must report your income actual expenses on line 23 of Section C andexpense you are claiming is for gifts, and theand expenses on Schedule C or C-EZ (Form include the entire value of the em-Special Rules  discussed later do not apply to1040) if you are a sole proprietor, or on Sched- ployer-provided car on line 25. Complete theyou, do not complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ.ule F (Form 1040) if you are a farmer. You do not rest of the form.Instead, claim the amount of your deductibleuse Form 2106 or 2106-EZ.
gifts directly on line 21 of Schedule A (FormIf you claim car or truck expenses, you must Less than full value included in your income.1040).provide certain information on the use of your If less than the full annual lease value of the carvehicle. You provide this information on Sched- Statutory employees. If you received a was included on your Form W-2, this means thatule C, Schedule C-EZ, or Form 4562. Form W-2 and the ªStatutory employeeº box in your Form W-2 only includes the value of yourIf you file Schedule C: box 13 was checked, report your income and personal use of the car. Do not enter this value
expenses related to that income on Schedule C on your Form 2106; it is not deductible.• Report your travel expenses, except
or C-EZ (Form 1040). Do not complete Form If you paid any actual costs (that your em-meals, on line 24a,
2106 or 2106-EZ. ployer did not provide or reimburse you for) to• Report your deductible meals (actual cost Statutory employees include full-time life in- operate the car, you can deduct the businessor standard meal allowance) and enter- surance salespersons, certain agent or commis- portion of those costs. Examples of costs thattainment on line 24b, sion drivers, traveling salespersons, and certain you may have are gas, oil, and repairs. Com-
homeworkers. plete Part II, Sections A and C, of Form 2106.• Report your gift expenses and transporta-
Enter your actual costs on line 23 of Section Ction expenses, other than car expenses,  If you are entitled to a reimbursement
and leave line 25 blank. Complete the rest of theon line 27, and from your employer but you do not
form.claim it, you cannot claim a deduction
CAUTION
!• Report your car expenses on line 9. Com-
for the expenses to which that unclaimed reim-plete Part IV of the form unless you have
bursement applies.to file Form 4562 for depreciation or amor-
tization. ReimbursementsReimbursement for personal expenses. If
your employer reimburses you for nondeduct-If you file Schedule C-EZ, report the total of all This section explains what to do when you re-ible personal expenses, such as for vacationbusiness expenses on line 2. You can only in- ceive an advance or are reimbursed for any oftrips, your employer must report the reimburse-clude 50% of your meals and entertainment in the employee business expenses discussed inment as wage income in box 1 of your Formthat total. If you include car expenses, you must this publication.W-2. You cannot deduct personal expenses.also complete Part III of the form. If you received an advance, allowance, orIf you file Schedule F: Income-producing property. If you have reimbursement for your expenses, how you re-
• Report your car expenses on line 12. At- travel or transportation expenses related to in- port this amount and your expenses depends on
tach Form 4562 and provide information come-producing property, report your deducti- whether the reimbursement was paid to you
on the use of your car in Part V of Form ble expenses on the form appropriate for that under an accountable plan or a nonaccountable
4562. activity. plan.
Page 28 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 29 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
This section explains the two types of plans, situation. However, regardless of the facts and Adequate Accounting
how per diem and car allowances simplify prov- circumstances of your situation, actions that
One of the rules for an accountable plan is thating the amount of your expenses, and the tax take place within the times specified in the fol-
you must adequately account to your employertreatment of your reimbursements and ex- lowing list will be treated as taking place within a
for your expenses. You adequately account bypenses. It also covers rules for independent reasonable period of time. giving your employer a statement of expense,contractors. • You receive an advance within 30 days of an account book, a diary, or a similar record in
No reimbursement. You are not reimbursed the time you have an expense. which you entered each expense at or near the
or given an allowance for your expenses if you time you had it, along with documentary evi-• You adequately account for your ex-are paid a salary or commission with the under- dence (such as receipts) of your travel, mileage,penses within 60 days after they were paidstanding that you will pay your own expenses. In and other employee business expenses. (Seeor incurred.this situation, you have no reimbursement or Table 5-1 in chapter 5 for details you need to
allowance arrangement, and you do not have to • You return any excess reimbursement enter in your record and documents you need toread this section on reimbursements. Instead, within 120 days after the expense was prove certain expenses.) A per diem or car al-see Completing Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ, later, paid or incurred. lowance satisfies the adequate accounting re-for information on completing your tax return. quirement under certain conditions. See Per• You are given a periodic statement (at diem and Car Allowances, later.Reimbursement, allowance, or advance. A least quarterly) that asks you to either re- You must account for all amounts you re-reimbursement or other expense allowance ar- turn or adequately account for outstanding ceived from your employer during the year asrangement is a system or plan that an employer advances and you comply within 120 days advances, reimbursements, or allowances. Thisuses to pay, substantiate, and recover the ex- of the statement. includes amounts you charged to your employerpenses, advances, reimbursements, and
by credit card or other method. You must giveamounts charged to the employer for employee
Employee meets accountable plan rules. If your employer the same type of records andbusiness expenses. Arrangements include per
you meet the three rules for accountable plans, supporting information that you would have todiem and car allowances.
your employer should not include any reim- give to the IRS if the IRS questioned a deductionA per diem allowance is a fixed amount of
bursements in your income in box 1 of your on your return. You must pay back the amount ofdaily reimbursement your employer gives you
Form W-2. If your expenses equal your reim- any reimbursement or other expense allowancefor your lodging, meals, and incidental expenses
for which you do not adequately account or thatwhen you are away from home on business. bursement, you do not complete Form 2106.
(The term ªincidental expensesº  is defined in is more than the amount for which you ac-You have no deduction since your expenses
chapter 1 under Standard Meal Allowance.) A counted.and reimbursement are equal.
car allowance is an amount your employer gives If your employer included reimburse-you for the business use of your car. ments in box 1 of your Form W-2 and Per Diem and Car AllowancesYour employer should tell you what method you meet all the rules for accountable
TIPof reimbursement is used and what records you plans, ask your employer for a corrected Form If your employer reimburses you for your ex-must provide. W-2. penses using a per diem or a car allowance, you
Employers. If you are an employer and you can generally use the allowance as proof for the
reimburse employee business expenses, how amount of your expenses. A per diem or carAccountable plan rules not met. Evenyou treat this reimbursement on your em- allowance satisfies the adequate accounting re-though you are reimbursed under an accounta-ployee's Form W-2 depends in part on whether quirements for the amount of your expensesble plan, some of your expenses may not meetyou have an accountable plan. Reimburse- only if all of the following conditions apply.all the rules. Those expenses that fail to meet allments treated as paid under an accountable the rules for accountable plans are treated as • Your employer reasonably limits paymentsplan, as explained next, are not reported as pay. having been reimbursed under a nonaccount- of your expenses to those that are ordi-Reimbursements treated as paid under nonac- nary and necessary in the conduct of theable plan (discussed later).countable plans, as explained later, are reported trade or business.as pay. See Publication 15 (Circular E), Em- Reimbursement of nondeductible ex-
ployer's Tax Guide, for information on employee • The allowance is similar in form to and notpenses. You may be reimbursed under your
pay. more than the federal rate (defined later).employer's accountable plan for expenses re-
lated to that employer's business, some of which • You prove the time (dates), place, andare deductible as employee business expensesAccountable Plans business purpose of your expenses to
and some of which are not deductible. The reim- your employer (as explained in Table 5-1)To be an accountable plan, your employer's bursements you receive for the nondeductible within a reasonable period of time.reimbursement or allowance arrangement must expenses do not meet rule (1) for accountable
include all of the following rules. • You are not related to your employer (asplans, and they are treated as paid under a
defined next). If you are related to yournonaccountable plan.1. Your expenses must have a business con- employer, you must be able to prove your
nection Ð that is, you must have paid or expenses to the IRS even if you have al-Example. Your employer's plan reimbursesincurred deductible expenses while per- ready adequately accounted to your em-you for travel expenses while away from homeforming services as an employee of your ployer and returned any excesson business and also for meals when you workemployer. reimbursement.late at the office, even though you are not away
2. You must adequately account to your em- from home. The part of the arrangement that If the IRS finds that an employer's travel allow-
ployer for these expenses within a reason- reimburses you for the nondeductible meals ance practices are not based on reasonably
able period of time. when you work late at the office is treated as accurate estimates of travel costs (including rec-
paid under a nonaccountable plan. ognition of cost differences in different areas for3. You must return any excess reimburse-
per diem amounts), you will not be considered toment or allowance within a reasonable pe- The employer makes the decision have accounted to your employer. In this case,riod of time. whether to reimburse employees you must be able to prove your expenses to theunder an accountable plan or a nonac-ªAdequate accountingº  and ªreturning ex-
TIP IRS.countable plan. If you are an employee whocess reimbursementsº are discussed later.
receives payments under a nonaccountableAn excess reimbursement or allowance is Related to employer. You are related to yourplan, you cannot convert these amounts to pay-any amount you are paid that is more than the employer if: ments under an accountable plan by voluntarilybusiness-related expenses that you adequately
accounting to your employer for the expenses 1. Your employer is your brother or sister,accounted for to your employer.
and voluntarily returning excess reimburse- half brother or half sister, spouse, ances-The definition of reasonable period of time
ments to the employer. tor, or lineal descendant,depends on the facts and circumstances of your
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 29

Page 30 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2. Your employer is a corporation in which High-low rate. This is a simplified method • 581/2 cents per mile for the period July 1
you own, directly or indirectly, more than through December 31, 2008.of computing the federal per diem rate for travel
10% in value of the outstanding stock, or within the continental United States. It elimi-
Fixed and variable rate (FAVR). This is annates the need to keep a current list of the per3. Certain relationships (such as grantor, fi- allowance your employer may use to reimbursediem rate for each city.duciary, or beneficiary) exist between you, your car expenses. Under this method, yourUnder the high-low method, the per diema trust, and your employer. employer pays an allowance that includes aamount for travel during January through Sep-You may be considered to indirectly own stock, combination of payments covering fixed and va-tember of 2008 is $237 (including $58 for M&IE)for purposes of (2), if you have an interest in a riable costs, such as a cents-per-mile rate tofor certain high-cost locations. All other areascorporation, partnership, estate, or trust that cover your variable operating costs (such ashave a per diem amount of $152 (including $45owns the stock or if a member of your family or gas, oil, etc.) plus a flat amount to cover yourfor M&IE). (Employers can get Publication 1542your partner owns the stock. fixed costs (such as depreciation (or lease pay-on the Internet, which gives the areas eligible for ments), insurance, etc.). If your employerthe $237 per diem amount under the high-lowThe federal rate. The federal rate can be fig- chooses to use this method, your employer willmethod for all or part of this period.)ured using any one of the following methods. request the necessary records from you.
Effective October 1, 2008, the per diem1. For per diem amounts: Reporting your expenses with a per diem orrate for certain high-cost locations in- car allowance. If your reimbursement is in thecreased to $256 (including $58 fora. The regular federal per diem rate.
CAUTION
! form of an allowance received under an ac-M&IE). The rate for all other locations increased countable plan, the following facts affect yourb. The standard meal allowance. to $158 (including $45 for M&IE). However, an reporting.employer can continue to use the rates de-c. The high-low rate.
scribed in the preceding paragraph for the re- • The federal rate.
mainder of 2008 if those rates and locations are2. For car expenses: • Whether the allowance or your actual ex-used consistently during October, November, penses were more than the federal rate.a. The standard mileage rate. and December for all employees. Employers
The following discussions explain where to re-who did not use the high-low method during theb. A fixed and variable rate (FAVR).
port your expenses depending upon how thefirst 9 months of 2008 cannot begin to use it
amount of your allowance compares to the fed-before 2009. For more information, see Reve-For per diem amounts, use the rate in eral rate.nue Procedure 2008-59, which can be found oneffect for the area where you stop for the Internet at www.irs.gov/irb/2008-41_IRB/ Allowance less than or equal to the federalsleep or rest.
TIP ar13.html. Also see Publication 1542 (available rate. If your allowance is less than or equal to
on the Internet at www.irs.gov). the federal rate, the allowance will not be in-Regular federal per diem rate. The regular
cluded in box 1 of your Form W-2. You do notfederal per diem rate is the highest amount that Prorating the standard meal allowance on need to report the related expenses or the allow-the federal government will pay to its employees partial days of travel. The standard meal al- ance on your return if your expenses are equalfor lodging, meals, and incidental expenses (or lowance is for a full 24-hour day of travel. If you to or less than the allowance.meals and incidental expenses only) while they travel for part of a day, such as on the days you However, if your actual expenses are moreare traveling away from home in a particular depart and return, you must prorate the full-day than your allowance, you can complete Formarea. The rates are different for different loca- M&IE rate. This rule also applies if your em- 2106 and deduct the excess amount on Sched-tions. Your employer should have these rates ployer uses the regular federal per diem rate or ule A (Form 1040). If you are using actual ex-available. (Employers can get Publication 1542, the high-low rate. penses, you must be able to prove to the IRS thewhich gives the rates in the continental United
You can use either of the following methods total amount of your expenses and reimburse-States for the current year. Publication 1542 is
to figure the federal M&IE for that day. ments for the entire year. If you are using theavailable on the Internet at www.irs.gov.)
standard meal allowance or the standard mile-The standard meal allowance. The stan- 1. Method 1: age rate, you do not have to prove that amount.dard meal allowance (discussed in chapter 1) is
a. For the day you depart, add 3/4 of thethe federal rate for meals and incidental ex- Example 1. In April, Jeremy takes a 2-daystandard meal allowance amount forpenses (M&IE). The rate for most small localities business trip to Denver. The federal rate forthat day.in the United States is $39 a day from January 1, Denver is $189 per day. As required by his
through December 31, 2008. Most major cities employer's accountable plan, he accounts forb. For the day you return, add 3/4 of theand many other localities qualify for higher rates. the time (dates), place, and business purpose ofstandard meal allowance amount forThe rates for localities within the continental the trip. His employer reimburses him $189 athe preceding day.United States are listed in Publication 1542. You day ($378 total) for living expenses. Jeremy's
can also find this information on the Internet at living expenses in Denver are not more than2. Method 2: Prorate the standard meal al-www.gsa.gov. $189 a day.lowance using any method that you con-You receive an allowance only for meals and Jeremy's employer does not include any ofsistently apply and that is in accordanceincidental expenses when your employer does the reimbursement on his Form W-2 and Jeremywith reasonable business practice. For ex-one of the following. does not deduct the expenses on his return.ample, an employer can treat 2 full days of
• Provides you with lodging (furnishes it in per diem (that includes M&IE) paid for
Example 2. In June, Matt takes a 2-daykind). travel away from home from 9 a.m. of one
business trip to Boston. Matt's employer usesday to 5 p.m. of the next day as being no• Reimburses you, based on your receipts, the high-low method to reimburse employees.more than the federal rate. This is truefor the actual cost of your lodging. Since Boston is a high-cost area, Matt is giveneven though a federal employee would be an advance of $237 a day ($474 total) for his• Pays the hotel, motel, etc., directly for your limited to a reimbursement of M&IE for lodging, meals, and incidental expenses. Matt'slodging. only 11/2 days of the federal M&IE rate. actual expenses totaled $700.• Does not have a reasonable belief that Since Matt's $700 of expenses are moreThe standard mileage rate. This is a setyou had (or will have) lodging expenses, than his $474 advance, he includes the excessrate per mile that you can use to compute yoursuch as when you stay with friends or rela- expenses when he itemizes his deductions. Mattdeductible car expenses. For 2008, the standardtives or sleep in the cab of your truck. completes Form 2106 (showing all of his ex-mileage rate for the cost of operating your car for penses and reimbursements). He must also al-• Figures the allowance on a basis similar to business use is: locate his reimbursement between his mealsthat used in computing your compensa-
• 501/2 cents per mile for the period January and other expenses as discussed later undertion, such as number of hours worked or
1 through June 30, 2008, and Completing Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ.miles traveled.
Page 30 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 31 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 6-1.  Reporting Travel, Entertainment, Gift, employer reimbursed Joe $75 a day for his
 and Car Expenses and Reimbursements meals and incidental expenses. The federal rate
for San Diego is $64 a day.
IF the type of reimbursement (or THEN the employer AND the employee Joe can prove that his actual meal expenses
other expense allowance) reports on Form W-2: reports on totaled $380. His employer's accountable plan arrangement is under:  Form 2106: * will not pay more than $75 a day for travel to San
Diego, so Joe does not give his employer theAn accountable plan with:
records that prove that he actually spent $380.
Actual expense reimbursement: No amount. No amount. However, he does account for the time, place,
Adequate accounting made and and business purpose of the trip. This is Joe's
excess returned. only business trip this year.
Joe was reimbursed $300 ($75 ×  4 days),Actual expense reimbursement: The excess amount as No amount.
which is $44 more than the federal rate of $256Adequate accounting and return of wages in box 1.
($64 ×  4 days). The employer includes the $44excess both required but excess not
as income on Joe's Form W-2 in box 1. Thereturned.
employer also enters $256 in box 12 of Joe's
Per diem or mileage allowance up to No amount. All expenses and Form W-2.the federal rate: Adequate reimbursements only if Joe completes Form 2106 to figure his de-accounting made and excess excess expenses are ductible expenses. He enters the total of hisreturned. claimed. Otherwise, form is actual expenses for the year ($380) on Formnot filed. 2106. He also enters the reimbursements that
were not included in his income ($256). His totalPer diem or mileage allowance up to The excess amount as No amount.
the federal rate: Adequate wages in box 1. The deductible expense, before the 50% limit, is
accounting and return of excess both amount up to the federal $124. After he figures the 50% limit on his un-
required but excess not returned. rate is reported only in box reimbursed meals and entertainment, he will
12Ðit is not reported in include the balance, $62, as an itemized deduc-
box 1. tion.
Per diem or mileage allowance The excess amount as All expenses (and Example 3. Debbie drives 10,000 miles forexceeds the federal rate:  Adequate wages in box 1. The reimbursements reported on business in 2008 (5,300 miles from January 1accounting up to the federal rate only amount up to the federal Form W-2, box 12) only if
through June 30 and 4,700 miles from July 1and excess not returned. rate is reported only in box expenses in excess of the
through December 31). Under her employer's12Ðit is not reported in federal rate are claimed.
accountable plan, she gets reimbursed 60 centsbox 1. Otherwise, form is not filed.
a mile, which is more than the standard mileage
A nonaccountable plan with: rate. Her total reimbursement is $6,000.
Debbie's employer must include the reim-Either adequate accounting or return The entire amount as All expenses.
bursement amount up to the standard mileageof excess, or both, not required by wages in box 1.
rate, $5,427 (5,300 miles ×  501/2 cents + 4,700plan.
miles ×  581/2 cents), in box 12 of her Form W-2.
No reimbursement plan: The entire amount as All expenses. That amount is not taxable. Her employer must
wages in box 1. also include $573 ($6,000 − $5,427) in box 1 of
her Form W-2. This is the reimbursement that is* You may be able to use Form 2106-EZ. See Completing Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ.
more than the standard mileage rate.
 If Debbie's expenses are equal to or less
than the standard mileage rate, she would notExample 3. Nicole drives 10,000 miles in However, if your actual expenses are more
complete Form 2106. If her expenses are morethan the federal rate, you can complete Form2008 for business (4,500 miles from January 1
than the standard mileage rate, she would com-2106 and deduct those excess expenses. Youthrough June 30 and 5,500 miles from July 1 plete Form 2106 and report her total expensesmust report on Form 2106 your reimbursementsthrough December 31). Under her employer's and reimbursement (shown in box 12 of herup to the federal rate (as shown in box 12 of youraccountable plan, she accounts for the time Form W-2). She would then claim the excessForm W-2) and all your expenses. You should(dates), place, and business purpose of each expenses as an itemized deduction.be able to prove these amounts to the IRS.trip. Her employer pays her a mileage allowance
of 40 cents a mile. Example 1.  Laura lives and works in Aus-Since Nicole's $5,491 expense computed Returning Excesstin. Her employer sent her to Albuquerque for 4under the standard mileage rate (4,500 miles × Reimbursementsdays on business. Laura's employer paid the501/2 cents + 5,500 miles ×  581/2 cents) is more hotel directly for her lodging and reimbursed Under an accountable plan, you are required tothan her $4,000 reimbursement (10,000 miles × Laura $65 a day ($260 total) for meals and return any excess reimbursement or other ex-40 cents), she itemizes her deductions to claim incidental expenses. Laura's actual meal ex- pense allowances for your business expensesthe excess expense. Nicole completes Form penses were not more than the federal rate for to the person paying the reimbursement or al-2106 (showing all of her expenses and reim- Albuquerque, which is $49 per day. lowance. Excess reimbursement means anybursements) and enters $1,491 ($5,491 −
amount for which you did not adequately ac-$4,000) as an itemized deduction. Her employer included the $64 that was
count within a reasonable period of time. Formore than the federal rate (($65 − $49) ×  4) inAllowance more than the federal rate. If example, if you received a travel advance andbox 1 of Laura's Form W-2. Her employer showsyour allowance is more than the federal rate, you did not spend all the money on busi-$196 ($49 a day ×  4) in box 12 of her Form W-2.your employer must include the allowance ness-related expenses, or you do not have proofThis amount is not included in Laura's income.amount up to the federal rate in box 12 of your of all your expenses, you have an excess reim-Laura does not have to complete Form 2106;Form W-2. This amount is not taxable. However, bursement.however, she must include the $64 in her grossthe excess allowance will be included in box 1 of ªAdequate accountingº and ªreasonable pe-income as wages (by reporting the total amountyour Form W-2. You must report this part of your riod of timeº were discussed earlier in this chap-shown in box 1 of her Form W-2).allowance as if it were wage income. ter.
If your actual expenses are less than or Example 2. Joe also lives in Austin and
equal to the federal rate, you do not complete works for the same employer as Laura. In May Travel advance. You receive a travel ad-
Form 2106 or claim any of your expenses on the employer sent Joe to San Diego for 4 days vance if your employer provides you with an
your return. and paid the hotel directly for Joe's hotel bill. The expense allowance before you actually have the
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 31

Page 32 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
expense, and the allowance is reasonably ex- If you are not sure if the reimbursement or you are subject to the 50% limit on those ex-
expense allowance arrangement is an account- penses. See 50% Limit  in chapter 2.pected to be no more than your expense. Under
able or nonaccountable plan, ask your em-an accountable plan, you are required to ade- Adequate accounting. As a self-employedployer.quately account to your employer for this ad- person, you adequately account by reporting
vance and to return any excess within a your actual expenses. You should follow theReporting your expenses under a nonac-reasonable period of time. recordkeeping rules in chapter 5.countable plan. Your employer will combine
If you do not adequately account for or do not the amount of any reimbursement or other ex- How to report. For information on how toreturn any excess advance within a reasonable pense allowance paid to you under a nonac- report expenses on your tax return, see
period of time, the amount you do not account countable plan with your wages, salary, or other Self-employed at the beginning of this chapter.
for or return will be treated as having been paid pay. Your employer will report the total in box 1
of your Form W-2.under a nonaccountable plan (discussed later).
You must complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ Required Records forUnproved amounts. If you do not prove and itemize your deductions to deduct your ex- Clients or Customersthat you actually traveled on each day for which penses for travel, transportation, meals, or en-you received a per diem or car allowance (prov- If you are a client or customer, you generally dotertainment. Your meal and entertainmenting the elements described in Table 5-1 ), you not have to keep records to prove the reimburse-expenses will be subject to the 50% limit  dis-must return this unproved amount of the travel ments or allowances you give, in the course ofcussed in chapter 2. Also, your total expenses
advance within a reasonable period of time. If your business, to an independent contractor forwill be subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-
you do not do this, the unproved amount will be travel or gift expenses incurred on your behalf.gross-income limit that applies to most miscella-
considered paid under a nonaccountable plan However, you must keep records if:neous itemized deductions.
(discussed later). • You reimburse the contractor for entertain-Example 1. Kim's employer gives herPer diem allowance more than federal rate. ment expenses incurred on your behalf,$1,000 a month ($12,000 total for the year) forIf your employer's accountable plan pays you an andher business expenses. Kim does not have toallowance that is higher than the federal rate, • The contractor adequately accounts to youprovide any proof of her expenses to her em-you do not have to return the difference between for these expenses.ployer, and Kim can keep any funds that shethe two rates for the period you can prove busi- does not spend.ness-related travel expenses. However, the dif- Kim is being reimbursed under a nonac- Contractor adequately accounts. If the con-ference will be reported as wages on your Form countable plan. Her employer will include the tractor adequately accounts to you for entertain-W-2. This excess amount is considered paid $12,000 on Kim's Form W-2 as if it were wages. ment expenses, you (the client or customer)under a nonaccountable plan (discussed later). If Kim wants to deduct her business expenses, must keep records documenting each element
she must complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ and of the expense, as explained in chapter 5. UseExample.  Your employer sends you on a itemize her deductions. your records as proof for a deduction on your tax5-day business trip to Phoenix in March 2008 return. If entertainment expenses are accountedand gives you a $400 ($80 ×  5 days) advance to Example 2. Kevin is paid $2,000 a month by for separately, you are subject to the 50% limitcover your meals and incidental expenses. The his employer. On days that he travels away from on entertainment. If the contractor adequatelyfederal per diem for meals and incidental ex- home on business, his employer designates $50 accounts to you for reimbursed amounts, you dopenses for Phoenix is $59. Your trip lasts only 3 a day of his salary as paid to reimburse his travel not have to report the amounts on an informationexpenses. Because his employer would pay Ke-days. Under your employer's accountable plan, return.vin his monthly salary whether or not he wasyou must return the $160 ($80 ×  2 days) ad-
Contractor does not adequately account.  Iftraveling away from home, the arrangement is avance for the 2 days you did not travel. For the 3
the contractor does not adequately account tononaccountable plan. No part of the $50 a daydays you did travel you do not have to return the
you for allowances or reimbursements of enter-designated by his employer is treated as paid$63 difference between the allowance you re- tainment expenses, you do not have to keepunder an accountable plan.ceived and the federal rate for Phoenix (($80 − records of these items. You are not subject to$59) ×  3 days). However, the $63 will be re- the 50% limit on entertainment in this case. YouRules for Independentported on your Form W-2 as wages. can deduct the reimbursements or allowancesContractors and Clients as payment for services if they are ordinary and
Nonaccountable Plans necessary business expenses. However, youThis section provides rules for independent con- must file Form 1099-MISC to report amountstractors who incur expenses on behalf of a clientA nonaccountable plan is a reimbursement or paid to the independent contractor if the total ofor customer. The rules cover the reporting andexpense allowance arrangement that does not the reimbursements and any other fees is $600substantiation of certain expenses discussed inmeet one or more of the three rules listed earlier or more during the calendar year.this publication, and they affect both indepen-under Accountable Plans.
dent contractors and their clients or customers.In addition, even if your employer has an You are considered an independent contrac-accountable plan, the following payments will be tor if you are self-employed and you perform Completing Formstreated as being paid under a nonaccountable services for a customer or client.
plan:
2106 and 2106-EZ• Excess reimbursements you fail to return
Accounting to Your Clientto your employer, and This section briefly describes how employees
complete Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ. Table 6-1If you received a reimbursement or an allow-• Reimbursement of nondeductible ex-
explains what the employer reports on Formance for travel, entertainment, or gift expensespenses related to your employer's busi-
W-2 and what the employee reports on Formthat you incurred on behalf of a client, youness. See Reimbursement of 2106. The instructions for the forms have moreshould provide an adequate accounting of thesenondeductible expenses, earlier, under information on completing them.expenses to your client. If you do not account toAccountable Plans.
your client for these expenses, you must include If you are self-employed, do not fileAn arrangement that repays you for business any reimbursements or allowances in income. Form 2106 or 2106-EZ. Report yourexpenses by reducing the amount reported as You must keep adequate records of these ex- expenses on Schedule C, C-EZ, or F
CAUTION
!your wages, salary, or other pay will be treated penses whether or not you account to your client (Form 1040). See the instructions for the formas a nonaccountable plan. This is because you for these expenses. that you must file.are entitled to receive the full amount of your pay If you do not separately account for and seek
whether or not you have any business ex- reimbursement for meals and entertainment in Form 2106-EZ. You may be able to use the
penses. connection with providing services for a client, shorter Form 2106-EZ to claim your employee
Page 32 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 33 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
business expenses. You can use this form if you 1. Compute the inclusion amount without tak- • Pays you a single amount that covers
meet all of the following conditions. ing into account your business use per- meals and/or entertainment, as well as
centage for the tax year. other business expenses, and• You are an employee deducting ordinary
and necessary expenses attributable to 2. Report the inclusion amount from (1) on • Does not clearly identify how much is for
your job. Form 2106, Part II, line 24b. deductible meals and/or entertainment.
• You were not reimbursed by your em- 3. Report on line 24c the net amount of car You must allocate that single payment so that
ployer for your expenses (amounts in- rental expenses (total car rental expenses you know how much to enter in Form 2106,
cluded in box 1 of your Form W-2 are not minus the inclusion amount computed in Column A and Column B of line 7.
considered reimbursements). (1)).
Example. Rob's employer paid him an ex-• If you are claiming car expenses, you are The net amount of car rental expenses will be pense allowance of $12,000 this year under anusing the standard mileage rate. adjusted on Form 2106, Part II, line 27, to reflect accountable plan. The $12,000 payment con-the percentage of business use for the tax year. sisted of $5,000 for airfare and $7,000 for meals,
Car expenses. If you used a car to perform entertainment, and car expenses. The employerTransportation expenses. Show your trans-
your job as an employee, you may be able to did not clearly show how much of the $7,000portation expenses that did not involve overnight
deduct certain car expenses. These are gener- was for the cost of deductible meals and enter-travel on Form 2106, line 2, Column A, or on
ally figured on Form 2106, Part II, and then tainment. Rob actually spent $14,000 during theForm 2106-EZ, Part I, line 2. Also include on this
claimed on Form 2106, Part I, line 1, Column A. year ($5,500 for airfare, $4,500 for meals andline business expenses you have for parking
Car expenses using the standard mileage rate entertainment, and $4,000 for car expenses).fees and tolls. Do not include expenses of oper-
can also be figured on Form 2106-EZ by com- Since the airfare allowance was clearly iden-ating your car or expenses of commuting be-
pleting Part II and Part I, line 1. tified, Rob knows that $5,000 of the paymenttween your home and work.
goes in Column A, line 7, of Form 2106. ToEmployee business expenses other thanInformation on use of cars. If you claim allocate the remaining $7,000, Rob uses themeals and entertainment. Show your otherany deduction for the business use of a car, you worksheet from the instructions for Form 2106.employee business expenses on Form 2106,must answer certain questions and provide in- His completed worksheet follows.Column A, lines 3 and 4, or Form 2106-EZ, linesformation about the use of the car. The informa-
3 and 4. Do not include expenses for meals andtion relates to the following items. 1. Enter the total amount ofentertainment on those lines. Line 4 is for ex- reimbursements your employer• Date placed in service. penses such as gifts, educational expenses (tui- gave you that were not reported
tion and books), office-in-the-home expenses,• Mileage (total, business, commuting, and to you in box 1 of Form W-2 .. . $7,000
2. Enter the total amount of yourand trade and professional publications.other personal mileage).
expenses for the periods
If line 4 expenses are the only ones you• Percentage of business use. covered by this reimbursement 8,500
are claiming, you received no reim- 3. Of the amount on line 2, enter• After-work use. bursements (or the reimbursements your total expense for meals
TIP
and entertainment ........ . 4,500were all included in box 1 of your Form W-2),• Use of other vehicles.
4. Divide line 3 by line 2. Enter theand the Special Rules  discussed later do not• Whether you have evidence to support the result as a decimal (rounded toapply to you, do not complete Form 2106 ordeduction. at least three places) ...... .  .529 2106-EZ. Claim these amounts directly on 5. Multiply line 1 by line 4. EnterSchedule A (Form 1040), line 21. List the type• Whether or not the evidence is written. the result here and in Columnand amount of each expense on the dotted lines B, line 7 .............. . 3,703Employees must complete Form 2106, Part II, and include the total on line 21. 6. Subtract line 5 from line 1. EnterSection A, or Form 2106-EZ, Part II, to provide the result here and in Columnthis information. Meal and entertainment expenses. Show A, line 7 .............. . $3,297
the full amount of your expenses for busi-Standard mileage rate. If you claim a de- On line 7 of Form 2106, Rob enters $8,297ness-related meals and entertainment on Formduction based on the standard mileage rate in- ($5,000 airfare and $3,297 of the $7,000) in2106, line 5, Column B. Include meals whilestead of your actual expenses, you must Column A and $3,703 (of the $7,000) in Columnaway from your tax home overnight and othercomplete Form 2106, Part II, Section B. The B.business meals and entertainment. Enter 50%amount on line 22c (Section B) is carried to
of the line 8, Column B, meal and entertainmentForm 2106, Part I, line 1. In addition, on Part 1, After you complete the form. After you haveexpenses on line 9, Column B.line 2, you can deduct parking fees and tolls that completed your Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, followIf you file Form 2106-EZ, enter the fullapply to the business use of the car. If you file the directions on that form to deduct your ex-amount of your meals and entertainment on theForm 2106-EZ, complete Part I, line 1, for the penses on the appropriate line of your tax return.line to the left of line 5 and multiply the total bystandard mileage rate and line 2 for parking fees For most taxpayers, this is line 21 of Schedule A50%. Enter the result on line 5.and tolls. See Standard Mileage Rate in chapter (Form 1040). However, if you are a government4 for information on using this rate. Hours of service limits. If you are subject official paid on a fee basis, a performing artist,
to the Department of Transportation's ªhours of an Armed Forces reservist, or a disabled em-Actual expenses. If you claim a deduction
serviceº limits (as explained earlier under Indi- ployee with impairment-related work expenses,based on actual car expenses, you cannot use
viduals subject to ªhours of serviceº limits  in see Special Rules, later.Form 2106-EZ. You must complete Form 2106,
chapter 2), use 80% instead of 50% for mealsPart II, Section C. In addition, unless you lease
while away from your tax home. Limits on employee business expenses.your car, you must complete Section D to show
Your employee business expenses may be sub-your depreciation deduction and any section Reimbursements. Enter on Form 2106, line 7 ject to any of the three limits described next.179 deduction and special depreciation allow- (you cannot use Form 2106-EZ) the amounts They are figured in the following order on theance you claim. your employer (or third party) reimbursed you specified form.If you are still using a car that is fully depreci- that were not reported to you in box 1 of your
ated, continue to complete Section C. Since you Form W-2. This includes any amount reported 1. Limit on meals and entertainment. Cer-
have no depreciation deduction, enter zero on under code L in box 12 of Form W-2. tain meal and entertainment expenses are sub-
line 28. In this case, do not complete Section D. ject to a 50% limit. If you are an employee, youAllocating your reimbursement. If you figure this limit on line 9 of Form 2106 or line 5 ofCar rentals. If you claim car rental ex- were reimbursed under an accountable plan and Form 2106-EZ. (See 50% Limit in chapter 2.)penses on Form 2106, line 24a, you may have to want to deduct excess expenses that were not
reduce that expense by an inclusion amount as reimbursed, you may have to allocate your reim- 2. Limit on miscellaneous itemized deduc-
described in chapter 4. If so, you can show your bursement. This is necessary when your em- tions. If you are an employee, deduct your
car expenses and any inclusion amount as fol- ployer pays your reimbursement in the following employee business expenses (as figured on
lows. manner: Form 2106 or 2106-EZ) on line 21 of Schedule A
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 33

Page 34 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
(Form 1040). Most miscellaneous itemized de- itemized deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040), Impairment-Related Work
ductions, including employee business ex- line 21. Expenses of Disabled Employees
penses, are subject to a 2%-of-adjusted-
If you are an employee with a physical or mentalgross-income limit. This limit is figured on line 26
Officials Paid on a Fee Basisof Schedule A (Form 1040). disability, your impairment-related work ex-
penses are not subject to the3. Limit on total itemized deductions. If Certain fee-basis officials can claim their em- 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that appliesyour adjusted gross income (line 38 of Form ployee business expenses whether or not they to most other employee business expenses. Af-1040) is more than $159,950 ($79,975 if you are itemize their other deductions on Schedule A
ter you complete Form 2106 or 2106-EZ, entermarried filing separately), the total of certain (Form 1040).
itemized deductions, including employee busi- your impairment-related work expenses fromFee-basis officials are persons who are em-
ness expenses, may be limited. See your form Form 2106, line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, onployed by a state or local government and who
instructions for information on how to figure this Schedule A (Form 1040), line 28, and identifyare paid in whole or in part on a fee basis. They
limit. can deduct their business expenses in perform- the type and amount of this expense on the
ing services in that job as an adjustment to gross dotted line next to line 28. Enter your employee
Special Rules income rather than as a miscellaneous itemized business expenses that are unrelated to your
deduction. disability from Form 2106, line 10, or FormThis section discusses special rules that apply If you are a fee-basis official, include your 2106-EZ, line 6, on Schedule A (Form 1040),only to Armed Forces reservists, government employee business expenses from Form 2106, line 21.officials who are paid on a fee basis, performing line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, in the total onartists, and disabled employees with impair- Impairment-related work expenses are yourForm 1040, line 24.ment-related work expenses. allowable expenses for attendant care at your
workplace and other expenses in connection
Expenses of Certain with your workplace that are necessary for youArmed Forces Reservists Traveling Performing Artists to be able to work.More Than 100 Miles From Home
If you are a performing artist, you may qualify to You are disabled if you have:If you are a member of a reserve component of deduct your employee business expenses as an • A physical or mental disability (for exam-the Armed Forces of the United States and you adjustment to gross income rather than as a ple, blindness or deafness) that function-travel more than 100 miles away from home in miscellaneous itemized deduction. To qualify,connection with your performance of services as ally limits your being employed, oryou must meet all of the following requirements.a member of the reserves, you can deduct your • A physical or mental impairment (for ex-travel expenses as an adjustment to gross in- 1. During the tax year, you perform services ample, a sight or hearing impairment) thatcome rather than as a miscellaneous itemized in the performing arts as an employee for substantially limits one or more of yourdeduction. The amount of expenses you can at least two employers.
major life activities, such as performingdeduct as an adjustment to gross income is 2. You receive at least $200 each from any manual tasks, walking, speaking, breath-limited to the regular federal per diem rate (for two of these employers. ing, learning, or working.lodging, meals, and incidental expenses) and
the standard mileage rate (for car expenses) 3. Your related performing-arts business ex-
You can deduct impairment-related expensesplus any parking fees, ferry fees, and tolls. See penses are more than 10% of your gross
Per Diem and Car Allowances  earlier for more income from the performance of those as business expenses if they are:
information. Any expenses in excess of these services. • Necessary for you to do your work satis-amounts can be claimed only as a miscellane- 4. Your adjusted gross income is not more factorily,ous itemized deduction subject to the 2% limit. than $16,000 before deducting these busi- • For goods and services not required orMember of a reserve component. You are a ness expenses.
used, other than incidentally, in your per-member of a reserve component of the Armed
sonal activities, andForces of the United States if you are in the Special rules for married persons. If you areArmy, Naval, Marine Corps, Air Force, or Coast • Not specifically covered under other in-married, you must file a joint return unless youGuard Reserve, the Army National Guard of the come tax laws.lived apart from your spouse at all times duringUnited States, the Air National Guard of the the tax year. If you file a joint return, you mustUnited States, or the Reserve Corps of the Pub- figure requirements (1), (2), and (3) separately Example 1. You are blind. You must use alic Health Service. for both you and your spouse. However, require- reader to do your work. You use the reader bothHow to report. If you have reserve-related ment (4) applies to your and your spouse's com- during your regular working hours at your placetravel that takes you more than 100 miles from bined adjusted gross income.
of work and outside your regular working hourshome, you should first complete Form 2106 or
away from your place of work. The reader'sWhere to report. If you meet all of the aboveForm 2106-EZ. Then include your expenses for
requirements, you should first complete Form services are only for your work. You can deductreserve travel over 100 miles from home, up to
2106 or 2106-EZ. Then you include your per-the federal rate, from Form 2106, line 10, or your expenses for the reader as business ex-
forming-arts-related expenses from Form 2106,Form 2106-EZ, line 6, in the total on Form 1040, penses.
line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, in the total online 24. Subtract this amount from the total on
Form 1040, line 24.Form 2106, line 10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, and Example 2. You are deaf. You must use a
deduct the balance as an itemized deduction on If you do not meet all of the above require- sign-language interpreter during meetings while
Schedule A (Form 1040), line 21. ments, you do not qualify to deduct your ex- you are at work. The interpreter's services are
You cannot deduct expenses of travel that penses as an adjustment to gross income. used only for your work. You can deduct yourdoes not take you more than 100 miles from Instead, you must complete Form 2106 or expenses for the interpreter as business ex-home as an adjustment to gross income. In- 2106-EZ and deduct your employee business penses.stead, you must complete Form 2106 or expenses as an itemized deduction on Schedule
2106-EZ and deduct those expenses as an A (Form 1040), line 21.
Page 34 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 35 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
method (200% DB) to determine his deprecia- amount in Part II, Section C, and multiplies it byIllustrated Examples
tion deduction. the 70% business use. He adds this amount
David first figures his special depreciationThe following examples illustrate the reporting of ($4,200) to the depreciation deduction ($7,672)
allowance to be $8,575 ($24,500 x 70% x 50%).travel, entertainment, gift, and transportation ex- and reports the total ($11,872) on Part I, line 1.
David's depreciation limit for 2008 is reducedpenses on Forms 2106 and 2106-EZ. Business His other transportation expenses for park-because his business use is less than 100%. Heuse of a car is shown using actual car expenses ing fees, tolls, and taxis were $1,320. He entersfigures his reduced limit to be $7,672 (2008in Example 1 and the standard mileage rate in this amount on Part I, line 2. David's employerdepreciation limit ($10,960 (from the MaximumExample 2. Sample records that prove some of reimbursed him a total of $5,400 for his car andDepreciation Deduction for Cars table shown inthe claimed expenses are also shown.
transportation expenses. This amount was paidchapter 4) ×  70%). David notes that his special
from an accountable plan and was not shown onallowance ($8,575) exceeds his depreciationExample 1. David Pine purchased a new
David's Form W-2. However, since he is claim-limit ($7,672) for 2008. He then figures his unad-car for $24,500 (including sales tax) on January
ing expenses that are more than his reimburse-justed basis to be $9,478 ($24,500 ×  70% ±5, 2008. In 2008, he used the car 70% for busi-
ments, he must show the entire reimbursement$7,672). David figures his MACRS depreciationness purposes. A sample page from David's
deduction to be $1,896 ($9,478 (unadjusted ba-logbook is illustrated in Table 6-2. He records his amount on Part I, Column A, line 7. Since David
sis) x 20%). David figures his total depreciationbusiness mileage (but not his personal miles) had no meal or entertainment expenses, he en-
deduction to be $9,568 ($7,672 (special allow-and expenses daily. ters his excess deductible expenses ($7,792) on
ance) + $1,896 (MACRS depreciation)). How-David uses Form 2106 to claim actual car Part I, line 10. He can deduct these expenses
ever, David's depreciation deduction is limited toexpenses. He completes Part II, Section A, as (subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income
$7,672. He enters the appropriate amounts inshown later on his illustrated form. He does not limit) on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 21, if he
Part II, Section D.claim the section 179 deduction but he does itemizes his deductions.claim the special depreciation allowance. He His other car expenses included $6,000 for
uses the MACRS double declining balance gas, oil, repairs, and insurance. He enters this
Table 6-2.  Daily Business Mileage and Expense Log Name: David Pine
Odometer Readings Expenses
Destination  Type
 (City, Town, or Business Miles  (Gas, oil, tolls,
Date Area) Purpose  Start  Stop  this trip etc.) Amount
6/1/08
6/2/08 Local Sales calls 8,097 8,188 91 Gas $ 44.50
(St. Louis)
6/3/08 Indianapolis Sales calls 8,211 8,486 275 Parking 6.50
6/4/08 Louisville See Bob Smith 8,486 8,599 113 Gas/Repair flat 46.00
(Pot. Client) tire 105.00
6/5/08 Return to 8,599 8,875 276 Gas 45.50
St. Louis
6/6/08 Local Sales calls 8,914 9,005 91
(St. Louis)
6/7/08
Weekly 8,097 9,005 846 $ 247.50
Total
Total 6,236 $2,748.00
Year-to-Date
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 35

Page 36 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
David Pine 559 00 9559Sales
1,320
13,192
5,400
7,792
7,792
7,792
EPS Filename: 11081L22 Size - Width = 44.0 picas Depth = PAGE
11,872
OMB No. 1545-0074Employee Business Expenses2106Form
/H17075See separate instructions.
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service /H17075Attach to Form 1040 or Form 1040NR.
Attachment
Sequence No. 129
Social security numberYour name Occupation in which you incurred expenses
Employee Business Expenses and Reimbursements
Column BColumn A
Step 1 Enter Your Expenses Meals and
Entertainment
Other Than Meals
and Entertainment
1
Vehicle expense from line 22c or line 29. (Rural mail carriers: See
instructions.)
1
2
Parking fees, tolls, and transportation, including train, bus, etc., that
did not involve overnight travel or commuting to and from work
2
Travel expense while away from home overnight, including lodging,
airplane, car rental, etc. Do not include meals and entertainment
3
3
Business expenses not included on lines 1 through 3. Do not
include meals and entertainment
4
4
5Meals and entertainment expenses (see instructions)5
Total expenses. In Column A, add lines 1 through 4 and enter the
result. In Column B, enter the amount from line 5
6
6
Note: If you were not reimbursed for any expenses in Step 1, skip line 7 and enter the amount from line 6 on line 8.
Step 2 Enter Reimbursements Received From Your Employer for Expenses Listed in Step 1
Enter reimbursements received from your employer that were not
reported to you in box 1 of Form W-2. Include any reimbursements
reported under code “L” in box 12 of your Form W-2 (see
instructions)
7
7
Step 3 Figure Expenses To Deduct on Schedule A (Form 1040 or Form 1040NR)
8
Subtract line 7 from line 6. If zero or less, enter -0-. However, if
line 7 is greater than line 6 in Column A, report the excess as
income on Form 1040, line 7 (or on Form 1040NR, line 8)
8
Note: If both columns of line 8 are zero, you cannot deduct
employee business expenses. Stop here and attach Form 2106 to
your return.
9
9
10
In Column A, enter the amount from line 8. In Column B, multiply
line 8 by 50% (.50). (Employees subject to Department of
Transportation (DOT) hours of service limits: Multiply meal
expenses incurred while away from home on business by 80% (.80)
instead of 50%. For details, see instructions.)
Add the amounts on line 9 of both columns and enter the total here. Also, enter the total on
Schedule A (Form 1040), line 21 (or on Schedule A (Form 1040NR), line 9 ). (Reservists,
qualified performing artists, fee-basis state or local government officials, and individuals with
disabilities: See the instructions for special rules on where to enter the total.)
/H1707510
Cat. No. 11700NFor Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see instructions. Form 2106 (2008)
Part I
(99)
2008
Page 36 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 37 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
/H12011
/H12011
150 8
20,000
14,000
70
10
2,400
3,600
/H12011
6,000
4,200
7,672
11,872
24,500
9,478
200DB 20%
1,896
9,568
10,960
7,672
7,672
EPS Filename: 11081L23 Size - Width = 44.0 picas Depth = PAGE
/H12011
6,000
7,672
Page 2Form 2106 (2008)
Vehicle Expenses
Section A—General Information (You must complete this section if you
are claiming vehicle expenses.) (b) Vehicle 2(a) Vehicle 1
//1111 Enter the date the vehicle was placed in service
12 milesmiles12 Total miles the vehicle was driven during 2008
milesmiles1313 Business miles included on line 12
%%1414 Percent of business use. Divide line 13 by line 12
milesmiles1515 Average daily roundtrip commuting distance
milesmiles1616 Commuting miles included on line 12
17 Other miles. Add lines 13 and 16 and subtract the total from line 12 milesmiles17
Do you (or your spouse) have another vehicle available for personal use?
18 NoYes
NoYes
Was your vehicle available for personal use during off-duty hours?
19
NoYes
If “Yes,” is the evidence written?21 NoYes
Do you have evidence to support your deduction?20
Section B—Standard Mileage Rate (See the instructions for Part II to find out whether to complete this section or Section C.)
22a Multiply business miles driven before July 1, 2008, by 50.5¢ (.505)
Section C—Actual Expenses (b) Vehicle 2(a) Vehicle 1
Gasoline, oil, repairs, vehicle
insurance, etc.
23
23
24a24a Vehicle rentals
24bb Inclusion amount (see instructions)
24cc Subtract line 24b from line 24a
Value of employer-provided
vehicle (applies only if 100% of
annual lease value was included
on Form W-2—see instructions)
25
25
2626 Add lines 23, 24c, and 25
Multiply line 26 by the
percentage on line 14
27
27
28Depreciation (see instructions)28
29 Add lines 27 and 28. Enter total
here and on line 1 29
Section D—Depreciation of Vehicles (Use this section only if you owned the vehicle and are completing Section C for the vehicle.)
(a) Vehicle 1 (b) Vehicle 2
Enter cost or other basis (see
instructions)
30
30
Enter section 179 deduction
and special allowance (see
instructions)
31
31
Multiply line 30 by line 14 (see
instructions if you claimed the
section 179 deduction or
special allowance)
32
32
Enter depreciation method and
percentage (see instructions)
33
33
Multiply line 32 by the percentage
on line 33 (see instructions)
34
34
35Add lines 31 and 3435
Enter the applicable limit explained
in the line 36 instructions
36
36
Multiply line 36 by the
percentage on line 14
37
37
Enter the smaller of line 35
or line 37. If you skipped lines
36 and 37, enter the amount
from line 35. Also enter this
amount on line 28 above
38
38
Part II
//
Form 2106 (2008)
22a
b Multiply business miles driven after June 30, 2008, by 58.5¢ (.585)
c Add lines 22a and 22b. Enter the result here and on line 1
22b
22c
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 37

Page 38 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Type of Expense AmountExample 2. Bill Wilson is an employee of Bill records his expenses and other pertinent
Fashion Clothing Co. in Manhattan, NY. In a information in his Weekly Traveling Expense Parking fees and tolls .......... . $  520
typical travel week, Bill leaves his home on Long Car expenses ............... . 10,820and Entertainment Record, shown in Table 6-3.
Island on Monday morning and drives to Albany Meals .................... . 3,861He obtains receipts for his expenses for lodging
Lodging, laundry, dry cleaning .... . 18,318to exhibit the Fashion line for 3 days to prospec- and for any other expenses of $75 or more. Entertainment ............... . 3,250tive customers. Then he drives to Troy to show
Gifts, education, etc. .......... . 650During the year, Bill drove a total of 25,000Fashion's new line of merchandise to Town De-
Total $37,419miles of which 20,000 miles were for businesspartment Store, an old customer. While in Troy,
he talks with Tom Brown, purchasing agent for (11,000 miles from January 1 through June 30, Bill received an allowance of $33,000
Town Department Store, to discuss the new line. and 9,000 mile from July 1 through December ($2,750 per month) to help offset his expenses.
He later takes John Smith of Attire Co. out to Bill did not have to account to his employer for31, 2008). Following the instructions for Form
dinner to discuss Attire Co.'s buying Fashion's the reimbursement and the $33,000 was in-2106-EZ, Part II, he answers all the questions
new line of clothing. cluded as income in box 1 of his Form W-2.and figures his car expense to be $10,820
Bill purchased his car on January 3, 2005. Because Bill's reimbursement was included(11,000 ×  501/2 cents per mile ($5,555) + 9,000 ×He uses the standard mileage rate for car ex- in his income and he is using the standard mile-581/2 cents per mile ($5,265)).pense purposes. He records his total mileage, age rate for his car expenses, he files Form
His total employee business expenses arebusiness mileage, parking fees, and tolls for the 2106-EZ with his tax return.
shown in the following table.year.
Page 38 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 39 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
THIS IS NOT AN OFFICIAL INTERNAL REVENUE FORM
Table 6-3.  Weekly Traveling Expense and Entertainment Record
From: August 3, 2008 To: August 9, 2008 Name: Bill Wilson
Expenses Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday Total
1. Travel Expenses:
Airlines
Excess Baggage
Bus ±  Train
Cab and Limousine
Tips
Porter
2.  Meals and Lodging: 
Breakfast 8 75 8 00 8 25 9 00 34 00
 Lunch 9 75 10 00 10 25 10 25 10 50 50 75
 Dinner 22 00 20 25 21 50 63 75
 Hotel and Motel 105 00 105 00 105 00 84 00 399 00(Detail in Schedule B)
3.  Entertainment 75 00 75 00
(Detail in Schedule C)
4. Other Expenses: 
Postage
Telephone & Telegraph 5 50 4 00 9 50
Stationery & Printing
Stenographer
Sample Room 50 00 50 00 100 00
Advertising
Assistant(s) & Model(s) 100 00 100 00 200 00
Trade Shows
5. Car Expenses:  (List all car expenses - the division between business and personal expenses may be made at the end of the year.)
(Detail mileage in Schedule A.)
Gas, oil, lube, wash
Repairs, parts
Tires, supplies
Parking fees, tolls 8 00 6 00 6 00 20 00
6. Other (Identify)
Total 150 25 294 00 294 75 183 50 29 50 952 00
Note:  Attach receipted bills for (1) ALL lodging and (2) any other expenses of $75.00 or more.
Schedule A ±  Car
Mileage: End 57,600 57,620 57,650 57,660 57,840
Start 57,445 57,600 57,620 57,650 57,660
Total 155 20 30 10 180 395
Business Mileage 155 20 30 10 170 385
Schedule B ±  Lodging
Name Bay Hotel Bay Hotel Bay Hotel Modern HotelHotel 
or
City Albany Albany Albany TroyMotel
Schedule C ±  Entertainment
Date Item Place Amount Business Purpose Business Relationship
August 7, 2008 Bar John's Steak House 25 00 Discuss purchases Smith-Attire Co.
Dinner Troy 50 00
 WEEKLY REIMBURSEMENTS:
Travel and transportation expenses ... . N/A
Other reimbursements ........... .
TOTAL .................... .
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 39

Page 40 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Bill Wilson 555 00 5555Sales
5,555
10,820
520
650
33,864
1 3 2005
20,000 2,600 2,400
/H12011
/H12011
/H12011
/H12011
7,111
5,265
EPS Filename: 11081L24 Size - Width = 44.0 picas Depth = PAGE
18,318
3,556
OMB No. 1545-0074
Unreimbursed Employee Business Expenses2106-EZForm
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service /H17075Attach to Form 1040 or Form 1040NR.
Attachment
Sequence No. 129A
Social security numberYour name Occupation in which you incurred expenses
Vehicle expense using the standard mileage rate. Complete Part II and then go to line 1a below.1
2
Parking fees, tolls, and transportation, including train, bus, etc., that did not involve overnight
travel or commuting to and from work
2
Travel expense while away from home overnight, including lodging, airplane, car rental, etc.
Do not include meals and entertainment
3
3
Business expenses not included on lines 1c through 3. Do not include meals and
entertainment
4
4
5
Meals and entertainment expenses: $ × 50% (.50). (Employees subject to
Department of Transportation (DOT) hours of service limits: Multiply meal expenses incurred
while away from home on business by 80% (.80) instead of 50%. For details, see instructions.)
5
Total expenses. Add lines 1c through 5. Enter here and on Schedule A (Form 1040), line
21 (or on Schedule A (Form 1040NR, line 9) ). (Armed Forces reservists, fee-basis state or
local government officials, qualified performing artists, and individuals with disabilities: See
the instructions for special rules on where to enter this amount.)
6
6
Cat. No. 20604Q Form 2106-EZ (2008)
Part I
Part II
Figure Your Expenses
You May Use This Form Only if All of the Following Apply.
● You are an employee deducting ordinary and necessary expenses attributable to your job. An ordinary expense is one that is
common and accepted in your field of trade, business, or profession. A necessary expense is one that is helpful and appropriate
for your business. An expense does not have to be required to be considered necessary.
● If you are claiming vehicle expense, you are using the standard mileage rate for 2008.
● You do not get reimbursed by your employer for any expenses (amounts your employer included in box 1 of your Form W-2 are
not considered reimbursements for this purpose).
Information on Your Vehicle. Complete this part only if you are claiming vehicle expense on line 1.
7
8
a
9
10
11a
b
When did you place your vehicle in service for business use? (month, day, year) /H17075 / /
Of the total number of miles you drove your vehicle during 2008, enter the number of miles you used your vehicle for:
Do you (or your spouse) have another vehicle available for personal use?
Was your vehicle available for personal use during off-duty hours?
Do you have evidence to support your deduction?
If “Yes,” is the evidence written?
Business
Yes No
b Commuting (see instructions) c Other
Yes No
Yes No
Yes No
(99)
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see page 4.
Caution: You can use the standard mileage rate for 2008 only if: (a) you owned the vehicle and used the standard mileage rate for the first year
you placed the vehicle in service, or (b) you leased the vehicle and used the standard mileage rate for the portion of the lease period after 1997.
1c
2008
Multiply business miles driven before July 1, 2008, by 50.5¢ (.505)
Multiply business miles driven after June 30, 2008, by 58.5¢ (.585)
Add lines 1a and 1b
a
b
c
1b
1a
Page 40 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 41 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Internet. You can access the IRS web- • TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 to lis-
site at www.irs.gov 24 hours a day, 7 ten to pre-recorded messages coveringHow To Get Tax Help
days a week to: various tax topics.
You can get help with unresolved tax issues, • E-file your return. Find out about commer- • Refund information. To check the status of
order free publications and forms, ask tax ques- your 2008 refund, call 1-800-829-1954cial tax preparation and e-file services
tions, and get information from the IRS in sev- during business hours or 1-800-829-4477available free to eligible taxpayers.eral ways. By selecting the method that is best (automated refund information 24 hours a• Check the status of your 2008 refund. Gofor you, you will have quick and easy access to day, 7 days a week). Wait at least 72to www.irs.gov and click on Where's Mytax help. hours after the IRS acknowledges receipt
Refund. Wait at least 72 hours after the of your e-filed return, or 3 to 4 weeks afterContacting your Taxpayer Advocate. The IRS acknowledges receipt of your e-filed mailing a paper return. If you filed FormTaxpayer Advocate Service (TAS) is an inde- return, or 3 to 4 weeks after mailing a 8379 with your return, wait 14 weeks (11pendent organization within the IRS whose em- paper return. If you filed Form 8379 with weeks if you filed electronically). Haveployees assist taxpayers who are experiencing your return, wait 14 weeks (11 weeks if your 2008 tax return available so you caneconomic harm, who are seeking help in resolv- you filed electronically). Have your 2008 provide your social security number, youring tax problems that have not been resolved filing status, and the exact whole dollartax return available so you can providethrough normal channels, or who believe that an amount of your refund. Refunds are sentyour social security number, your filingIRS system or procedure is not working as it out weekly on Fridays. If you check thestatus, and the exact whole dollar amountshould. status of your refund and are not given theof your refund.You can contact the TAS by calling the TAS date it will be issued, please wait until thetoll-free case intake line at 1-877-777-4778 or • Download forms, instructions, and publica- next week before checking back.TTY/TDD 1-800-829-4059 to see if you are eligi- tions.
ble for assistance. You can also call or write your • Other refund information. To check the
• Order IRS products online.local taxpayer advocate, whose phone number status of a prior year refund or amended
and address are listed in your local telephone return refund, call 1-800-829-1954.• Research your tax questions online.
directory and in Publication 1546, Taxpayer Ad-
• Search publications online by topic orvocate Service ÐYour Voice at the IRS. You Evaluating the quality of our telephone
keyword.can file Form 911, Request for Taxpayer Advo- services. To ensure IRS representatives give
cate Service Assistance (And Application for accurate, courteous, and professional answers,• View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs)Taxpayer Assistance Order), or ask an IRS em- we use several methods to evaluate the qualitypublished in the last few years.ployee to complete it on your behalf. For more of our telephone services. One method is for a
• Figure your withholding allowances usinginformation, go to www.irs.gov/advocate. second IRS representative to listen in on or
the withholding calculator online at record random telephone calls. Another is to askLow Income Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs). www.irs.gov/individuals. some callers to complete a short survey at theLITCs are independent organizations that pro- end of the call.vide low income taxpayers with representation • Determine if Form 6251 must be filed by
in federal tax controversies with the IRS for free using our Alternative Minimum Tax (AMT) Walk-in. Many products and servicesor for a nominal charge. The clinics also provide Assistant. are available on a walk-in basis.tax education and outreach for taxpayers who
 • Sign up to receive local and national taxspeak English as a second language. Publica-
news by email. • Products. You can walk in to many posttion 4134, Low Income Taxpayer Clinic List,
offices, libraries, and IRS offices to pick upprovides information on clinics in your area. It is • Get information on starting and operating certain forms, instructions, and publica-available at www.irs.gov or your local IRS office. a small business. tions. Some IRS offices, libraries, grocery
Free tax services. To find out what services stores, copy centers, city and county gov-
are available, get Publication 910, IRS Guide to ernment offices, credit unions, and officePhone. Many services are available byFree Tax Services. It contains lists of free tax supply stores have a collection of productsphone. information sources, including publications, available to print from a CD or photocopy
services, and free tax education and assistance
 from reproducible proofs. Also, some IRS
programs. It also has an index of over 100 offices and libraries have the Internal Rev-• Ordering forms, instructions, and publica-
TeleTax topics (recorded tax information) you enue Code, regulations, Internal Revenuetions. Call 1-800-829-3676 to order cur-can listen to on your telephone. Bulletins, and Cumulative Bulletins avail-rent-year forms, instructions, andAccessible versions of IRS published prod- able for research purposes.publications, and prior-year forms and in-ucts are available on request in a variety of structions. You should receive your order • Services. You can walk in to your localalternative formats for people with disabilities. within 10 days. Taxpayer Assistance Center every busi-
Free help with your return. Free help in pre- ness day for personal, face-to-face tax• Asking tax questions. Call the IRS withparing your return is available nationwide from help. An employee can explain IRS letters,your tax questions at 1-800-829-1040.IRS-trained volunteers. The Volunteer Income request adjustments to your tax account,
• Solving problems. You can getTax Assistance (VITA) program is designed to or help you set up a payment plan. If you
face-to-face help solving tax problemshelp low-income taxpayers and the Tax Coun- need to resolve a tax problem, have ques-
seling for the Elderly (TCE) program is designed every business day in IRS Taxpayer As- tions about how the tax law applies to your
to assist taxpayers age 60 and older with their individual tax return, or you are more com-sistance Centers. An employee can ex-
tax returns. Many VITA sites offer free electronic fortable talking with someone in person,plain IRS letters, request adjustments to
filing and all volunteers will let you know about visit your local Taxpayer Assistanceyour account, or help you set up a pay-
credits and deductions you may be entitled to Center where you can spread out yourment plan. Call your local Taxpayer Assis-
claim. To find the nearest Vita or TCE site, call records and talk with an IRS representa-tance Center for an appointment. To find
1-800-829-1040. tive face-to-face. No appointment is nec-the number, go to 
As part of the TCE program, AARP offers the essaryÐjust walk in. If you prefer, youwww.irs.gov/localcontacts or look in the
Tax-Aide counseling program. To find the near- can call your local Center and leave aphone book under United States Govern-est AARP Tax-Aide site, call 1-888-227-7669 or message requesting an appointment to re-ment, Internal Revenue Service.visit AARP's website at solve a tax account issue. A representa-
• TTY/TDD equipment. If you have accesswww.aarp.org/money/taxaide. tive will call you back within 2 business
to TTY/TDD equipment, callFor more information on these programs, go days to schedule an in-person appoint-
1-800-829-4059 to ask tax questions or toto www.irs.gov and enter keyword ªVITAº in the ment at your convenience. If you have an
upper right-hand corner. order forms and publications. ongoing, complex tax account problem or
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 41

Page 42 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
a special need, such as a disability, an • Internal Revenue Bulletins. • ªRate the Productº surveyÐyour opportu-
appointment can be requested. All other nity to suggest changes for future editions.• Toll-free and email technical support.issues will be handled without an appoint- • A site map of the guide to help you navi-• Two releases during the year.ment. To find the number of your local gate the pages with ease.± The first release will ship the beginningoffice, go to www.irs.gov/localcontacts or
of January 2009.look in the phone book under United • An interactive ªTeens in Bizº module that
± The final release will ship the beginningStates Government, Internal Revenue gives practical tips for teens about starting
of March 2009.Service. their own business, creating a business
plan, and filing taxes.Purchase the DVD from National TechnicalMail. You can send your order for
Information Service (NTIS) at forms, instructions, and publications to The information is updated during the year.
www.irs.gov/cdorders for $30 (no handling fee)the address below. You should receive Visit www.irs.gov and enter keyword ªSBRGº in
or call 1-877-233-6767 toll free to buy the DVDa response within 10 days after your request is the upper right-hand corner for more informa-for $30 (plus a $6 handling fee). The price isreceived. tion.discounted to $25 for orders placed prior to
December 1, 2008.Internal Revenue Service
1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorway Small Business Resource GuideBloomington, IL 61705-6613 2009. This online guide is a must for Appendicesevery small business owner or any tax-
DVD for tax products. You can order
payer about to start a business. This year'sPublication 1796, IRS Tax Products There are sixteen appendices.guide includes:DVD, and obtain:
 Appendices A-1 through A-6 show the lease
• Helpful information, such as how to pre-• Current-year forms, instructions, and pub- inclusion amounts that you may need to report ifpare a business plan, find financing forlications. you leased a car (other than a truck or van, or anyour business, and much more. electric car) for 30 days or more. The tables are• Prior-year forms, instructions, and publica-
• All the business tax forms, instructions, numbered.tions.
and publications needed to successfully Appendices B-1 through B-6 show the lease• Tax Map: an electronic research tool and manage a business. inclusion amounts that you may need to report iffinding aid.
• Tax law changes for 2009. you leased a truck or van.
• Tax law frequently asked questions. Appendices C-1 through C-4 show the lease• Tax Map: an electronic research tool and
• Tax Topics from the IRS telephone re- inclusion amounts that you may need to report iffinding aid.
sponse system. you leased an electric car before 2007.• Web links to various government agen-
• Internal Revenue CodeÐTitle 26 of the If any of these apply to you, use the appendixcies, business associations, and IRS orga-
U.S. Code. for the year you first leased the car. (See chapternizations.
4.)• Fill-in, print, and save features for most tax
forms.
Page 42 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 43 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-1. Inclusion Amounts for Cars First Leased in 1999 through 2003
Tax Year of Lease1
For Lease Term For Lease Term For Lease Term For Lease Term For Lease Term
Fair Market Value Beginning in 1999 Beginning in 2000 Beginning in 2001 Beginning in 2002 Beginning in 2003
Over Not Over 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later
$ 15,500 $ 15,800 $  6 $  12 $  11 $  6 $  0
15,800 16,100 14 23 22 13 0
16,100 16,400 23 34 33 19 0
16,400 16,700 32 45 44 26 0
16,700 17,000 41 57 56 31 0
17,000 17,500 53 72 70 40 0
17,500 18,000 68 91 89 50 0
18,000 18,500 82 109 107 61 45
18,500 19,000 96 128 125 72 53
19,000 19,500 111 147 143 82 61
19,500 20,000 126 166 162 93 69
20,000 20,500 140 185 181 103 77
20,500 21,000 155 204 199 114 85
21,000 21,500 169 222 217 123 92
21,500 22,000 183 241 236 134 100
22,000 23,000 206 269 263 150 111
23,000 24,000 235 306 300 171 127
24,000 25,000 264 345 337 192 143
25,000 26,000 293 381 373 213 158
26,000 27,000 322 419 410 234 174
27,000 28,000 351 457 447 255 189
28,000 29,000 380 494 484 276 204
29,000 30,000 410 532 520 296 221
30,000 31,000 439 570 557 318 236
31,000 32,000 468 607 594 338 251
32,000 33,000 497 645 631 360 267
33,000 34,000 527 683 667 381 283
34,000 35,000 556 720 705 402 298
35,000 36,000 585 757 741 422 314
36,000 37,000 614 795 778 443 330
37,000 38,000 643 833 815 464 346
38,000 39,000 672 870 851 485 361
39,000 40,000 702 908 888 506 376
40,000 41,000 731 946 925 527 391
41,000 42,000 760 983 962 549 407
42,000 43,000 789 1,021 998 570 423
43,000 44,000 819 1,058 1,036 590 438
44,000 45,000 848 1,095 1,072 611 454
45,000 46,000 877 1,133 1,108 632 470
46,000 47,000 906 1,171 1,145 653 486
47,000 48,000 935 1,208 1,183 674 501
48,000 49,000 964 1,246 1,219 695 516
49,000 50,000 993 1,284 1,256 717 532
50,000 51,000 1,023 1,321 1,293 737 548
51,000 52,000 1,052 1,359 1,330 758 563
52,000 53,000 1,081 1,396 1,366 779 578
53,000 54,000 1,110 1,433 1,403 800 594
54,000 55,000 1,140 1,471 1,439 821 610
55,000 56,000 1,169 1,508 1,476 842 626
56,000 57,000 1,198 1,546 1,514 863 641
57,000 58,000 1,227 1,584 1,550 883 656
58,000 59,000 1,256 1,621 1,586 905 672
59,000 60,000 1,285 1,659 1,624 925 688
60,000 62,000 1,329 1,715 1,678 957 711
62,000 64,000 1,387 1,790 1,752 999 743
64,000 66,000 1,446 1,865 1,825 1,041 773
66,000 68,000 1,504 1,941 1,900 1,083 805
68,000 70,000 1,563 2,016 1,972 1,125 835
70,000 72,000 1,621 2,092 2,047 1,166 867
72,000 74,000 1,679 2,166 2,120 1,208 898
74,000 76,0002 1,738 2,241 2,193 1,250 930
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $76,000 or less than $15,501, see the document listed for the first year of the lease.
For 1999, Revenue Procedure 99-14 (1999-5 IRB 56), available at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb99-05.pdf.
For 2000, Revenue Procedure 2000-18 (2000-9 IRB 722), available at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb00-09.pdf.
For 2001, Revenue Procedure 2001-19 (2001-9 IRB 732), available at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb01-09.pdf.
For 2002, Revenue Procedure 2002-14 (2002-5 IRB 450), available at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb02-05.pdf.
For 2003, Revenue Procedure 2003-75 (2003-45 IRB 1018), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2003-45_IRB/ar14.html.
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 43

Page 44 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-2. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Trucks, Vans, or Electric Cars) First Leased in 2004
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 17,500 $ 18,000 $ 11  $ 23 $ 33 $ 42 48
18,000 18,500 13 26 40 49 56
18,500 19,000 14 31 46 55 65
19,000 19,500 16 35 51 63 73
19,500 20,000 18 39 57 70 81
20,000 20,500 20 43 63 77 89
20,500 21,000 22 47 69 84 97
21,000 21,500 23 51 75 91 106
21,500 22,000 25 55 81 98 114
22,000 23,000 28 61 90 109 126
23,000 24,000 32 69 102 123 142
24,000 25,000 35 77 114 137 159
25,000 26,000 39 85 126 151 176
26,000 27,000 43 93 137 166 192
27,000 28,000 46 101 149 180 209
 28,000 29,000 50 109 161 194 225
29,000 30,000 54 116 174 208 242
30,000 31,000 57 125 185 223 257
31,000 32,000 61 133 197 237 274
32,000 33,000 64 141 209 251 291
33,000 34,000 68 149 221 265 307
34,000 35,000 72 157 232 280 323
35,000 36,000 75 165 244 294 340
36,000 37,000 79 173 256 308 357
37,000 38,000 83 181 268 322 373
38,000 39,000 86 189 280 337 389
39,000 40,000 90 197 292 351 405
40,000 41,000 94 204 304 365 423
41,000 42,000 97 213 316 379 438
42,000 43,000 101 221 327 394 455
43,000 44,000 105 228 340 408 471
44,000 45,000 108 237 351 422 488
45,000 46,000 112 245 363 436 504
46,000 47,000 115 253 375 451 520
47,000 48,000 119 261 387 464 538
48,000 49,000 123 269 398 479 554
49,000 50,000 126 277 411 493 570
50,000 51,000 130 285 422 508 586
51,000 52,000 134 292 435 522 603
52,000 53,000 137 301 446 536 619
53,000 54,000 141 309 458 550 636
54,000 55,000 145 316 471 564 652
55,000 56,000 148 325 482 578 669
56,000 57,000 152 333 493 593 685
57,000 58,000 155 341 506 607 701
58,000 59,000 159 349 517 622 718
59,000 60,000 163 357 529 636 734
60,000 62,000 168 369 547 657 759
62,000 64,000 176 384 571 686 792
64,000 66,000 183 401 594 714 825
66,000 68,000 190 417 618 743 857
68,000 70,000 197 433 642 771 890
70,000 72,000 205 448 666 800 923
72,000 74,000 212 465 689 828 956
74,000 76,000 219 481 713 856 990
76,000 78,000 227 496 738 884 1022
78,000 80,000 234 513 760 914 1,055
80,000 85,000 247 540 803 963 1,112
85,000 90,000 265 580 862 1,035 1,194
90,000 95,000 283 621 921 1,105 1,277
95,000 100,0002 301 661 980 1,177 1,359
1 For the tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the lease is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2004-20 (2004-13 IRB 642), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2004-13_IRB/ar09.html.
Page 44 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 45 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-3. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Trucks, Vans, or Electric Cars) First Leased in 2005
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 15,200 $ 15,500 $ 3  $ 6 $ 9 $ 11 $ 13
15,500 15,800 4 9 13 17 19
15,800 16,100 5 12 18 22 26
16,100 16,400 7 15 22 27 32
16,400 16,700 8 18 27 32 39
16,700 17,000 9 21 32 38 44
17,000 17,500 11 25 38 45 52
17,500 18,000 14 30 45 54 63
18,000 18,500 16 35 52 63 73
18,500 19,000 18 40 60 72 83
19,000 19,500 20 46 67 80 94
19,500 20,000 23 50 75 90 104
20,000 20,500 25 55 82 99 115
20,500 21,000 27 61 89 108 125
21,000 21,500 30 65 97 117 135
21,500 22,000 32 70 105 125 146
22,000 23,000 35 78 116 139 161
23,000 24,000 40 88 131 156 182
24,000 25,000 44 98 146 175 202
25,000 26,000 49 108 161 192 223
26,000 27,000 54 118 175 211 244
27,000 28,000 58 128 191 228 265
28,000 29,000 63 138 205 247 285
29,000 30,000 67 149 220 264 306
30,000 31,000 72 159 234 283 326
31,000 32,000 77 168 250 300 348
32,000 33,000 81 179 265 318 367
33,000 34,000 86 189 279 336 389
34,000 35,000 90 199 295 354 409
35,000 36,000 95 209 309 372 430
36,000 37,000 99 219 325 389 451
37,000 38,000 104 229 339 408 471
38,000 39,000 109 239 354 426 491
39,000 40,000 113 249 370 443 512
40,000 41,000 118 259 384 462 533
41,000 42,000 122 269 400 479 554
42,000 43,000 127 279 414 497 575
43,000 44,000 132 289 429 515 595
44,000 45,000 136 299 444 533 616
45,000 46,000 141 309 459 551 636
46,000 47,000 145 320 473 569 657
47,000 48,000 150 329 489 587 678
48,000 49,000 154 340 504 604 699
49,000 50,000 159 350 518 623 719
50,000 51,000 164 360 533 640 740
51,000 52,000 168 370 548 659 760
52,000 53,000 173 380 563 676 781
53,000 54,000 177 390 578 694 802
54,000 55,000 182 400 593 712 823
55,000 56,000 186 410 609 729 844
56,000 57,000 191 420 623 748 864
57,000 58,000 196 430 638 766 884
58,000 59,000 200 440 653 784 905
59,000 60,000 205 450 668 802 925
60,000 62,000 212 465 691 828 957
62,000 64,000 221 485 721 864 998
64,000 66,000 230 506 750 900 1,039
66,000 68,000 239 526 780 935 1,081
68,000 70,000 248 546 810 971 1,123
70,000 72,000 258 566 839 1,008 1,163
72,000 74,000 267 586 869 1,044 1,204
74,000 76,000 276 606 899 1,079 1,247
76,000 78,000 285 626 930 1,114 1,288
78,000 80,000 294 646 960 1,150 1,329
80,000 85,000 310 682 1,011 1,213 1,402
85,000 90,000 333 732 1,086 1,303 1,504
90,000 95,000 356 782 1,161 1,392 1,608
95,000 100,0002 379 832 1,236 1,481 1,712
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2005-13 (2005-12 IRB 759), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2005-12_IRB/ar15.html.
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 45

Page 46 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-4. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Trucks, Vans, or Electric Cars) First Leased in 2006
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 15,200 $ 15,500 $ 4  $ 6 $ 10 $ 10 $ 10
15,500 15,800 6 10 16 18 18
15,800 16,100 8 15 22 25 28
16,100 16,400 9 19 29 33 36
16,400 16,700 11 24 35 40 45
16,700 17,000 13 28 42 48 53
17,000 17,500 16 34 50 58 66
17,500 18,000 19 41 61 71 80
18,000 18,500 23 48 71 84 95
18,500 19,000 26 55 82 96 110
19,000 19,500 29 62 93 109 125
19,500 20,000 32 70 103 122 139
20,000 20,500 36 76 114 135 154
20,500 21,000 39 84 124 148 168
21,000 21,500 42 91 135 160 184
21,500 22,000 45 98 146 173 198
22,000 23,000 50 109 162 192 220
23,000 24,000 57 123 183 218 250
24,000 25,000 63 138 204 243 279
25,000 26,000 70 152 225 269 309
26,000 27,000 76 166 247 294 339
27,000 28,000 83 181 268 319 368
28,000 29,000 90 195 289 345 397
29,000 30,000 96 209 311 371 426
30,000 31,000 103 223 332 397 455
31,000 32,000 109 238 353 422 485
32,000 33,000 116 252 374 448 515
33,000 34,000 122 267 395 473 545
34,000 35,000 129 281 417 498 574
35,000 36,000 135 295 439 523 604
36,000 37,000 142 309 460 549 633
37,000 38,000 148 324 481 575 662
38,000 39,000 155 338 502 601 691
39,000 40,000 161 353 523 626 721
40,000 41,000 168 367 545 651 750
41,000 42,000 175 381 566 677 780
42,000 43,000 181 396 587 702 810
43,000 44,000 188 410 608 728 839
44,000 45,000 194 424 630 753 869
45,000 46,000 201 438 651 779 898
46,000 47,000 207 453 672 805 927
47,000 48,000 214 467 694 830 956
48,000 49,000 220 482 715 855 986
49,000 50,000 227 496 736 881 1,016
50,000 51,000 233 510 758 906 1,045
51,000 52,000 240 525 778 932 1,075
52,000 53,000 246 539 800 958 1,104
53,000 54,000 253 553 821 984 1,133
54,000 55,000 259 568 842 1,009 1,163
55,000 56,000 266 582 864 1,034 1,192
56,000 57,000 273 596 885 1,060 1,221
57,000 58,000 279 611 906 1,085 1,251
58,000 59,000 286 625 927 1,111 1,281
59,000 60,000 292 639 949 1,136 1,311
60,000 62,000 302 661 981 1,174 1,354
62,000 64,000 315 690 1,023 1,225 1,413
64,000 66,000 328 718 1,066 1,276 1,473
66,000 68,000 341 747 1,108 1,328 1,531
68,000 70,000 354 776 1,151 1,378 1,590
70,000 72,000 367 804 1,194 1,429 1,649
72,000 74,000 380 833 1,236 1,481 1,707
74,000 76,000 393 862 1,278 1,532 1,767
76,000 78,000 407 890 1,321 1,583 1,825
78,000 80,000 420 919 1,363 1,634 1,884
80,000 85,000 443 969 1,438 1,723 1,987
85,000 90,000 475 1,041 1,544 1,851 2,135
90,000 95,000 508 1,112 1,651 1,978 2,282
95,000 100,0002 541 1,184 1,757 2,106 2,429
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2006-18 (2006-12 IRB 645), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2006-12_IRB/ar11.html.
Page 46 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 47 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-5. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Trucks and Vans) First Leased in 2007
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 15,000 $ 15,800 $ 2  $ 5 $ 11 $ 11 $ 13
15,800 16,100 4 10 17 19 22
16,100 16,400 6 14 24 28 31
16,400 16,700 9 18 31 35 41
16,700 17,000 11 23 37 43 50
17,000 17,500 13 29 46 54 62
17,500 18,000 17 37 56 68 77
18,000 18,500 20 44 68 81 93
18,500 19,000 24 51 80 94 108
19,000 19,500 27 59 90 108 124
19,500 20,000 30 67 101 121 139
20,000 20,500 34 74 113 134 154
20,500 21,000 37 82 123 148 170
21,000 21,500 41 89 135 161 185
21,500 22,000 44 97 146 174 201
22,000 23,000 49 108 163 194 224
23,000 24,000 56 123 185 221 255
24,000 25,000 63 138 207 248 285
25,000 26,000 70 153 229 275 316
26,000 27,000 77 168 251 302 347
27,000 28,000 83 183 274 328 378
28,000 29,000 90 198 296 355 409
29,000 30,000 97 213 318 382 439
30,000 31,000 104 228 341 408 470
31,000 32,000 111 243 363 435 501
32,000 33,000 118 258 385 461 532
33,000 34,000 125 273 407 488 563
34,000 35,000 131 288 430 515 593
35,000 36,000 138 303 452 542 624
36,000 37,000 145 318 474 568 656
37,000 38,000 152 333 496 595 686
38,000 39,000 159 348 519 621 717
39,000 40,000 166 363 541 648 748
40,000 41,000 172 378 564 674 779
41,000 42,000 179 393 586 701 810
42,000 43,000 186 408 608 728 840
43,000 44,000 193 423 630 755 871
44,000 45,000 200 438 652 782 902
45,000 46,000 207 453 674 809 933
46,000 47,000 213 468 697 835 964
47,000 48,000 220 483 719 862 995
48,000 49,000 227 498 742 888 1,025
49,000 50,000 234 513 764 915 1,056
50,000 51,000 241 528 786 942 1,087
51,000 52,000 278 543 808 969 1,117
52,000 53,000 254 558 831 995 1,148
53,000 54,000 261 573 853 1,022 1,179
54,000 55,000 268 588 875 1,049 1,210
55,000 56,000 275 603 897 1,076 1,241
56,000 57,000 282 618 920 1,102 1,271
57,000 58,000 289 633 942 1,128 1,303
58,000 59,000 296 648 964 1,155 1,334
59,000 60,000 302 663 987 1,182 1,364
60,000 62,000 313 685 1,020 1,222 1,411
62,000 64,000 326 716 1,064 1,276 1,472
64,000 66,000 340 746 1,108 1,329 1,534
66,000 68,000 354 775 1,154 1,382 1,595
68,000 70,000 367 806 1,198 1,435 1,657
70,000 72,000 381 836 1,242 1,489 1,719
72,000 74,000 395 865 1,287 1,543 1,780
74,000 76,000 408 896 1,331 1,596 1,842
76,000 78,000 422 926 1,376 1,649 1,903
78,000 80,000 436 955 1,421 1,703 1,965
80,000 85,000 460 1,008 1,498 1,796 2,074
85,000 90,000 494 1,083 1,610 1,929 2,228
90,000 95,000 528 1,158 1,721 2,063 2,382
95,000 100,0002 562 1,233 1,833 2,196 2,536
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2007-30 (2007-18 IRB 1104), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2007-18_IRB/ar11.html.
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 47

Page 48 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-6. Inclusion Amounts for Cars (Other Than Trucks and Vans) First Leased in 2008
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 18,500 $ 19,000 $ 20 $ 42 $ 62 $ 73 $ 84
19,000 19,500 22 47 71 83 94
19,500 20,000 25 53 78 93 106
20,000 20,500 27 58 87 102 117
20,500 21,000 30 63 95 112 128
21,000 21,500 32 69 103 122 139
21,500 22,000 34 75 111 131 151
22,000 23,000 38 83 123 146 167
23,000 24,000 43 94 139 165 190
24,000 25,000 48 105 155 185 212
25,000 26,000 53 115 172 204 235
26,000 27,000 58 126 188 223 257
27,000 28,000 63 137 204 243 279
28,000 29,000 68 148 220 262 302
29,000 30,000 73 159 236 282 324
30,000 31,000 78 107 252 301 347
31,000 32,000 83 181 268 321 368
32,000 33,000 88 192 284 340 391
33,000 34,000 93 202 301 359 414
34,000 35,000 98 213 317 379 436
35,000 36,000 103 224 333 398 459
36,000 37,000 108 235 349 418 481
37,000 38,000 113 246 365 437 503
38,000 39,000 118 257 381 457 525
39,000 40,000 123 268 397 476 548
40,000 41,000 128 279 413 495 571
41,000 42,000 133 289 430 515 593
42,000 43,000 137 301 446 534 615
43,000 44,000 142 312 462 553 638
44,000 45,000 147 323 478 573 659
45,000 46,000 152 333 495 592 682
46,000 47,000 157 344 511 611 705
47,000 48,000 162 355 527 631 727
48,000 49,000 167 366 543 650 750
49,000 50,000 172 377 559 670 772
50,000 51,000 177 388 575 689 794
51,000 52,000 182 399 591 709 816
52,000 53,000 187 410 607 728 839
53,000 54,000 192 420 624 747 862
54,000 55,000 197 431 640 767 884
55,000 56,000 202 442 657 785 906
56,000 57,000 207 453 673 805 928
57,000 58,000 212 464 689 824 951
58,000 59,000 217 475 705 844 973
59,000 60,000 222 486 721 863 996
60,000 62,000 229 502 746 892 1,029
62,000 64,000 239 524 778 931 1,074
64,000 66,000 249 546 810 970 1,118
66,000 68,000 259 567 843 1,008 1,164
68,000 70,000 269 589 875 1,047 1,209
70,000 72,000 279 611 907 1,086 1,253
72,000 74,000 289 633 939 1,125 1,298
74,000 76,000 299 654 972 1,164 1,342
76,000 78,000 309 676 1,004 1,203 1,387
78,000 80,000 319 698 1,036 1,242 1,432
80,000 85,000 336 736 1,093 1,309 1,511
85,000 90,000 361 791 1,173 1,406 1,623
90,000 95,000 386 845 1,255 1,503 1,734
95,000 100,0002 410 900 1,335 1,600 1,846
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2008-22 (2008-12 IRB 658), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2008-12_IRB/ar18.html.
Page 48 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 49 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix B-1. Inclusion Amounts for Trucks and Vans First Leased in 2003
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 18,500 $ 19,000 $ 7  $ 14 $ 22 $ 24 $ 29
19,000 19,500 8 18 27 32 36
19,500 20,000 10 22 33 38 44
20,000 20,500 12 26 38 45 52
20,500 21,000 14 29 44 52 60
21,000 21,500 15 34 49 59 67
21,500 22,000 17 37 55 66 75
22,000 23,000 20 43 63 76 86
23,000 24,000 23 51 74 89 102
24,000 25,000 27 58 86 102 118
25,000 26,000 30 66 97 116 133
26,000 27,000 33 73 109 129 149
27,000 28,000 37 81 119 143 165
28,000 29,000 40 89 130 157 180
29,000 30,000 44 96 142 170 196
30,000 31,000 47 104 153 183 212
31,000 32,000 51 111 165 196 227
32,000 33,000 54 119 176 210 242
33,000 34,000 58 126 187 224 258
34,000 35,000 61 134 198 238 273
35,000 36,000 65 141 210 251 289
36,000 37,000 68 149 221 264 305
37,000 38,000 71 157 232 278 320
38,000 39,000 75 164 243 292 336
39,000 40,000 78 172 254 305 352
40,000 41,000 82 179 266 318 367
41,000 42,000 85 187 277 332 383
42,000 43,000 89 194 289 345 398
43,000 44,000 92 202 300 358 414
44,000 45,000 96 209 311 373 429
45,000 46,000 99 217 322 386 445
46,000 47,000 102 225 333 400 460
47,000 48,000 106 232 345 413 476
48,000 49,000 109 240 356 426 492
49,000 50,000 113 247 368 439 507
50,000 51,000 116 255 379 453 523
51,000 52,000 120 263 389 467 538
52,000 53,000 123 270 401 480 554
53,000 54,000 127 278 412 493 570
54,000 55,000 130 285 424 507 585
55,000 56,000 134 293 434 521 601
56,000 57,000 137 301 445 534 617
57,000 58,000 140 308 457 548 632
58,000 59,000 144 316 468 561 647
59,000 60,000 147 323 480 575 663
60,000 62,000 152 335 496 595 687
62,000 64,000 159 350 519 622 717
64,000 66,000 166 365 542 648 749
66,000 68,000 173 380 564 676 780
68,000 70,000 180 395 587 702 811
70,000 72,000 187 410 609 730 842
72,000 74,000 194 426 631 757 873
74,000 76,000 201 441 654 783 905
76,000 78,000 208 456 676 811 935
78,000 80,000 215 471 699 837 967
80,000 85,000 227 497 739 885 1,021
85,000 90,000 244 535 795 952 1,099
90,000 95,000 261 573 851 1,020 1,177
95,000 100,0002 278 611 907 1,088 1,254
1 For the tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the lease is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2003-75 (2003-45 IRB 1018), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2003-45_IRB/ar14.html.
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 49

Page 50 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix B-2. Inclusion Amounts for Trucks and Vans First Leased in 2004
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 18,000 $ 18,500 $ 7  $ 15 $ 21 $ 26 $ 30
18,500 19,000 9 18 28 33 38
19,000 19,500 11 22 34 40 47
19,500 20,000 13 26 39 48 55
20,000 20,500 14 31 45 54 63
20,500 21,000 16 35 51 61 72
21,000 21,500 18 38 58 68 80
21,500 22,000 20 42 63 76 88
22,000 23,000 23 48 72 87 100
23,000 24,000 26 57 83 101 117
24,000 25,000 30 64 96 115 133
25,000 26,000 34 72 108 129 149
26,000 27,000 37 81 119 143 166
27,000 28,000 41 88 132 157 183
28,000 29,000 44 97 143 172 198
29,000 30,000 48 104 155 187 215
30,000 31,000 52 112 167 201 231
31,000 32,000 55 121 178 215 248
32,000 33,000 59 128 191 229 264
33,000 34,000 63 136 203 243 281
34,000 35,000 66 145 214 257 298
35,000 36,000 70 152 227 271 314
36,000 37,000 74 160 238 286 330
37,000 38,000 77 169 249 301 346
38,000 39,000 81 176 262 314 364
39,000 40,000 84 185 273 329 379
40,000 41,000 88 192 286 343 396
41,000 42,000 92 200 298 357 412
42,000 43,000 95 209 309 371 429
43,000 44,000 99 216 322 385 445
44,000 45,000 103 224 333 400 462
45,000 46,000 106 233 345 413 479
46,000 47,000 110 240 357 428 495
47,000 48,000 114 248 369 442 511
48,000 49,000 117 257 380 457 527
49,000 50,000 121 264 393 471 544
50,000 51,000 125 272 404 486 560
51,000 52,000 128 280 417 499 577
52,000 53,000 132 288 428 514 593
53,000 54,000 135 297 440 527 610
54,000 55,000 139 304 452 542 626
55,000 56,000 143 312 464 556 643
56,000 57,000 146 321 475 571 659
57,000 58,000 150 328 488 585 675
58,000 59,000 154 336 499 600 691
59,000 60,000 157 345 511 613 708
60,000 62,000 163 356 529 635 733
62,000 64,000 170 372 553 663 766
64,000 66,000 177 389 576 692 798
66,000 68,000 185 404 600 720 832
68,000 70,000 192 420 624 749 864
70,000 72,000 199 436 648 777 897
72,000 74,000 206 453 671 805 931
74,000 76,000 214 468 695 834 963
76,000 78,000 221 484 719 863 996
78,000 80,000 228 501 742 891 1,029
80,000 85,000 241 528 785 940 1,087
85,000 90,000 259 568 844 1,012 1,168
90,000 95,000 277 609 902 1,084 1,250
95,000 100,0002 296 648 962 1,155 1,333
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the lease is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2004-20 (2004-13 IRB 642), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2004-13_IRB/ar09.html.
Page 50 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 51 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix B-3. Inclusion Amounts for Trucks and Vans First Leased in 2005
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 16,700 $ 17,000 $ 3  $ 6 $ 8 $ 10 $ 11
17,000 17,500 4 10 14 17 20
17,500 18,000 7 15 21 26 30
18,000 18,500 9 20 29 35 40
18,500 19,000 11 25 37 43 51
19,000 19,500 14 30 44 52 61
19,500 20,000 16 35 51 62 71
20,000 20,500 18 40 59 71 81
20,500 21,000 20 45 67 79 92
21,000 21,500 23 50 74 88 103
21,500 22,000 25 55 81 98 113
22,000 23,000 28 63 92 111 129
23,000 24,000 33 73 107 129 149
24,000 25,000 38 83 122 147 169
25,000 26,000 42 93 137 165 190
26,000 27,000 47 103 152 183 210
27,000 28,000 51 113 167 201 231
28,000 29,000 56 123 182 218 253
29,000 30,000 60 133 197 237 272
30,000 31,000 65 143 212 254 294
31,000 32,000 70 153 227 272 314
32,000 33,000 74 163 242 290 335
33,000 34,000 79 173 257 308 355
34,000 35,000 83 184 271 326 376
35,000 36,000 88 193 287 344 397
36,000 37,000 93 203 302 361 418
37,000 38,000 97 214 316 380 438
38,000 39,000 102 223 332 397 459
39,000 40,000 106 234 346 415 480
40,000 41,000 111 244 361 433 500
41,000 42,000 115 254 376 451 521
42,000 43,000 120 264 391 469 542
43,000 44,000 125 274 406 487 562
44,000 45,000 129 284 421 505 583
45,000 46,000 134 294 436 523 603
46,000 47,000 138 304 451 541 624
47,000 48,000 143 314 466 558 645
48,000 49,000 148 324 481 576 666
49,000 50,000 152 334 496 594 687
50,000 51,000 157 344 511 612 707
51,000 52,000 161 355 525 630 728
52,000 53,000 166 364 541 648 748
53,000 54,000 170 375 555 666 769
54,000 55,000 175 385 570 684 789
55,000 56,000 180 394 586 701 811
56,000 57,000 184 405 600 720 830
57,000 58,000 189 415 615 737 852
58,000 59,000 193 425 630 755 873
59,000 60,000 198 435 645 773 893
60,000 62,000 205 450 667 800 924
62,000 64,000 214 470 697 836 966
64,000 66,000 223 490 727 872 1,007
66,000 68,000 232 510 757 908 1,048
68,000 70,000 241 531 786 944 1,089
70,000 72,000 251 550 817 979 1,131
72,000 74,000 260 571 846 1,015 1,172
74,000 76,000 269 591 876 1,051 1,213
76,000 78,000 278 611 906 1,087 1,254
78,000 80,000 287 631 936 1,123 1,296
80,000 85,000 303 666 989 1,185 1,368
85,000 90,000 326 717 1,063 1,274 1,472
90,000 95,000 349 767 1,137 1,365 1,575
95,000 100,0002 372 817 1,212 1,454 1,678
1 For the last year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2005-13 (2005-12 IRB 759), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2005-12_IRB/ar15.html.
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 51

Page 52 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix B-4. Inclusion Amounts for Trucks and Vans First Leased in 2006
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 16,700 $ 17,000 $ 4  $ 8 $ 12 $ 14 $ 16
17,000 17,500 6 14 20 24 29
17,500 18,000 9 21 31 37 43
18,000 18,500 13 28 42 49 58
18,500 19,000 16 36 52 62 72
19,000 19,500 19 43 63 75 87
19,500 20,000 23 50 73 88 102
20,000 20,500 26 57 84 101 116
20,500 21,000 29 64 95 113 131
21,000 21,500 32 72 105 126 146
21,500 22,000 36 78 116 139 161
22,000 23,000 41 89 132 158 183
23,000 24,000 47 104 153 183 213
24,000 25,000 54 118 174 209 242
25,000 26,000 60 132 196 235 271
26,000 27,000 67 146 217 261 300
27,000 28,000 73 161 238 286 330
28,000 29,000 80 175 260 311 359
29,000 30,000 86 190 281 336 389
30,000 31,000 93 204 302 362 418
31,000 32,000 99 219 323 388 447
32,000 33,000 106 233 344 413 478
33,000 34,000 112 247 366 439 506
34,000 35,000 119 261 387 465 536
35,000 36,000 125 276 408 490 566
36,000 37,000 132 290 430 515 595
37,000 38,000 139 304 451 541 624
38,000 39,000 145 319 472 566 654
39,000 40,000 152 333 493 592 684
40,000 41,000 158 347 515 618 712
41,000 42,000 165 362 536 642 743
42,000 43,000 171 376 557 669 772
43,000 44,000 178 390 579 694 801
44,000 45,000 184 405 600 719 831
45,000 46,000 191 419 621 745 860
46,000 47,000 197 434 642 770 890
47,000 48,000 204 448 663 796 919
48,000 49,000 210 462 685 822 948
49,000 50,000 217 476 707 847 977
50,000 51,000 224 490 728 872 1,008
51,000 52,000 230 505 749 898 1,037
52,000 53,000 237 519 770 924 1,066
53,000 54,000 243 534 791 949 1,096
54,000 55,000 250 548 813 974 1,125
55,000 56,000 256 563 833 1,000 1,155
56,000 57,000 263 577 855 1,025 1,184
57,000 58,000 269 591 877 1,051 1,213
58,000 59,000 276 605 898 1,077 1,243
59,000 60,000 282 620 919 1,102 1,272
60,000 62,000 292 641 951 1,141 1,316
62,000 64,000 305 670 994 1,191 1,375
64,000 66,000 318 699 1,036 1,242 1,435
66,000 68,000 331 728 1,078 1,293 1,494
68,000 70,000 344 756 1,121 1,345 1,552
70,000 72,000 358 784 1,164 1,395 1,612
72,000 74,000 371 813 1,206 1,447 1,670
74,000 76,000 384 842 1,249 1,497 1,729
76,000 78,000 397 871 1,291 1,548 1,788
78,000 80,000 410 899 1,334 1,600 1,846
80,000 85,000 433 949 1,409 1,688 1,950
85,000 90,000 465 1,021 1,515 1,816 2,098
90,000 95,000 498 1,093 1,621 1,944 2,244
95,000 100,0002 531 1,164 1,728 2,071 2,392
1 For the last year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2006-18 (2006-12 IRB 645), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2006-12_IRB/ar11.html.
Page 52 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 53 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix B-5. Inclusion Amounts for Trucks and Vans First Leased in 2007
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 16,400 $ 16,700 $ 2  $ 4 $ 8 $ 10 $ 11
16,700 17,000 4 9 15 17 21
17,000 17,500 6 15 24 28 33
17,500 18,000 10 22 35 42 48
18,000 18,500 13 30 46 55 64
18,500 19,000 17 37 57 69 79
19,000 19,500 20 45 68 82 94
19,500 20,000 24 52 80 95 109
20,000 20,500 27 60 90 109 125
20,500 21,000 30 67 102 122 141
21,000 21,500 34 75 113 135 156
21,500 22,000 37 82 124 149 171
22,000 23,000 42 94 140 169 194
23,000 24,000 49 109 163 195 225
24,000 25,000 56 123 186 222 256
25,000 26,000 63 138 208 249 286
26,000 27,000 70 153 230 276 317
27,000 28,000 77 168 252 302 349
28,000 29,000 83 184 274 329 379
29,000 30,000 90 199 296 356 410
30,000 31,000 97 214 318 383 440
31,000 32,000 104 228 342 408 472
32,000 33,000 111 243 364 435 503
33,000 34,000 118 258 386 462 534
34,000 35,000 125 273 408 489 564
35,000 36,000 131 289 430 515 595
36,000 37,000 138 304 452 542 626
37,000 38,000 145 318 475 569 657
38,000 39,000 152 333 497 596 688
39,000 40,000 159 348 520 622 718
40,000 41,000 166 363 542 649 749
41,000 42,000 172 379 563 676 780
42,000 43,000 179 397 586 702 811
43,000 44,000 186 409 608 729 842
44,000 45,000 193 423 631 756 872
45,000 46,000 200 438 653 783 903
46,000 47,000 207 453 675 810 934
47,000 48,000 213 469 697 836 965
48,000 49,000 220 484 719 863 996
49,000 50,000 227 499 741 890 1,026
50,000 51,000 234 514 764 916 1,057
51,000 52,000 241 528 787 943 1,088
52,000 53,000 248 543 809 969 1,119
53,000 54,000 254 559 831 996 1,150
54,000 55,000 261 574 853 1,023 1,180
55,000 56,000 268 589 875 1,050 1,211
56,000 57,000 275 604 897 1,076 1,243
57,000 58,000 282 618 920 1,103 1,273
58,000 59,000 289 633 943 1,129 1,304
59,000 60,000 296 648 965 1,156 1,335
60,000 62,000 306 671 998 1,196 1,381
62,000 64,000 319 701 1,043 1,249 1,443
64,000 66,000 333 731 1,087 1,303 1,504
66,000 68,000 347 761 1,131 1,357 1,566
68,000 70,000 361 791 1,176 1,410 1,627
70,000 72,000 374 821 1,221 1,463 1,689
72,000 74,000 388 851 1,265 1,517 1,751
74,000 76,000 402 881 1,309 1,570 1,813
76,000 78,000 415 911 1,354 1,624 1,874
78,000 80,000 429 941 1,399 1,676 1,936
80,000 85,000 453 994 1,476 1,770 2,044
85,000 90,000 487 1,069 1,587 1,904 2,198
90,000 95,000 521 1,144 1,699 2,037 2,352
95,000 100,0002 555 1,219 1,810 2,171 2,506
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2007-30 (2007-18 IRB 1104), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2007-18_IRB/ar11.html.
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 53

Page 54 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix B-6. Inclusion Amounts for Trucks and Vans First Leased in 2008
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 19,000 $ 19,500 $ 17 $ 37 $ 54 $ 65 $ 73
19,500 20,000 20 42 63 73 85
20,000 20,500 22 48 70 84 96
20,500 21,000 25 53 79 93 107
21,000 21,500 27 59 86 103 118
21,500 22,000 30 64 95 112 130
22,000 23,000 33 72 107 128 146
23,000 24,000 38 83 123 147 168
24,000 25,000 43 94 139 166 191
25,000 26,000 48 105 155 186 213
26,000 27,000 53 116 171 205 236
27,000 28,000 58 127 187 225 258
28,000 29,000 63 138 204 243 280
29,000 30,000 68 148 221 263 302
30,000 31,000 73 159 237 282 325
31,000 32,000 78 170 253 301 348
32,000 33,000 83 181 269 321 370
33,000 34,000 88 192 285 340 393
34,000 35,000 93 203 301 360 414
35,000 36,000 98 214 317 379 437
36,000 37,000 103 225 333 399 459
37,000 38,000 108 235 350 418 482
38,000 39,000 113 246 366 437 505
39,000 40,000 118 257 382 457 526
40,000 41,000 123 268 398 476 549
41,000 42,000 128 279 414 496 571
42,000 43,000 133 290 430 515 594
43,000 44,000 137 301 447 534 616
44,000 45,000 142 312 463 553 639
45,000 46,000 147 323 479 573 661
46,000 47,000 152 334 495 592 684
47,000 48,000 157 345 511 612 705
48,000 49,000 162 356 527 631 728
49,000 50,000 167 366 544 651 750
50,000 51,000 172 377 560 670 773
51,000 52,000 177 388 576 689 796
52,000 53,000 182 399 592 709 817
53,000 54,000 187 410 608 728 840
54,000 55,000 192 421 624 748 862
55,000 56,000 197 432 640 767 885
56,000 57,000 202 443 656 787 907
57,000 58,000 207 453 673 806 929
58,000 59,000 212 464 689 825 952
59,000 60,000 217 475 705 845 974
60,000 62,000 224 492 729 874 1,008
62,000 64,000 234 513 762 913 1,052
64,000 66,000 244 535 794 951 1,098
66,000 68,000 254 557 826 990 1,142
68,000 70,000 264 579 858 1,029 1,187
70,000 72,000 274 600 892 1,067 1,232
72,000 74,000 284 622 924 1,106 1,276
74,000 76,000 294 644 956 1,145 1,321
76,000 78,000 304 666 988 1,184 1,366
78,000 80,000 314 687 1,021 1,222 1,411
80,000 85,000 331 726 1,077 1,290 1,489
85,000 90,000 356 780 1,158 1,387 1,601
90,000 95,000 381 835 1,238 1,484 1,713
95,000 100,0002 405 889 1,320 1,581 1,825
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2008-22 (2008-12 IRB 658), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2008-12_IRB/ar18.html.
Page 54 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 55 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix C-1. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 1999 through 2003
Tax Year of Lease1
For Lease Term For Lease Term For Lease Term For Lease Term For Lease Term
Fair Market Value Beginning in 1999 Beginning in 2000 Beginning in 2001 Beginning in 2002 Beginning in 2003
Over Not Over 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later 5th and Later
$ 46,000 $ 47,000 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 12 $ 0
47,000 48,000 30 36 46 33 0
48,000 49,000 59 66 83 54 0
49,000 50,000 88 95 119 74 0
50,000 51,000 118 124 157 96 0
51,000 52,000 147 153 193 117 0
52,000 53,000 177 183 230 138 0
53,000 54,000 205 211 266 159 124
54,000 55,000 253 240 304 180 140
55,000 56,000 264 270 340 201 156
56,000 57,000 292 299 377 222 171
57,000 58,000 322 328 414 242 187
58,000 59,000 351 357 451 264 203
59,000 60,000 380 387 487 284 218
60,000 62,000 424 430 543 316 241
62,000 64,000 483 489 616 358 273
64,000 66,000 541 547 690 400 304
66,000 68,000 600 606 763 442 334
68,000 70,000 658 664 837 484 366
70,000 72,000 716 723 910 525 397
72,000 74,000 775 781 984 567 428
74,000 76,000 833 838 1,057 609 460
76,000 78,000 891 897 1,131 652 491
78,000 80,000 949 955 1,204 693 521
80,000 85,000 1,052 1,058 1,332 767 576
85,000 90,000 1,198 1,204 1,517 871 655
90,000 95,000 1,343 1,350 1,701 976 732
95,000 100,0002 1,489 1,495 1,885 1,081 810
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see the document listed for the first year of the lease.
For 1999, Revenue Procedure 99-14 (1999-5 IRB 56), available at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb99-05.pdf.
For 2000, Revenue Procedure 2000-18 (2000-9 IRB 722), available at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb00-09.pdf.
For 2001, Revenue Procedure 2001-19 (2001-9 IRB 732), available at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb01-09.pdf.
For 2002, Revenue Procedure 2002-14 (2002-5 IRB 450), available at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb02-05.pdf.
For 2003, Revenue Procedure 2003-75 (2003-45 IRB 1018), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2003-45_IRB/ar14.html.
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 55

Page 56 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix C-2. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 2004
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 53,000 $ 54,000 $ 33  $ 72 $ 106 $ 127 $ 147
54,000 55,000 37 79 118 142 164
55,000 56,000 40 88 130 155 180
56,000 57,000 44 96 141 170 197
57,000 58,000 48 103 154 184 213
58,000 59,000 51 112 165 199 229
59,000 60,000 55 120 177 213 245
60,000 62,000 60 132 195 234 270
62,000 64,000 68 147 219 263 303
64,000 66,000 75 164 242 291 336
66,000 68,000 82 180 266 320 369
68,000 70,000 90 195 290 348 402
70,000 72,000 97 211 314 377 435
72,000 74,000 104 228 337 405 468
74,000 76,000 111 244 361 434 500
76,000 78,000 119 259 385 462 534
78,000 80,000 126 275 409 491 566
80,000 85,000 139 303 451 540 624
85,000 90,000 157 343 510 612 706
90,000 95,000 175 384 569 682 788
95,000 100,0003 193 424 628 754 870
Appendix C-3. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 2005
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 45,000 $ 46,000 $ 5  $ 11 $ 18 $ 21 $ 25
46,000 47,000 10 21 33 39 45
47,000 48,000 14 31 48 57 66
48,000 49,000 19 41 63 75 86
49,000 50,000 23 52 77 93 107
50,000 51,000 28 61 93 111 127
51,000 52,000 33 71 108 129 148
52,000 53,000 37 82 122 147 169
53,000 54,000 42 92 137 164 190
54,000 55,000 46 102 152 183 210
55,000 56,000 51 112 167 200 231
56,000 57,000 55 122 182 218 252
57,000 58,000 60 132 197 236 272
58,000 59,000 65 142 212 254 293
59,000 60,000 69 152 227 272 314
60,000 62,000 76 167 250 298 345
62,000 64,000 85 187 280 334 386
64,000 66,000 94 208 309 370 427
66,000 68,000 104 227 339 406 469
68,000 70,000 113 247 369 442 510
70,000 72,000 122 268 398 478 551
72,000 74,000 131 288 428 514 593
74,000 76,000 140 308 458 550 634
76,000 78,000 149 328 489 585 675
78,000 80,000 159 348 518 621 717
80,000 85,000 175 383 571 683 789
85,000 90,000 197 434 645 773 892
90,000 95,000 220 484 720 863 995
95,000 100,0002 243 534 795 952 1,099
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2004-20 (2004-13 IRB 642), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2004-13_IRB/ar09.html.
3 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2005-13 (2005-12 IRB 759), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2005-12_IRB/ar15.html.
Page 56 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 57 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix C-4. Inclusion Amounts for Electric Cars First Leased in 2006
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
$ 45,000 $ 46,000 $ 4  $ 8 $ 11 $ 12 $ 12
46,000 47,000 10 22 33 37 42
47,000 48,000 17 36 54 63 72
48,000 49,000 24 51 74 89 101
49,000 50,000 30 65 96 114 131
50,000 51,000 37 79 118 139 160
51,000 52,000 43 94 139 165 189
52,000 53,000 50 108 160 190 219
53,000 54,000 56 123 181 216 248
54,000 55,000 63 137 202 242 277
55,000 56,000 69 151 224 267 307
56,000 57,000 76 165 245 293 337
57,000 58,000 82 180 266 318 367
58,000 59,000 89 194 288 343 396
59,000 60,000 95 209 309 369 425
60,000 62,000 105 230 341 407 470
62,000 64,000 118 259 383 459 528
64,000 66,000 131 288 425 510 587
66,000 68,000 144 316 469 560 646
68,000 70,000 158 345 510 612 705
70,000 72,000 171 373 554 662 764
72,000 74,000 184 402 596 713 823
74,000 76,000 197 431 638 765 881
76,000 78,000 210 459 682 815 940
78,000 80,000 223 488 724 866 1,000
80,000 85,000 246 538 798 956 1,103
85,000 90,000 278 610 905 1,083 1,250
90,000 95,000 311 682 1,011 1,211 1,397
95,000 100,0002 344 753 1,118 1,338 1,544
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the car is more than $100,000, see Revenue Procedure 2006-18 (2006-12 IRB 645), available at www.irs.gov/irb/2006-12_IRB/ar11.html.
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 57

Page 58 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See ªComments and Suggestionsº in the ªIntroductionº for the ways you can reach us.
Car, defined ................ . 17 F L
Casualty and theft losses:``Hours of service'' limits ... . 12 Fair market value of car .... . 24 Lavish or extravagant
Cars ...................... . 16Form 2106 ................ . 33 expenses .............. . 5, 12Farmers:
Depreciation ............ . 2550% limit on meals .......... . 5 Leasing a car ............ . 24-25Form 1040, Schedule F .... . 28
Charitable organizations: Luxury private boxes atFederal crime investigations or
Benefit events for ......... . 12 entertainment events ..... . 12prosecutions:A Sports events to benefit .... . 12 Luxury water travel .......... . 8Federal employees engagedAccountable plans ...... . 29-32 Club dues .................. . 13 in ....................... . 4Accounting to employer .... . 29 Comments on publication ... . 2 Federal rate for per diem .... . 6, MAdequate accounting ....... . 29 Commuting expenses ...... . 15 30Independent contractors ... . 32 MACRS (Modified AcceleratedConventions ............. . 9, 10 Fee-basis officials .......... . 34 Cost RecoveryAdequate records .......... . 25 Country clubs .............. . 13 Fees you pay ............... . 15 System) .................. . 20Advertising: Cruise ships ................ . 9 Fixed and variable rate (FAVR) 2008 chart (Table 4-1) ..... . 21Car display ............... . 15 allowance ................ . 30 Main place of business orExpenses ................. . 12
Form 1040, Schedule C ..... . 28 work ...................... . 3Signs, display racks, or D Form 1040, Schedule F ..... . 28promotional material to be Married taxpayers:Daily business mileage and Form 2106 ........ . 18, 28, 32-39used on recipient's business Performing artists ......... . 34expense log (Tablepremises ............... . 13 Form 2106-EZ .......... . 32, 39 Meal expenses .............. . 56-2) ...................... . 35Airline clubs ............... . 13 50% limit .................. . 11Form 4562 .................. . 28Depreciation of car  (See also Determination of applicabilityAllocating costs ...... . 4, 12, 27 Form 4797 .................. . 23Section 179 deductions) ... . 16 (Figure A) ............ . 11Allowance  (See Form W-2:Adjustment for using standard Exceptions .............. . 11Reimbursements) Employer-providedmileage rate ............ . 25 Actual cost method ......... . 5Armed forces: vehicles ................ . 28Basis ..................... . 18 Form 2106 ................ . 33Assigned overseas ......... . 3 Reimbursement of personalSales taxes ............. . 16 Major cities with higherAssistance  (See Tax help) expenses ............... . 28Unrecovered basis ...... . 23 allowances .............. . 6Associated Statutory employees ....... . 28Casualty or theft, effect .... . 25 Standard meal allowance ... . 5,entertainment ............ . 10 Deduction ............. . 16, 25 Free tax services ........... . 41 6, 30Excess depreciation ....... . 23Athletic clubs .............. . 13 Meals,Modified Accelerated Cost entertainment-related .... . 12GRecovery SystemB Mileage rate  (See Standard(MACRS) ............... . 20 Gifts .................... . 13-14Basis of car  (See also mileage rate)Section 179 deduction ..... . 23 $25 limit .................. . 13Depreciation of car) ....... . 18 Military  (See Armed forces)Trade-in, effect ........ . 19, 25 Combining for recordkeepingBona fide business Missing children, photographsTrucks and vans .......... . 22 purposes ............... . 27purpose ................... . 5 of ......................... . 2Directly-related Reporting requirements .... . 28Box seats at entertainment Modified Accelerated Costentertainment ............. . 9 Golf clubs .................. . 13events ................... . 12 Recovery SystemDisabled employees: Gulf Opportunity Zone:Business travel ............. . 6 (MACRS) ................. . 20Impairment-related work Qualified property ......... . 18Outside U.S. ............... . 7 2008 chart (Table 4-1) ..... . 21expenses ............... . 34 Special depreciationBusiness use of car ........ . 16 More information  (See Tax help)Documentary evidence ..... . 25 allowance ............... . 18More-than-50%-use
test. .................... . 19 NQualified business use ..... . 19 E H Nonaccountable plans ..... . 32Employer-provided Hauling tools ............... . 15
vehicles .................. . 16C Help  (See Tax help)Reporting requirements .... . 28 OCanceled checks: High-low rate method ...... . 30Entertainment Office in the home .......... . 15As evidence of business Home office ................ . 15expenses ........... . 9-12, 13 Officials paid on feeexpenses ............... . 26 Hotel clubs ................. . 1350% limit .................. . 11 basis ..................... . 34Car expenses ........... . 15-25 Determination of applicability Overseas travel:Actual expenses .......... . 16 (Figure A) ............ . 11 Conventions ............... . 9Allowances for ......... . 29-31 IAssociated test ............ . 10 Meal allowance ............ . 6Business and personal Impairment-related workDeductible ............. . 12-13 Part of trip outside U.S. ..... . 7use ..................... . 16 expenses ................ . 34Summary (Table 2-1) .... . 12Combining expenses ...... . 27 Incidental expenses:Directly-related test ......... . 9Disposition of car .......... . 25 Defined .................... . 5 PEntertainment, defined ..... . 12Fixed and variable rate (FAVR) Gifts ...................... . 13 Parking fees ............ . 15, 16Form 2106 ................ . 33allowance ............... . 30 No meals, incidentalsTickets (See Tickets) Per diem allowances .... . 29-31Form 2106 ................ . 33 only ..................... . 6 Defined ................... . 29Entertainment facilities:Leasing a car .......... . 24-25 Income-producing Federal rate for ............ . 30Expenses for use of ....... . 13Mileage rate (See Standard property .................. . 28 Performing artists .......... . 34Estimates of expenses ..... . 25mileage rate)
Incomplete records ......... . 27 Personal property taxes .... . 16Exceptions to the 50%Taxes paid on car ......... . 16
Indefinite job assignment ... . 4Limit ..................... . 11Traffic tickets .............. . 16 Personal trips ............... . 6
Independent contractors ... . 32 Outside U.S. ............... . 8Excess reimbursements  (SeeCar pools .................. . 15
Reimbursements) Interest on car loans ....... . 16 Placed in service, cars ..... . 18Car rentals .............. . 24-25
Extravagant expenses .... . 5, 12Form 2106 ................ . 33 Itinerants .................... . 3 Probationary work period ... . 4
Page 58 Chapter 6 How To Report

Page 59 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Proving business Traveling more than 100 miles Modified Accelerated Cost Travel expenses ........... . 3-9
purpose .................. . 26 from home .............. . 34 Recovery System (MACRS) Another individual
2008 chart (Table 4-1) ... . 21 accompanyingPublic transportation: Returning excess
Proving expenses (Table taxpayer ................. . 4Outside of U.S. travel ....... . 7 reimbursements .......... . 31
5-1) .................... . 26 Away from home ........... . 3Publications  (See Tax help) Rural mail carriers ......... . 15
Reporting reimbursements Deductible ............... . 4-9
(Table 6-1) .............. . 31 Summary of (TableR S Transportation expenses, 1-1) ................... . 5
Recordkeeping Section 179 deduction: determination of deductibility Defined .................... . 3
requirements .......... . 25-28 Amended return ........... . 18 (Figure B) ............... . 14 Going home on days off .... . 4
Adequate records ......... . 25 Deduction ................. . 17 Travel expenses, determination In U.S. ..................... . 6
Daily business mileage and Limits ..................... . 17 of deductibility (Table Lodging .................... . 6
expense log (Table Self-employed persons ..... . 11 1-1) ..................... . 5 Luxury water travel ......... . 8
6-2) .................... . 35 Reporting requirements .... . 28 Weekly travel expense and Outside U.S. ............... . 7
Destroyed records ......... . 27 Skyboxes .................. . 12 entertainment record (Table Travel to family home ....... . 4
How to prove expenses (Table 6-3) .................... . 39Special depreciation Trucks and vans:5-1) .................... . 26 allowance ................ . 18 Tax help .................... . 41 Depreciation .............. . 22Incomplete records ........ . 27 Transportation workers .... . 12Spouse, expenses for .... . 4, 13 Tax home, determinationReimbursed expenses ..... . 27 Transportation workers'of ......................... . 3Standard meal allowance .... . 5,Sampling to prove expenses ................ . 66, 30 Taxpayer Advocate ......... . 41expenses ............... . 27 TTY/TDD information ....... . 41Standard mileage rate ... . 2, 15, Temporary jobSeparating and combining Two places of work ......... . 1430 assignments .............. . 4expenses ............... . 27 Depreciation adjustment for Temporary work location ... . 14Three-year period of using ................... . 25 Tickets ................. . 12, 13retention ................ . 27 UForm 2106 ................ . 33 Season or series tickets ... . 27Weekly travel expense and UnclaimedStatutory employees ....... . 28 Traffic violations ........... . 16entertainment record (Table reimbursements .......... . 28
Suggestions for Tools:6-3) .................... . 39 Unions:publication ................ . 2 Hauling tools .............. . 15Reimbursements ........ . 28-32 Trips from union hall to place of
Trade associationAccountable plans ......... . 29 work .................... . 15
meetings ................. . 12Excess ............... . 31, 32 T Unrecovered basis of car ... . 23
Form 2106 ................ . 33 Trade-in of car ......... . 19, 25Tables and figures:Nonaccountable plans ..... . 32 Traffic tickets .............. . 1650% limit determination (Figure VNondeductible expenses ... . 29 Transients ................... . 3A) ...................... . 11 Volunteers .................. . 2Personal expenses ........ . 28 Daily business mileage and TransportationRecordkeeping ............ . 27 expense log (Table expenses ............. . 14-25Reporting (Table 6-1) ...... . 31 W6-2) .................... . 35 Car expenses .......... . 15-25Unclaimed ................ . 28 Entertainment expenses, Weekly travel expense andDeductible (Figure B) ...... . 14
Reporting determination of deductibility entertainment record (Tablefive or more cars .......... . 16
requirements .......... . 28-39 (Table 2-1) .............. . 10 6-3) ...................... . 39Form 2106 ................ . 33
Per diem or car Maximum depreciation Transportation workers ..... . 6, ■allowance ............... . 30 deduction for cars 12Reimbursements ....... . 28-32 table ................... . 22 Travel advance  (See alsoReservists: Reimbursements) ..... . 29, 31Transportation
expenses ............... . 15
Chapter 6 How To Report Page 59

Page 60 of 60 of Publication 463 13:48 -  4-FEB-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
EPS File Name: NEWIND01 Size: Width = 44.0 picas, Depth = 58.0 picas
Tax Publications for Individual Taxpayers
General Guides
Your Rights as a Taxpayer
Your Federal Income Tax For
Individuals
Farmer’s Tax Guide
Tax Guide for Small Business (For
Individuals Who Use Schedule C or
C-EZ)
Tax Calendars for 2009
Highlights of 2008 Tax Changes
IRS Guide to Free Tax Services
Specialized Publications
Armed Forces’ Tax Guide
Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Expenses
Exemptions, Standard Deduction, and
Filing Information
Medical and Dental Expenses (Including
the Health Coverage Tax Credit)
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Divorced or Separated Individuals
Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax
Foreign Tax Credit for Individuals
U.S. Government Civilian Employees
Stationed Abroad
Social Security and Other Information
for Members of the Clergy and
Religious Workers
U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens
Moving Expenses
Selling Your Home
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Taxable and Nontaxable Income
Charitable Contributions
Residential Rental Property (Including
Rental of Vacation Homes)
Commonly Used Tax Forms
Miscellaneous Deductions
Tax Information for Homeowners
Reporting Tip Income
Installment Sales
Partnerships
Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets
Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
Investment Income and Expenses
(Including Capital Gains and Losses)
Basis of Assets
Recordkeeping for Individuals
Tax Guide for Seniors
Community Property
Examination of Returns, Appeal Rights,
and Claims for Refund
Survivors, Executors, and
Administrators
Determining the Value of Donated
Property
Mutual Fund Distributions
Tax Guide for Individuals With Income
From U.S. Possessions
Pension and Annuity Income
Casualty, Disaster, and Theft Loss
Workbook (Personal-Use Property)
Business Use of Your Home (Including
Use by Daycare Providers)
Individual Retirement Arrangements
(IRAs)
Tax Highlights for U.S. Citizens and
Residents Going Abroad
The IRS Collection Process
Earned Income Credit (EIC)
Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service
Retirement Benefits
Tax Highlights for Persons with
Disabilities
Bankruptcy Tax Guide
Social Security and Equivalent
Railroad Retirement Benefits
How Do I Adjust My Tax Withholding?
Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
Household Employer’s Tax Guide For
Wages Paid in 2009
Tax Rules for Children and
Dependents
Home Mortgage Interest Deduction
How To Depreciate Property
Practice Before the IRS and
Power of Attorney
Introduction to Estate and Gift Taxes
The IRS Will Figure Your Tax
Per Diem Rates (For Travel Within the
Continental United States)
Reporting Cash Payments of Over
$10,000 (Received in a Trade or
Business)
Taxpayer Advocate Service – Your
Voice at the IRS
Derechos del Contribuyente
El Impuesto Federal sobre los Ingresos
(Para Personas Fisicas)
Crédito por Ingreso del Trabajo
English-Spanish Glossary of Words
and Phrases Used in Publications
Issued by the Internal Revenue
Service
U.S. Tax Treaties
Spanish Language Publications
910
553
509
334
225
17
1
3
463
501
502
503
504
505
514
516
517
519
521
523
524
525
526
527
529
530
531
537
544
547
550
551
552
554
541
555
556
559
561
564
570
575
584
587
590
593
594
596
721
901
907
908
915
919
925
926
929
946
936
950
1542
967
1544
1546
596SP
1SP
850
17SP
El Proceso de Cobro del IRS594SP
947
Informe de Pagos en Efectivo en
Exceso de $10,000 (Recibidos en
una Ocupación o Negocio)
1544SP
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get forms, including by computer, phone, and mail.
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Itemized Deductions & Interest and
Ordinary Dividends
Profit or Loss From Business
Net Profit From Business
Capital Gains and Losses
Supplemental Income and Loss
Earned Income Credit
Profit or Loss From Farming
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Income Tax Return for Single and 
Joint Filers With No Dependents
Self-Employment Tax
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Interest and Ordinary Dividends for
Form 1040A Filers
Child and Dependent Care
Expenses for Form 1040A Filers
Credit for the Elderly or the 
Disabled for Form 1040A Filers
Estimated Tax for Individuals
Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Unreimbursed Employee Business
Expenses
Underpayment of Estimated Tax by
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
Power of Attorney and Declaration of
Representative
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Moving Expenses
Depreciation and Amortization
Application for Automatic Extension of Time
To File U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Investment Interest Expense Deduction
Additional Taxes on Qualified Plans (Including
IRAs) and Other Tax-Favored Accounts
Alternative Minimum Tax—Individuals
Noncash Charitable Contributions
Change of Address
Expenses for Business Use of Your Home
Nondeductible IRAs
Passive Activity Loss Limitations
1040
Sch A&B
Sch C
Sch C-EZ
Sch D
Sch E
Sch EIC
Sch F
Sch H Household Employment Taxes 
Sch R
Sch SE
1040EZ
1040A
Sch 1
Sch 2
Sch 3
1040-ES
1040X
2106 Employee Business Expenses
2106-EZ
2210
2441
2848
3903
4562
4868
4952
5329
6251
8283
8582
8606
8822
8829
Form Number and Title
Sch J Income Averaging for Farmers and Fishermen
Additional Child Tax Credit8812
Education Credits (Hope and Lifetime Learning
Credits)
8863
Form Number and Title
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get publications, including
by computer, phone, and mail.
970 Tax Benefits for Education
971 Innocent Spouse Relief
Sch D-1 Continuation Sheet for Schedule D
972 Child Tax Credit
Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and
Resident Aliens Abroad
54
Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
536
Tax-Sheltered Annuity Plans (403(b)
Plans) For Employees of Public
Schools and Certain Tax-Exempt
Organizations
571
Health Savings Accounts and Other
Tax-Favored Health Plans
969
Installment Agreement Request9465
Business Expenses535
Page 60 Chapter 6 How To Report