Contents
Future Developments ............ 2
What's New .................. 2
Reminder .................... 2
Introduction .................. 2
Chapter 1. Travel .............. 3
Traveling Away From Home ....... 3
Tax Home .............. 3
Tax Home Different From 
Family Home .......... 4
Temporary Assignment or Job ..... 4
What Travel Expenses Are 
Deductible? .............. 4
Meals ................ 5
Travel in the United States .... 6
Travel Outside the United 
States .............. 7
Luxury Water Travel ........ 9
Conventions ............ 9
Chapter 2. Meals and 
Entertainment ............. 10
50% Limit ................ 11
Exception to the 50% Limit 
for Meals ........... 12
Chapter 3. Gifts .............. 13
Chapter 4. Transportation ........ 13
Car Expenses .............. 14
Standard Mileage Rate ..... 14
Actual Car Expenses ....... 15
Leasing a Car ........... 22
Disposition of a Car .......... 23
Chapter 5. Recordkeeping ........ 24
How To Prove Expenses ....... 24
What Are Adequate 
Records? ........... 24
What if I Have Incomplete 
Records? ........... 25
Separating and Combining 
Expenses ........... 25
How Long To Keep 
Records and Receipts .... 26
Examples of Records ...... 28
Chapter 6. How To Report ........ 28
Where To Report ............ 28
Vehicle Provided by Your 
Employer ........... 28
Reimbursements ............ 29
Accountable Plans ........ 29
Nonaccountable Plans ...... 32
Rules for Independent 
Contractors and Clients ... 32
How To Use Per Diem Rate 
Tables ................ 33
The Two Substantiation 
Methods ............ 33
Transition Rules ......... 33
Completing Form 2106 ........ 33
Special Rules ........... 34
How To Get Tax Help ........... 35
Appendices ................. 38
Department 
of the 
Treasury
Internal 
Revenue 
Service
Publication 463
Cat. No. 11081L
Travel,
Gift, and Car
Expenses
For use in preparing
2022 Returns
Get forms and other information faster and easier at:
• IRS.gov (English) 
• IRS.gov/Spanish (Español) 
• IRS.gov/Chinese (中文) 
• IRS.gov/Korean (한국어) 
• IRS.gov/Russian (Pусский) 
• IRS.gov/Vietnamese (Tiếng Việt) 
Userid: CPM Schema: tipx Leadpct: 100% Pt. size: 8  Draft  Ok to Print
AH XSL/XML Fileid: … tions/p463/2022/a/xml/cycle02/source (Init. & Date) _______
Page 1 of 42  14:42 - 1-Feb-2023
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Feb 1, 2023

Index ..................... 40
Future Developments
For the latest information about developments 
related to Pub. 463, such as legislation enacted 
after it was published, go to IRS.gov/Pub463.
What's New
Standard mileage rate.  For 2022, the stand-
ard mileage rate for the cost of operating your 
car for business use is 58.5 cents (0.585) per 
mile from January 1–June 30 and 62.5 cents 
(0.625) per mile from July 1–December 31. Car 
expenses and use of the standard mileage rate 
are explained in chapter 4.
Depreciation limits on cars, trucks, and 
vans. The first -year limit on the depreciation 
deduction, special depreciation allowance, and 
section 179 deduction for vehicles acquired be-
fore September 28, 2017, and placed in service 
during 2022, is $11,200. The first -year limit on 
depreciation, special depreciation allowance, 
and section 179 deduction for vehicles acquired 
after September 27, 2017, and placed in serv-
ice during 2022 increases to $19,200. If you 
elect not to claim a special depreciation allow-
ance for a vehicle placed in service in 2022, the 
amount increases to $11,200. Depreciation lim-
its are explained in chapter 4.
Section 179 deduction.  The maximum 
amount you can elect to deduct for most section 
179 property (including cars, trucks, and vans) 
you placed in service in tax years beginning in 
2022 is $1,080,000. This limit is reduced by the 
amount by which the cost of section 179 prop-
erty placed in service during the tax year ex-
ceeds $2,700,000. Section 179 deduction is ex-
plained in chapter 4.
Also, the maximum section 179 expense de-
duction for sport utility vehicles placed in serv-
ice in tax years beginning in 2022 is $27,000.
Reminder
Photographs of missing children. The IRS is 
a proud partner with the National Center for 
Missing & Exploited Children® (NCMEC) . Pho-
tographs of missing children selected by the 
Center may appear in this publication on pages 
that would otherwise be blank. You can help 
bring these children home by looking at the 
photographs and calling 800 -THE-LOST 
(800-843-5678) if you recognize a child.
Per diem rates.  Current and prior per diem 
rates may be found on the U.S. General Serv-
ices Administration (GSA) website at GSA.gov/
travel/plan-book/per-diem-rates.
Temporary deduction of 100% business 
meals. A 100% deduction is allowed for certain 
business meals paid or incurred after 2020 and 
before 2023. See 50% Limit  in chapter 2 for 
more information.
Temporary 100% deduction of the full meal 
portion of a per diem rate or allowance.  A 
100% deduction is allowed for certain business 
meals paid or incurred after 2020 and before 
2023. A special rule allows this 100% deduction 
for the full meal portion of a per diem rate or al-
lowance. See Exception to the 50% Limit for 
Meals in chapter 2 for more information.
Introduction
You may be able to deduct the ordinary and 
necessary business-related expenses you have 
for:
• Travel,
• Non-entertainment-related meals,
• Gifts, or
• Transportation.
An ordinary expense is one that is common and 
accepted in your trade or business. A neces-
sary expense is one that is helpful and appropri-
ate for your business. An expense doesn’t have 
to be required to be considered necessary.
This publication explains:
• What expenses are deductible,
• How to report them on your return,
• What records you need to prove your ex-
penses, and
• How to treat any expense reimbursements 
you may receive.
Who should use this publication.  You 
should read this publication if you are an em-
ployee or a sole proprietor who has busi-
ness-related travel, non -entertainment-related 
meals, gift, or transportation expenses.
Users of employer -provided vehicles.  If 
an employer-provided vehicle was available for 
your use, you received a fringe benefit. Gener-
ally, your employer must include the value of 
the use or availability of the vehicle in your in-
come. However, there are exceptions if the use 
of the vehicle qualifies as a working condition 
fringe benefit (such as the use of a qualified 
nonpersonal use vehicle).
A working condition fringe benefit is any 
property or service provided to you by your em-
ployer, the cost of which would be allowable as 
an employee business expense deduction if 
you had paid for it.
A qualified nonpersonal use vehicle is one 
that isn’t likely to be used more than minimally 
for personal purposes because of its design. 
See Qualified nonpersonal use vehicles  under 
Actual Car Expenses in chapter 4.
For information on how to report your car ex-
penses that your employer didn’t provide or re-
imburse you for (such as when you pay for gas 
and maintenance for a car your employer pro-
vides), see Vehicle Provided by Your Employer 
in chapter 6.
Who doesn’t need to use this publication. 
Partnerships, corporations, trusts, and employ-
ers who reimburse their employees for business 
expenses should refer to the instructions for 
their required tax forms and chapter 11 of Pub. 
535, Business Expenses, for information on de-
ducting travel, meals, and entertainment expen-
ses.
If you are an employee, you won’t need to 
read this publication if all of the following are 
true.
• You fully accounted to your employer for 
your work-related expenses.
• You received full reimbursement for your 
expenses.
• Your employer required you to return any 
excess reimbursement and you did so.
• There is no amount shown with a code L in 
box 12 of your Form W-2, Wage and Tax 
Statement.
If you meet all of these conditions, there is no 
need to show the expenses or the reimburse-
ments on your return. If you would like more in-
formation on reimbursements and accounting to 
your employer, see chapter 6.
If you meet these conditions and your 
employer included reimbursements on 
your Form W -2 in error, ask your em-
ployer for a corrected Form W-2.
Volunteers. If you perform services as a 
volunteer worker for a qualified charity, you may 
be able to deduct some of your costs as a chari-
table contribution. See Out-of-Pocket Expenses 
in Giving Services in Pub. 526, Charitable Con-
tributions, for information on the expenses you 
can deduct.
Comments and suggestions.  We welcome 
your comments about this publication and sug-
gestions for future editions.
You can send us comments through 
IRS.gov/FormComments. Or, you can write to:
Internal Revenue Service
Tax Forms and Publications
1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6526
Washington, DC 20224
Although we can’t respond individually to 
each comment received, we do appreciate your 
feedback and will consider your comments as 
we revise our tax forms, instructions, and publi-
cations. Don’t send tax questions, tax returns, 
or payments to the above address.
Getting answers to your tax questions. 
If you have a tax question not answered by this 
publication or the How To Get Tax Help  section 
at the end of this publication, go to the IRS In-
teractive Tax Assistant page at IRS.gov/ 
Help/ITA where you can find topics by using the 
search feature or viewing the categories listed.
Getting tax forms, instructions, and pub-
lications. Go to IRS.gov/Forms to download 
current and prior -year forms, instructions, and 
publications.
Ordering tax forms, instructions, and 
publications. Go to IRS.gov/OrderForms to 
order current forms, instructions, and publica-
tions; call 800 -829-3676 to order prior -year 
forms and instructions. The IRS will process 
your order for forms and publications as soon 
as possible. Don’t resubmit requests you’ve al-
ready sent us. You can get forms and publica-
tions faster online.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
535 Business Expenses
946 How To Depreciate Property
TIP
  535
  946
Page 2 of 42  Fileid: … tions/p463/2022/a/xml/cycle02/source 14:42 - 1-Feb-2023
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 2 Publication 463 (2022)

Form (and Instructions)
Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized 
Deductions
Schedule C (Form 1040) Profit or Loss 
From Business
Schedule F (Form 1040) Profit or Loss 
From Farming
2106 Employee Business Expenses
4562 Depreciation and Amortization
See How To Get Tax Help for information about 
getting these publications and forms.
1.
Travel
If you temporarily travel away from your tax 
home, you can use this chapter to determine if 
you have deductible travel expenses.
This chapter discusses:
• Traveling away from home,
• Temporary assignment or job, and
• What travel expenses are deductible.
It also discusses the standard meal allowance, 
rules for travel inside and outside the United 
States, luxury water travel, and deductible con-
vention expenses.
Travel expenses defined.  For tax purposes, 
travel expenses are the ordinary and necessary 
expenses of traveling away from home for your 
business, profession, or job.
An ordinary expense is one that is common 
and accepted in your trade or business. A nec-
essary expense is one that is helpful and appro-
priate for your business. An expense doesn’t 
have to be required to be considered neces-
sary.
You will find examples of deductible travel 
expenses in Table 1-1.
Traveling Away From 
Home
You are traveling away from home if:
• Your duties require you to be away from 
the general area of your tax home (defined 
later) substantially longer than an ordinary 
day's work, and
• You need to sleep or rest to meet the de-
mands of your work while away from 
home.
This rest requirement isn’t satisfied by merely 
napping in your car. You don’t have to be away 
from your tax home for a whole day or from 
dusk to dawn as long as your relief from duty is 
long enough to get necessary sleep or rest.
Example 1.  You are a railroad conductor. 
You leave your home terminal on a regularly 
  Schedule A (Form 1040)
  Schedule C (Form 1040)
  Schedule F (Form 1040)
  2106
  4562
scheduled round -trip run between two cities 
and return home 16 hours later. During the run, 
you have 6 hours off at your turnaround point 
where you eat two meals and rent a hotel room 
to get necessary sleep before starting the return 
trip. You are considered to be away from home.
Example 2.  You are a truck driver. You 
leave your terminal and return to it later the 
same day. You get an hour off at your turn-
around point to eat. Because you aren’t off to 
get necessary sleep and the brief time off isn’t 
an adequate rest period, you aren’t traveling 
away from home.
Members of the Armed Forces.  If you are a 
member of the U.S. Armed Forces on a perma-
nent duty assignment overseas, you aren’t trav-
eling away from home. You can’t deduct your 
expenses for meals and lodging. You can’t de-
duct these expenses even if you have to main-
tain a home in the United States for your family 
members who aren’t allowed to accompany you 
overseas. If you are transferred from one per-
manent duty station to another, you may have 
deductible moving expenses, which are ex-
plained in Pub. 521, Moving Expenses.
A naval officer assigned to permanent duty 
aboard a ship that has regular eating and living 
facilities has a tax home (explained next) 
aboard the ship for travel expense purposes.
Tax Home
To determine whether you are traveling away 
from home, you must first determine the loca-
tion of your tax home.
Generally, your tax home is your regular 
place of business or post of duty, regardless of 
where you maintain your family home. It in-
cludes the entire city or general area in which 
your business or work is located.
If you have more than one regular place of 
business, your tax home is your main place of 
business. See Main place of business or work , 
later.
If you don’t have a regular or a main place of 
business because of the nature of your work, 
then your tax home may be the place where you 
regularly live. See No main place of business or 
work, later.
If you don’t have a regular or main place of 
business or post of duty and there is no place 
where you regularly live, you are considered an 
itinerant (a transient) and your tax home is 
wherever you work. As an itinerant, you can’t 
claim a travel expense deduction because you 
are never considered to be traveling away from 
home.
Main place of business or work.  If you have 
more than one place of work, consider the fol-
lowing when determining which one is your 
main place of business or work.
• The total time you ordinarily spend in each 
place.
• The level of your business activity in each 
place.
• Whether your income from each place is 
significant or insignificant.
Example. You live in Cincinnati where you 
have a seasonal job for 8 months each year and 
earn $40,000. You work the other 4 months in 
Miami, also at a seasonal job, and earn 
$15,000. Cincinnati is your main place of work 
because you spend most of your time there and 
earn most of your income there.
No main place of business or work.  You 
may have a tax home even if you don’t have a 
regular or main place of work. Your tax home 
may be the home where you regularly live.
Factors used to determine tax home.  If 
you don’t have a regular or main place of busi-
ness or work, use the following three factors to 
determine where your tax home is.
1. You perform part of your business in the 
area of your main home and use that 
home for lodging while doing business in 
the area.
2. You have living expenses at your main 
home that you duplicate because your 
business requires you to be away from 
that home.
3. You haven’t abandoned the area in which 
both your historical place of lodging and 
your claimed main home are located; you 
have a member or members of your family 
living at your main home; or you often use 
that home for lodging.
If you satisfy all three factors, your tax home 
is the home where you regularly live. If you sat-
isfy only two factors, you may have a tax home 
depending on all the facts and circumstances. If 
you satisfy only one factor, you are an itinerant; 
your tax home is wherever you work and you 
can’t deduct travel expenses.
Example 1. You are single and live in Bos-
ton in an apartment you rent. You have worked 
for your employer in Boston for a number of 
years. Your employer enrolls you in a 12 -month 
executive training program. You don’t expect to 
return to work in Boston after you complete your 
training.
During your training, you don’t do any work 
in Boston. Instead, you receive classroom and 
on-the-job training throughout the United 
States. You keep your apartment in Boston and 
return to it frequently. You use your apartment 
to conduct your personal business. You also 
keep up your community contacts in Boston. 
When you complete your training, you are 
transferred to Los Angeles.
You don’t satisfy factor (1) because you 
didn’t work in Boston. You satisfy factor (2) be-
cause you had duplicate living expenses. You 
also satisfy factor (3) because you didn’t aban-
don your apartment in Boston as your main 
home, you kept your community contacts, and 
you frequently returned to live in your apart-
ment. Therefore, you have a tax home in Bos-
ton.
Example 2.  You are an outside salesper-
son with a sales territory covering several 
states. Your employer's main office is in New-
ark, but you don’t conduct any business there. 
Your work assignments are temporary, and you 
have no way of knowing where your future as-
signments will be located. You have a room in 
Page 3 of 42  Fileid: … tions/p463/2022/a/xml/cycle02/source 14:42 - 1-Feb-2023
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 1 Travel  Page 3

your married sister's house in Dayton. You stay 
there for one or two weekends a year, but you 
do no work in the area. You don’t pay your sis-
ter for the use of the room.
You don’t satisfy any of the three factors lis-
ted earlier. You are an itinerant and have no tax 
home.
Tax Home Different From 
Family Home
If you (and your family) don’t live at your tax 
home (defined earlier), you can’t deduct the 
cost of traveling between your tax home and 
your family home. You also can’t deduct the 
cost of meals and lodging while at your tax 
home. See Example 1, later.
If you are working temporarily in the same 
city where you and your family live, you may be 
considered as traveling away from home. See 
Example 2, later.
Example 1. You are a truck driver and you 
and your family live in Tucson. You are em-
ployed by a trucking firm that has its terminal in 
Phoenix. At the end of your long runs, you re-
turn to your home terminal in Phoenix and 
spend one night there before returning home. 
You can’t deduct any expenses you have for 
meals and lodging in Phoenix or the cost of 
traveling from Phoenix to Tucson. This is be-
cause Phoenix is your tax home.
Example 2.  Your family home is in Pitts-
burgh, where you work 12 weeks a year. The 
rest of the year you work for the same employer 
in Baltimore. In Baltimore, you eat in restaurants 
and sleep in a rooming house. Your salary is 
the same whether you are in Pittsburgh or Balti-
more.
Because you spend most of your working 
time and earn most of your salary in Baltimore, 
that city is your tax home. You can’t deduct any 
expenses you have for meals and lodging 
there. However, when you return to work in 
Pittsburgh, you are away from your tax home 
even though you stay at your family home. You 
can deduct the cost of your round trip between 
Baltimore and Pittsburgh. You can also deduct 
your part of your family's living expenses for 
non-entertainment-related meals and lodging 
while you are living and working in Pittsburgh.
Temporary
Assignment or Job
You may regularly work at your tax home and 
also work at another location. It may not be 
practical to return to your tax home from this 
other location at the end of each workday.
Temporary assignment vs. indefinite as-
signment. If your assignment or job away from 
your main place of work is temporary, your tax 
home doesn’t change. You are considered to 
be away from home for the whole period you 
are away from your main place of work. You 
can deduct your travel expenses if they other-
wise qualify for deduction. Generally, a tempo-
rary assignment in a single location is one that 
is realistically expected to last (and does in fact 
last) for 1 year or less.
However, if your assignment or job is indefi-
nite, the location of the assignment or job be-
comes your new tax home and you can’t deduct 
your travel expenses while there. An assign-
ment or job in a single location is considered in-
definite if it is realistically expected to last for 
more than 1 year, whether or not it actually lasts 
for more than 1 year.
If your assignment is indefinite, you must in-
clude in your income any amounts you receive 
from your employer for living expenses, even if 
they are called “travel allowances” and you ac-
count to your employer for them. You may be 
able to deduct the cost of relocating to your new 
tax home as a moving expense. See Pub. 521 
for more information.
For tax years beginning after Decem-
ber 2017 and before January 2026, the 
deduction of certain moving expenses 
is suspended for nonmilitary taxpayers. In order 
to deduct certain moving expenses, you must 
be an active member of the military and moving 
due to a permanent change of duty station.
Exception for federal crime investigations 
or prosecutions.  If you are a federal em-
ployee participating in a federal crime investiga-
tion or prosecution, you aren’t subject to the 
1-year rule. This means you may be able to de-
duct travel expenses even if you are away from 
your tax home for more than 1 year provided 
you meet the other requirements for deductibil-
ity.
For you to qualify, the Attorney General (or 
their designee) must certify that you are travel-
ing:
• For the federal government;
• In a temporary duty status; and
• To investigate, prosecute, or provide sup-
port services for the investigation or prose-
cution of a federal crime.
Determining temporary or indefinite.  You 
must determine whether your assignment is 
temporary or indefinite when you start work. If 
you expect an assignment or job to last for 1 
year or less, it is temporary unless there are 
facts and circumstances that indicate other-
wise. An assignment or job that is initially tem-
porary may become indefinite due to changed 
circumstances. A series of assignments to the 
same location, all for short periods but that to-
gether cover a long period, may be considered 
an indefinite assignment.
The following examples illustrate whether an 
assignment or job is temporary or indefinite.
Example 1. You are a construction worker. 
You live and regularly work in Los Angeles. You 
are a member of a trade union in Los Angeles 
that helps you get work in the Los Angeles area. 
Your tax home is Los Angeles. Because of a 
shortage of work, you took a job on a construc-
tion project in Fresno. Your job was scheduled 
to end in 8 months. The job actually lasted 10 
months.
You realistically expected the job in Fresno 
to last 8 months. The job actually did last less 
than 1 year. The job is temporary and your tax 
home is still in Los Angeles.
CAUTION
!
Example 2.  The facts are the same as in 
Example 1, except that you realistically expec-
ted the work in Fresno to last 18 months. The 
job was actually completed in 10 months.
Your job in Fresno is indefinite because you 
realistically expected the work to last longer 
than 1 year, even though it actually lasted less 
than 1 year. You can’t deduct any travel expen-
ses you had in Fresno because Fresno became 
your tax home.
Example 3.  The facts are the same as in 
Example 1, except that you realistically expec-
ted the work in Fresno to last 9 months. After 8 
months, however, you were asked to remain for 
7 more months (for a total actual stay of 15 
months).
Initially, you realistically expected the job in 
Fresno to last for only 9 months. However, due 
to changed circumstances occurring after 8 
months, it was no longer realistic for you to ex-
pect that the job in Fresno would last for 1 year 
or less. You can deduct only your travel expen-
ses for the first 8 months. You can’t deduct any 
travel expenses you had after that time because 
Fresno became your tax home when the job be-
came indefinite.
Going home on days off.  If you go back to 
your tax home from a temporary assignment on 
your days off, you aren’t considered away from 
home while you are in your hometown. You 
can’t deduct the cost of your meals and lodging 
there. However, you can deduct your travel ex-
penses, including meals and lodging, while 
traveling between your temporary place of work 
and your tax home. You can claim these expen-
ses up to the amount it would have cost you to 
stay at your temporary place of work.
If you keep your hotel room during your visit 
home, you can deduct the cost of your hotel 
room. In addition, you can deduct your expen-
ses of returning home up to the amount you 
would have spent for meals had you stayed at 
your temporary place of work.
Probationary work period.  If you take a job 
that requires you to move, with the understand-
ing that you will keep the job if your work is sat-
isfactory during a probationary period, the job is 
indefinite. You can’t deduct any of your expen-
ses for meals and lodging during the probation-
ary period.
What Travel Expenses 
Are Deductible?
Once you have determined that you are travel-
ing away from your tax home, you can deter-
mine what travel expenses are deductible.
You can deduct ordinary and necessary ex-
penses you have when you travel away from 
home on business. The type of expense you 
can deduct depends on the facts and your cir-
cumstances.
Table 1 -1 summarizes travel expenses you 
may be able to deduct. You may have other de-
ductible travel expenses that aren’t covered 
there, depending on the facts and your circum-
stances.
Page 4 of 42  Fileid: … tions/p463/2022/a/xml/cycle02/source 14:42 - 1-Feb-2023
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 4  Chapter 1 Travel

When you travel away from home on 
business, you must keep records of all 
the expenses you have and any advan-
ces you receive from your employer. You can 
use a log, diary, notebook, or any other written 
record to keep track of your expenses. The 
types of expenses you need to record, along 
with supporting documentation, are described 
in Table 5-1 (see chapter 5).
Separating costs.  If you have one expense 
that includes the costs of non -entertainment-re-
lated meals, entertainment, and other services 
(such as lodging or transportation), you must al-
locate that expense between the cost of 
non-entertainment-related meals, and entertain-
ment and the cost of other services. You must 
have a reasonable basis for making this alloca-
tion. For example, you must allocate your ex-
penses if a hotel includes one or more meals in 
its room charge.
Travel expenses for another individual.  If a 
spouse, dependent, or other individual goes 
with you (or your employee) on a business trip 
or to a business convention, you generally can’t 
deduct their travel expenses.
Employee. You can deduct the travel ex-
penses of someone who goes with you if that 
person:
RECORDS
1. Is your employee,
2. Has a bona fide business purpose for the 
travel, and
3. Would otherwise be allowed to deduct the 
travel expenses.
Business associate.  If a business asso-
ciate travels with you and meets the conditions 
in (2) and (3) above, you can deduct the travel 
expenses you have for that person. A business 
associate is someone with whom you could rea-
sonably expect to actively conduct business. A 
business associate can be a current or pro-
spective (likely to become) customer, client, 
supplier, employee, agent, partner, or profes-
sional advisor.
Bona fide business purpose.  A bona fide 
business purpose exists if you can prove a real 
business purpose for the individual's presence. 
Incidental services, such as typing notes or as-
sisting in entertaining customers, aren’t enough 
to make the expenses deductible.
Example. You drive to Chicago on busi-
ness and take your spouse with you. Your 
spouse isn’t your employee. Your spouse occa-
sionally types notes, performs similar services, 
and accompanies you to luncheons and din-
ners. The performance of these services 
doesn’t establish that your spouse’s presence 
on the trip is necessary to the conduct of your 
business. Your spouse’s expenses aren’t de-
ductible.
You pay $199 a day for a double room. A 
single room costs $149 a day. You can deduct 
the total cost of driving your car to and from Chi-
cago, but only $149 a day for your hotel room. If 
both you and your spouse use public transpor-
tation, you can only deduct your fare.
Meals
You can deduct the cost of meals if it is neces-
sary for you to stop for substantial sleep or rest 
to properly perform your duties while traveling 
away from home on business. Meal and enter-
tainment expenses are discussed in chapter 2.
Lavish or extravagant.  You can't deduct ex-
penses for meals that are lavish or extravagant. 
An expense isn't considered lavish or extrava-
gant if it is reasonable based on the facts and 
circumstances. Meal expenses won't be disal-
lowed merely because they are more than a 
fixed dollar amount or because the meals take 
place at deluxe restaurants, hotels, or resorts.
50% limit on meals. You can figure your meal 
expenses using either of the following methods.
• Actual cost.
• The standard meal allowance.
Both of these methods are explained below. 
But, regardless of the method you use, you can 
generally deduct only 50% of the unreimbursed 
cost of your meals. However, you can deduct 
100% of your meal expenses if the meals are 
food and beverages provided by a restaurant, 
and paid or incurred after December 31, 2020, 
and before January 1, 2023. See IRS.gov/
Newsroom/IRS-Provides-Guidance-on-Per-
Diem-Rates-and-the-Temporary-100-Percent-
Deduction-for-Food-or-Beverages-From-
Restaurants for additional information.
If you are reimbursed for the cost of your 
meals, how you apply the 50% limit depends on 
whether your employer's reimbursement plan 
was accountable or nonaccountable. If you 
aren’t reimbursed, the 50% limit applies even if 
the unreimbursed meal expense is for business 
travel. Chapter 2 discusses the 50% Limit  in 
more detail, and chapter 6 discusses accounta-
ble and nonaccountable plans.
Actual Cost
You can use the actual cost of your meals to fig-
ure the amount of your expense before reim-
bursement and application of the 50% deduc-
tion limit. If you use this method, you must keep 
records of your actual cost.
Standard Meal Allowance
Generally, you can use the “standard meal al-
lowance” method as an alternative to the actual 
cost method. It allows you to use a set amount 
for your daily meals and incidental expenses 
(M&IE), instead of keeping records of your ac-
tual costs. The set amount varies depending on 
where and when you travel. In this publication, 
“standard meal allowance” refers to the federal 
rate for M&IE, discussed later under Amount of 
Table 1-1. Travel Expenses You Can Deduct
This chart summarizes expenses you can deduct when you travel away from 
home for business purposes.
IF you have 
expenses for... THEN you can deduct the cost of...
transportation travel by airplane, train, bus, or car between your home and your 
business destination. If you were provided with a free ticket or you are 
riding free as a result of a frequent traveler or similar program, your 
cost is zero. If you travel by ship, see Luxury Water Travel and Cruise 
Ships under Conventions, later, for additional rules and limits.
taxi, commuter bus, 
and airport 
limousine
fares for these and other types of transportation that take you between:
• The airport or station and your hotel; and
• The hotel and the work location of your customers or clients, your 
business meeting place, or your temporary work location.
baggage and 
shipping
sending baggage and sample or display material between your 
regular and temporary work locations.
car operating and maintaining your car when traveling away from home on 
business. You can deduct actual expenses or the standard mileage 
rate, as well as business-related tolls and parking. If you rent a car 
while away from home on business, you can deduct only the 
business-use portion of the expenses.
lodging and meals your lodging and non-entertainment-related meals if your business trip 
is overnight or long enough that you need to stop for sleep or rest to 
properly perform your duties. Meals include amounts spent for food, 
beverages, taxes, and related tips. See Meals, later, for additional 
rules and limits.
cleaning dry cleaning and laundry.
telephone business calls while on your business trip. This includes business 
communication by fax machine or other communication devices.
tips tips you pay for any expenses in this chart.
other other similar ordinary and necessary expenses related to your 
business travel. These expenses might include transportation to or 
from a business meal, public stenographer's fees, computer rental 
fees, and operating and maintaining a house trailer.
Page 5 of 42  Fileid: … tions/p463/2022/a/xml/cycle02/source 14:42 - 1-Feb-2023
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 1 Travel  Page 5

standard meal allowance . If you use the stand-
ard meal allowance, you must still keep records 
to prove the time, place, and business purpose 
of your travel. See the recordkeeping rules for 
travel in chapter 5.
Incidental expenses. The term “incidental ex-
penses” means fees and tips given to porters, 
baggage carriers, hotel staff, and staff on ships.
Incidental expenses don’t include expenses 
for laundry, cleaning and pressing of clothing, 
lodging taxes, costs of telegrams or telephone 
calls, transportation between places of lodging 
or business and places where meals are taken, 
or the mailing cost of filing travel vouchers and 
paying employer -sponsored charge card bill-
ings.
Incidental-expenses-only method.  You can 
use an optional method (instead of actual cost) 
for deducting incidental expenses only. The 
amount of the deduction is $5 a day. You can 
use this method only if you didn’t pay or incur 
any meal expenses. You can’t use this method 
on any day that you use the standard meal al-
lowance. This method is subject to the proration 
rules for partial days. See Travel for days you 
depart and return, later, in this chapter.
Note.  The incidental -expenses-only 
method isn’t subject to the 50% limit discussed 
below.
Federal employees should refer to the 
Federal Travel Regulations at GSA.gov 
for changes affecting claims for reim-
bursement.
50% limit may apply.  If you use the standard 
meal allowance method for non -entertain-
ment-related meal expenses and you aren’t re-
imbursed or you are reimbursed under a nonac-
countable plan, you can generally deduct only 
50% of the standard meal allowance. If you are 
reimbursed under an accountable plan and you 
are deducting amounts that are more than your 
reimbursements, you can deduct only 50% of 
the excess amount. The 50% Limit is discussed 
in more detail in chapter 2, and accountable 
and nonaccountable plans are discussed in 
chapter 6.
There is no optional standard lodging 
amount similar to the standard meal al-
lowance. Your allowable lodging ex-
pense deduction is your actual cost.
Who can use the standard meal allowance. 
You can use the standard meal allowance 
whether you are an employee or self -employed, 
and whether or not you are reimbursed for your 
traveling expenses.
Use of the standard meal allowance for 
other travel.  You can use the standard meal 
allowance to figure your meal expenses when 
you travel in connection with investment and 
other income-producing property. You can also 
use it to figure your meal expenses when you 
travel for qualifying educational purposes. You 
can’t use the standard meal allowance to figure 
the cost of your meals when you travel for medi-
cal or charitable purposes.
CAUTION
!
CAUTION
!
Amount of standard meal allowance.  The 
standard meal allowance is the federal M&IE 
rate. For travel in 2022, the rate for most small 
localities in the United States is $59 per day.
Most major cities and many other localities 
in the United States are designated as 
high-cost areas, qualifying for higher standard 
meal allowances.
You can find this information (organ-
ized by state) at GSA.gov/travel/plan-
book/per-diem-rates. Enter a zip code 
or select a city and state for the per diem rates 
for the current fiscal year. Per diem rates for 
prior fiscal years are available by using the 
drop-down menu.
If you travel to more than one location in one 
day, use the rate in effect for the area where 
you stop for sleep or rest. If you work in the 
transportation industry, however, see Special 
rate for transportation workers, later.
Federal government's fiscal year.  Per 
diem rates are listed by the federal govern-
ment's fiscal year, which runs from October 1 to 
September 30. You can choose to use the rates 
from the 2021 fiscal year per diem tables or the 
rates from the 2022 fiscal year tables, but you 
must consistently use the same tables for all 
travel you are reporting on your income tax re-
turn for the year. See Transition Rules, later.
Standard meal allowance for areas out-
side the continental United States.  The 
standard meal allowance rates above don’t ap-
ply to travel in Alaska, Hawaii, or any other loca-
tion outside the continental United States. The 
Department of Defense establishes per diem 
rates for Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, American 
Samoa, Guam, Midway, the Northern Mariana 
Islands, the U.S. Virgin Islands, Wake Island, 
and other non -foreign areas outside the conti-
nental United States. The Department of State 
establishes per diem rates for all other foreign 
areas.
You can access per diem rates for 
non-foreign areas outside the continen-
tal United States at Travel.dod.mil/
Travel-Transportation-Rates/Per-Diem/Per-
Diem-Rate-Lookup/. You can access all other 
foreign per diem rates at aoprals.state.gov/
web920/per_diem.asp.
Special rate for transportation workers. 
You can use a special standard meal allowance 
if you work in the transportation industry. You 
are in the transportation industry if your work:
• Directly involves moving people or goods 
by airplane, barge, bus, ship, train, or 
truck; and
• Regularly requires you to travel away from 
home and, during any single trip, usually 
involves travel to areas eligible for different 
standard meal allowance rates.
If this applies, you can claim a standard meal al-
lowance of $69 a day ($74 for travel outside the 
continental United States) for travel in 2022.
Using the special rate for transportation 
workers eliminates the need for you to deter-
mine the standard meal allowance for every 
area where you stop for sleep or rest. If you 
choose to use the special rate for any trip, you 
must use the special rate (and not use the regu-
lar standard meal allowance rates) for all trips 
you take that year.
Travel for days you depart and return.  For 
both the day you depart for and the day you re-
turn from a business trip, you must prorate the 
standard meal allowance (figure a reduced 
amount for each day). You can do so by one of 
two methods.
• Method 1: You can claim 3/4 of the stand-
ard meal allowance.
• Method 2: You can prorate using any 
method that you consistently apply and 
that is in accordance with reasonable busi-
ness practice.
Example. You are employed in New Or-
leans as a convention planner. In March, your 
employer sent you on a 3 -day trip to Washing-
ton, DC, to attend a planning seminar. You left 
your home in New Orleans at 10 a.m. on Wed-
nesday and arrived in Washington, DC, at 5:30 
p.m. After spending 2 nights there, you flew 
back to New Orleans on Friday and arrived 
back home at 8 p.m. Your employer gave you a 
flat amount to cover your expenses and inclu-
ded it with your wages.
Under Method 1, you can claim 2 1/2 days of 
the standard meal allowance for Washington, 
DC: 3/4 of the daily rate for Wednesday and Fri-
day (the days you departed and returned), and 
the full daily rate for Thursday.
Under Method 2 , you could also use any 
method that you apply consistently and that is in 
accordance with reasonable business practice. 
For example, you could claim 3 days of the 
standard meal allowance even though a federal 
employee would have to use Method 1 and be 
limited to only 21/2 days.
Travel in the United States
The following discussion applies to travel in the 
United States. For this purpose, the United 
States includes the 50 states and the District of 
Columbia. The treatment of your travel expen-
ses depends on how much of your trip was 
business related and on how much of your trip 
occurred within the United States. See Part of 
Trip Outside the United States, later.
Trip Primarily for Business
You can deduct all of your travel expenses if 
your trip was entirely business related. If your 
trip was primarily for business and, while at your 
business destination, you extended your stay 
for a vacation, made a personal side trip, or had 
other personal activities, you can deduct only 
your business -related travel expenses. These 
expenses include the travel costs of getting to 
and from your business destination and any 
business-related expenses at your business 
destination.
Example. You work in Atlanta and take a 
business trip to New Orleans in May. Your busi-
ness travel totals 900 miles round trip. On your 
way home, you stop in Mobile to visit your pa-
rents. You spend $2,165 for the 9 days you are 
away from home for travel, non -entertain-
ment-related meals, lodging, and other travel 
Page 6 of 42  Fileid: … tions/p463/2022/a/xml/cycle02/source 14:42 - 1-Feb-2023
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 6  Chapter 1 Travel

expenses. If you hadn’t stopped in Mobile, you 
would have been gone only 6 days, and your to-
tal cost would have been $1,633.50. You can 
deduct $1,633.50 for your trip, including the 
cost of round -trip transportation to and from 
New Orleans. The deduction for your non-enter-
tainment-related meals is subject to the 50% 
limit on meals mentioned earlier.
Trip Primarily for
Personal Reasons
If your trip was primarily for personal reasons, 
such as a vacation, the entire cost of the trip is a 
nondeductible personal expense. However, you 
can deduct any expenses you have while at 
your destination that are directly related to your 
business.
A trip to a resort or on a cruise ship may be a 
vacation even if the promoter advertises that it 
is primarily for business. The scheduling of inci-
dental business activities during a trip, such as 
viewing videotapes or attending lectures deal-
ing with general subjects, won’t change what is 
really a vacation into a business trip.
Part of Trip Outside
the United States
If part of your trip is outside the United States, 
use the rules described later in this chapter un-
der Travel Outside the United States  for that 
part of the trip. For the part of your trip that is in-
side the United States, use the rules for travel in 
the United States. Travel outside the United 
States doesn’t include travel from one point in 
the United States to another point in the United 
States. The following discussion can help you 
determine whether your trip was entirely within 
the United States.
Public transportation.  If you travel by public 
transportation, any place in the United States 
where that vehicle makes a scheduled stop is a 
point in the United States. Once the vehicle 
leaves the last scheduled stop in the United 
States on its way to a point outside the United 
States, you apply the rules under Travel Out-
side the United States, later.
Example. You fly from New York to Puerto 
Rico with a scheduled stop in Miami. Puerto 
Rico isn’t considered part of the United States 
for purposes of travel. You return to New York 
nonstop. The flight from New York to Miami is in 
the United States, so only the flight from Miami 
to Puerto Rico is outside the United States. Be-
cause there are no scheduled stops between 
Puerto Rico and New York, all of the return trip 
is outside the United States.
Private car. Travel by private car in the United 
States is travel between points in the United 
States, even though you are on your way to a 
destination outside the United States.
Example. You travel by car from Denver to 
Mexico City and return. Your travel from Denver 
to the border and from the border back to Den-
ver is travel in the United States, and the rules 
in this section apply. The rules below under 
Travel Outside the United States  apply to your 
trip from the border to Mexico City and back to 
the border.
Travel Outside
the United States
If any part of your business travel is outside the 
United States, some of your deductions for the 
cost of getting to and from your destination may 
be limited. For this purpose, the United States 
includes the 50 states and the District of Colum-
bia.
How much of your travel expenses you can 
deduct depends in part upon how much of your 
trip outside the United States was business re-
lated.
Travel Entirely for Business or
Considered Entirely for Business
You can deduct all your travel expenses of get-
ting to and from your business destination if 
your trip is entirely for business or considered 
entirely for business.
Travel entirely for business. If you travel out-
side the United States and you spend the entire 
time on business activities, you can deduct all 
of your travel expenses.
Travel considered entirely for business. 
Even if you didn’t spend your entire time on 
business activities, your trip is considered en-
tirely for business if you meet at least one of the 
following four exceptions.
Exception 1 —No substantial control. 
Your trip is considered entirely for business if 
you didn’t have substantial control over arrang-
ing the trip. The fact that you control the timing 
of your trip doesn’t, by itself, mean that you 
have substantial control over arranging your 
trip.
You don’t have substantial control over your 
trip if you:
• Are an employee who was reimbursed or 
paid a travel expense allowance, and
• Aren’t related to your employer, or
• Aren’t a managing executive.
“Related to your employer” is defined later in 
chapter 6 under Per Diem and Car Allowances.
A “managing executive” is an employee who 
has the authority and responsibility, without be-
ing subject to the veto of another, to decide on 
the need for the business travel.
A self -employed person generally has sub-
stantial control over arranging business trips.
Exception 2 —Outside United States no 
more than a week. Your trip is considered en-
tirely for business if you were outside the United 
States for a week or less, combining business 
and nonbusiness activities. One week means 7 
consecutive days. In counting the days, don’t 
count the day you leave the United States, but 
do count the day you return to the United 
States.
Example. You traveled to Brussels primar-
ily for business. You left Denver on Tuesday 
and flew to New York. On Wednesday, you flew 
from New York to Brussels, arriving the next 
morning. On Thursday and Friday, you had 
business discussions, and from Saturday until 
Tuesday, you were sightseeing. You flew back 
to New York, arriving Wednesday afternoon. On 
Thursday, you flew back to Denver.
Although you were away from your home in 
Denver for more than a week, you weren’t out-
side the United States for more than a week. 
This is because the day you depart doesn’t 
count as a day outside the United States.
You can deduct your cost of the round -trip 
flight between Denver and Brussels. You can 
also deduct the cost of your stay in Brussels for 
Thursday and Friday while you conducted busi-
ness. However, you can’t deduct the cost of 
your stay in Brussels from Saturday through 
Tuesday because those days were spent on 
nonbusiness activities.
Exception 3—Less than 25% of time on 
personal activities.  Your trip is considered 
entirely for business if:
• You were outside the United States for 
more than a week, and
• You spent less than 25% of the total time 
you were outside the United States on 
nonbusiness activities.
For this purpose, count both the day your trip 
began and the day it ended.
Example. You flew from Seattle to Tokyo, 
where you spent 14 days on business and 5 
days on personal matters. You then flew back 
to Seattle. You spent 1 day flying in each direc-
tion.
Because only 5/21 (less than 25%) of your to-
tal time abroad was for nonbusiness activities, 
you can deduct as travel expenses what it 
would have cost you to make the trip if you 
hadn’t engaged in any nonbusiness activity. 
The amount you can deduct is the cost of the 
round-trip plane fare and 16 days of non -enter-
tainment-related meals (subject to the 50% 
Limit), lodging, and other related expenses.
Exception 4—Vacation not a major con-
sideration. Your trip is considered entirely for 
business if you can establish that a personal va-
cation wasn’t a major consideration, even if you 
have substantial control over arranging the trip.
Travel Primarily for Business
If you travel outside the United States primarily 
for business but spend some of your time on 
other activities, you generally can’t deduct all of 
your travel expenses. You can only deduct the 
business portion of your cost of getting to and 
from your destination. You must allocate the 
costs between your business and other activi-
ties to determine your deductible amount. See 
Travel allocation rules, later.
You don’t have to allocate your travel 
expenses if you meet one of the four 
exceptions listed earlier under Travel 
considered entirely for business . In those ca-
ses, you can deduct the total cost of getting to 
and from your destination.
Travel allocation rules. If your trip outside the 
United States was primarily for business, you 
must allocate your travel time on a day -to-day 
basis between business days and nonbusiness 
days. The days you depart from and return to 
TIP
Page 7 of 42  Fileid: … tions/p463/2022/a/xml/cycle02/source 14:42 - 1-Feb-2023
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 1 Travel  Page 7

the United States are both counted as days out-
side the United States.
To figure the deductible amount of your 
round-trip travel expenses, use the following 
fraction. The numerator (top number) is the total 
number of business days outside the United 
States. The denominator (bottom number) is 
the total number of business and nonbusiness 
days of travel.
Counting business days.  Your business 
days include transportation days, days your 
presence was required, days you spent on busi-
ness, and certain weekends and holidays.
Transportation day.  Count as a business 
day any day you spend traveling to or from a 
business destination. However, if because of a 
nonbusiness activity you don’t travel by a direct 
route, your business days are the days it would 
take you to travel a reasonably direct route to 
your business destination. Extra days for side 
trips or nonbusiness activities can’t be counted 
as business days.
Presence required.  Count as a business 
day any day your presence is required at a par-
ticular place for a specific business purpose. 
Count it as a business day even if you spend 
most of the day on nonbusiness activities.
Day spent on business.  If your principal 
activity during working hours is the pursuit of 
your trade or business, count the day as a busi-
ness day. Also, count as a business day any 
day you are prevented from working because of 
circumstances beyond your control.
Certain weekends and holidays.  Count 
weekends, holidays, and other necessary 
standby days as business days if they fall be-
tween business days. But if they follow your 
business meetings or activity and you remain at 
your business destination for nonbusiness or 
personal reasons, don’t count them as business 
days.
Example 1.  Your tax home is New York 
City. You travel to Quebec, where you have a 
business appointment on Friday. You have an-
other appointment on the following Monday. 
Because your presence was required on both 
Friday and Monday, they are business days. 
Because the weekend is between business 
days, Saturday and Sunday are counted as 
business days. This is true even though you use 
the weekend for sightseeing, visiting friends, or 
other nonbusiness activity.
Example 2.  If, in Example 1 , you had no 
business in Quebec after Friday, but stayed un-
til Monday before starting home, Saturday and 
Sunday would be nonbusiness days.
Nonbusiness activity on the way to or from 
your business destination. If you stopped for 
a vacation or other nonbusiness activity either 
on the way from the United States to your busi-
ness destination, or on the way back to the Uni-
ted States from your business destination, you 
must allocate part of your travel expenses to the 
nonbusiness activity.
The part you must allocate is the amount it 
would have cost you to travel between the point 
where travel outside the United States begins 
and your nonbusiness destination and a return 
to the point where travel outside the United 
States ends.
You determine the nonbusiness portion of 
that expense by multiplying it by a fraction. The 
numerator (top number) of the fraction is the 
number of nonbusiness days during your travel 
outside the United States, and the denominator 
(bottom number) is the total number of days you 
spend outside the United States.
Example. You live in New York. On May 4, 
you flew to Paris to attend a business confer-
ence that began on May 5. The conference 
ended at noon on May 14. That evening, you 
flew to Dublin where you visited with friends un-
til the afternoon of May 21, when you flew di-
rectly home to New York. The primary purpose 
for the trip was to attend the conference.
If you hadn’t stopped in Dublin, you would 
have arrived home the evening of May 14. You 
don’t meet any of the exceptions that would al-
low you to consider your travel entirely for busi-
ness. May 4 through May 14 (11 days) are busi-
ness days and May 15 through May 21 (7 days) 
are nonbusiness days.
You can deduct the cost of your non -enter-
tainment-related meals (subject to the 50% 
Limit), lodging, and other business -related 
travel expenses while in Paris.
You can’t deduct your expenses while in 
Dublin. You also can’t deduct 7/18 of what it 
would have cost you to travel round trip be-
tween New York and Dublin.
You paid $750 to fly from New York to Paris, 
$400 to fly from Paris to Dublin, and $700 to fly 
from Dublin back to New York. Round -trip air-
fare from New York to Dublin would have been 
$1,250.
You figure the deductible part of your air 
travel expenses by subtracting 7/18 of the 
round-trip airfare and other expenses you would 
have had in traveling directly between New 
York and Dublin ($1,250 × 7/18 = $486) from 
your total expenses in traveling from New York 
to Paris to Dublin and back to New York ($750 + 
$400 + $700 = $1,850).
Your deductible air travel expense is $1,364 
($1,850 − $486).
Nonbusiness activity at, near, or beyond 
business destination. If you had a vacation or 
other nonbusiness activity at, near, or beyond 
your business destination, you must allocate 
part of your travel expenses to the nonbusiness 
activity.
The part you must allocate is the amount it 
would have cost you to travel between the point 
where travel outside the United States begins 
and your business destination and a return to 
the point where travel outside the United States 
ends.
You determine the nonbusiness portion of 
that expense by multiplying it by a fraction. The 
numerator (top number) of the fraction is the 
number of nonbusiness days during your travel 
outside the United States, and the denominator 
(bottom number) is the total number of days you 
spend outside the United States.
None of your travel expenses for nonbusi-
ness activities at, near, or beyond your busi-
ness destination are deductible.
Example. Assume that the dates are the 
same as in the previous example but that in-
stead of going to Dublin for your vacation, you 
fly to Venice, Italy, for a vacation.
You can’t deduct any part of the cost of your 
trip from Paris to Venice and return to Paris. In 
addition, you can’t deduct 7/18 of the airfare and 
other expenses from New York to Paris and 
back to New York.
You can deduct 11/18 of the round -trip plane 
fare and other travel expenses from New York 
to Paris, plus your non -entertainment-related 
meals (subject to the 50% Limit ), lodging, and 
any other business expenses you had in Paris. 
(Assume these expenses total $4,939.) If the 
round-trip plane fare and other travel -related 
expenses (such as food during the trip) are 
$1,750, you can deduct travel costs of $1,069 
(11/18 × $1,750), plus the full $4,939 for the ex-
penses you had in Paris.
Other methods. You can use another method 
of counting business days if you establish that it 
more clearly reflects the time spent on other 
than business activities outside the United 
States.
Travel Primarily for Personal 
Reasons
If you travel outside the United States primarily 
for vacation or for investment purposes, the en-
tire cost of the trip is a nondeductible personal 
expense. However, if you spend some time at-
tending brief professional seminars or a con-
tinuing education program, you can deduct your 
registration fees and other expenses you have 
that are directly related to your business.
Example. The university from which you 
graduated has a continuing education program 
for members of its alumni association. This pro-
gram consists of trips to various foreign coun-
tries where academic exercises and conferen-
ces are set up to acquaint individuals in most 
occupations with selected facilities in several 
regions of the world. However, none of the con-
ferences are directed toward specific occupa-
tions or professions. It is up to each participant 
to seek out specialists and organizational set-
tings appropriate to their occupational interests.
Three-hour sessions are held each day over 
a 5-day period at each of the selected overseas 
facilities where participants can meet with indi-
vidual practitioners. These sessions are com-
posed of a variety of activities including work-
shops, mini -lectures, roleplaying, skill 
development, and exercises. Professional con-
ference directors schedule and conduct the 
sessions. Participants can choose those ses-
sions they wish to attend.
You can participate in this program because 
you are a member of the alumni association. 
You and your family take one of the trips. You 
spend about 2 hours at each of the planned 
sessions. The rest of the time you go touring 
and sightseeing with your family. The trip lasts 
less than 1 week.
Your travel expenses for the trip aren’t de-
ductible since the trip was primarily a vacation. 
However, registration fees and any other inci-
dental expenses you have for the five planned 
sessions you attended that are directly related 
and beneficial to your business are deductible 
Page 8 of 42  Fileid: … tions/p463/2022/a/xml/cycle02/source 14:42 - 1-Feb-2023
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 8  Chapter 1 Travel

business expenses. These expenses should be 
specifically stated in your records to ensure 
proper allocation of your deductible business 
expenses.
Luxury Water Travel
If you travel by ocean liner, cruise ship, or other 
form of luxury water transportation for business 
purposes, there is a daily limit on the amount 
you can deduct. The limit is twice the highest 
federal per diem rate allowable at the time of 
your travel. (Generally, the federal per diem is 
the amount paid to federal government employ-
ees for daily living expenses when they travel 
away from home within the United States for 
business purposes.)
Daily limit on luxury water travel.  The high-
est federal per diem rate allowed and the daily 
limit for luxury water travel in 2022 are shown in 
the following table.
. . 
2022 Dates
Highest 
Federal 
Per Diem
Daily Limit on 
Luxury Water 
Travel
January 1 – 
March 31
$497 $994
April 1 – April 30 373 746
May 1– May 31 360 720
June 1 – 
September 30
433 866
October 1 – 
October 31
388 776
November 1 – 
November 30 
367 734
December 1 – 
December 31 
564 1,128
Example. You are a travel agent and trav-
eled by ocean liner from New York to London, 
England, on business in May. Your expense for 
the 6-day cruise was $6,200. Your deduction for 
the cruise can’t exceed $4,320 (6 days × $720 
daily limit).
Meals and entertainment.  If your expenses 
for luxury water travel include separately stated 
amounts for meals or entertainment, those 
amounts are subject to the 50% limit on non-en-
tertainment-related meals and entertainment 
before you apply the daily limit. For a discussion 
of the 50% Limit, see chapter 2.
Example. In the previous example, your 
luxury water travel had a total cost of $6,200. Of 
that amount, $3,700 was separately stated as 
non-entertainment-related meals and $1,000 
was separately stated as entertainment. Con-
sidering that you are self -employed, you aren’t 
reimbursed for any of your travel expenses. You 
figure your deductible travel expenses as fol-
lows.
Entertainment .............. $1,000
 0% limit ................... x 0.00
Allowable entertainment ...... $0.00
Non-entertainment-related 
meals ..................... $3,700
50% limit .................. × 0.50
Allowable non-entertainment 
meals & entertainment ........ $1,850
Other travel expenses ....... + 1,500
Allowable cost before the daily limit ... $3,350
Daily limit for May 2022 ...... $ 720
Times number of days ....... × 6
Maximum luxury water travel ....
deduction ....................... $4,320
Amount of allowable deduction .... $3,350
Your deduction for your cruise is limited to 
$3,350, even though the limit on luxury water 
travel is higher.
Not separately stated.  If your meal or en-
tertainment charges aren’t separately stated or 
aren’t clearly identifiable, you don’t have to allo-
cate any portion of the total charge to meals or 
entertainment.
Exceptions
The daily limit on luxury water travel  (discussed 
earlier) doesn’t apply to expenses you have to 
attend a convention, seminar, or meeting on 
board a cruise ship. See Cruise Ships, later, un-
der Conventions.
Conventions
You can deduct your travel expenses when you 
attend a convention if you can show that your 
attendance benefits your trade or business. You 
can’t deduct the travel expenses for your family.
If the convention is for investment, political, 
social, or other purposes unrelated to your 
trade or business, you can’t deduct the expen-
ses.
Your appointment or election as a dele-
gate doesn’t, in itself, determine 
whether you can deduct travel expen-
ses. You can deduct your travel expenses only 
if your attendance is connected to your own 
trade or business.
Convention agenda.  The convention agenda 
or program generally shows the purpose of the 
convention. You can show your attendance at 
the convention benefits your trade or business 
by comparing the agenda with the official duties 
and responsibilities of your position. The 
agenda doesn’t have to deal specifically with 
your official duties and responsibilities; it will be 
enough if the agenda is so related to your posi-
tion that it shows your attendance was for busi-
ness purposes.
CAUTION
!
Conventions Held Outside
the North American Area
You can’t deduct expenses for attending a con-
vention, seminar, or similar meeting held 
outside the North American area unless:
• The meeting is directly related to the active 
conduct of your trade or business, and
• It is as reasonable to hold the meeting out-
side the North American area as within the 
North American area. See Reasonable-
ness test, later.
If the meeting meets these requirements, you 
must also satisfy the rules for deducting expen-
ses for business trips in general, discussed ear-
lier under Travel Outside the United States.
North American area.  The North American 
area includes the following locations.
American Samoa Jarvis Island
Antigua and Barbuda Johnston Island
Aruba Kingman Reef
Bahamas Marshall Islands
Baker Island Mexico
Barbados Micronesia
Bermuda Midway Islands
Canada Northern Mariana
Costa Rica Islands
Curaçao Palau
Dominica Palmyra Atoll
Dominican Republic Panama
Grenada Puerto Rico
Guam Saint Lucia
Guyana Trinidad and Tobago
Honduras USA
Howland Island U.S. Virgin Islands
Jamaica Wake Island
The North American area also includes U.S. is-
lands, cays, and reefs that are territories of the 
United States and not part of the 50 states or 
the District of Columbia. See Revenue Ruling 
2016-16, available at IRS.gov/irb/
2016-26_IRB#RR-2016-16, for more informa-
tion.
Reasonableness test.  The following factors 
are taken into account to determine if it was as 
reasonable to hold the meeting outside the 
North American area as within the North Ameri-
can area.
• The purpose of the meeting and the activi-
ties taking place at the meeting.
• The purposes and activities of the spon-
soring organizations or groups.
• The homes of the active members of the 
sponsoring organizations and the places at 
which other meetings of the sponsoring or-
ganizations or groups have been or will be 
held.
• Other relevant factors you may present.
Cruise Ships
You can deduct up to $2,000 per year of your 
expenses of attending conventions, seminars, 
or similar meetings held on cruise ships. All 
ships that sail are considered cruise ships.
You can deduct these expenses only if all of 
the following requirements are met.
Page 9 of 42  Fileid: … tions/p463/2022/a/xml/cycle02/source 14:42 - 1-Feb-2023
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 1 Travel  Page 9

1. The convention, seminar, or meeting is di-
rectly related to the active conduct of your 
trade or business.
2. The cruise ship is a vessel registered in 
the United States.
3. All of the cruise ship's ports of call are in 
the United States or in territories of the 
United States.
4. You attach to your return a written state-
ment signed by you that includes informa-
tion about:
a. The total days of the trip (not including 
the days of transportation to and from 
the cruise ship port),
b. The number of hours each day that 
you devoted to scheduled business 
activities, and
c. A program of the scheduled business 
activities of the meeting.
5. You attach to your return a written state-
ment signed by an officer of the organiza-
tion or group sponsoring the meeting that 
includes:
a. A schedule of the business activities 
of each day of the meeting, and
b. The number of hours you attended 
the scheduled business activities.
2.
Meals and 
Entertainment
You can no longer take a deduction for any ex-
pense related to activities generally considered 
entertainment, amusement, or recreation. You 
can continue to deduct 50% of the cost of busi-
ness meals if you (or your employee) are 
present and the food or beverages aren't con-
sidered lavish or extravagant. You can deduct 
100% of your meal expenses if the meals are 
food and beverages provided by a restaurant, 
and paid or incurred after December 31, 2020, 
and before January 1, 2023. See IRS.gov/
Newsroom/IRS-Provides-Guidance-on-Per-
Diem-Rates-and-the-Temporary-100-Percent-
Deduction-for-Food-or-Beverages-From-
Restaurants for additional information.
If food or beverages are provided dur-
ing or at an entertainment event, and 
the food and beverages were pur-
chased separately from the entertainment or 
the cost of the food and beverages was stated 
separately from the cost of the entertainment on 
one or more bills, invoices, or receipts, you may 
be able to deduct the separately stated costs as 
a meal expense. For more information, see 
Regulations section 1.274-11(d)(2), Example 2.
TIP
Entertainment
Entertainment—Defined
Entertainment includes any activity generally 
considered to provide entertainment, amuse-
ment, or recreation. Examples include enter-
taining guests at nightclubs; at social, athletic, 
and sporting clubs; at theaters; at sporting 
events; on yachts; or on hunting, fishing, vaca-
tion, and similar trips. Entertainment may also 
include meeting personal, living, or family 
needs of individuals, such as providing meals, a 
hotel suite, or a car to customers or their fami-
lies.
Deduction may depend on your type of 
business. Your kind of business may deter-
mine if a particular activity is considered enter-
tainment. For example, if you are a dress de-
signer and have a fashion show to introduce 
your new designs to store buyers, the show 
generally isn’t considered entertainment. This is 
because fashion shows are typical in your busi-
ness. But, if you are an appliance distributor 
and hold a fashion show for the spouses of your 
retailers, the show is generally considered en-
tertainment.
Separating costs.  If you have one expense 
that includes the costs of entertainment and 
other services (such as lodging or transporta-
tion), you must allocate that expense between 
the cost of entertainment and the cost of other 
services. You must have a reasonable basis for 
making this allocation. For example, you must 
allocate your expenses if a hotel includes enter-
tainment in its lounge on the same bill with your 
room charge.
Exceptions to the Rules
In general, entertainment expenses are nonde-
ductible. However, there are a few exceptions 
to the general rule, including:
• Entertainment treated as compensation on 
your originally filed tax returns (and treated 
as wages to your employees);
• Recreational expenses for employees 
such as a holiday party or a summer pic-
nic;
• Expenses related to attending business 
meetings or conventions of certain exempt 
organizations such as business leagues, 
chambers of commerce, professional as-
sociations, etc.; and
• Entertainment sold to customers. For ex-
ample, if you run a nightclub, your expen-
ses for the entertainment you furnish to 
your customers, such as a floor show, 
aren’t subject to the nondeductible rules.
Examples of Nondeductible 
Entertainment
Entertainment events.  Generally, you can't 
deduct any expense for an entertainment event. 
This includes expenses for entertaining guests 
at nightclubs; at social, athletic, and sporting 
clubs; at theaters; at sporting events; on yachts; 
or on hunting, fishing, vacation, and similar 
trips.
Entertainment facilities.  Generally, you can’t 
deduct any expense for the use of an entertain-
ment facility. This includes expenses for depre-
ciation and operating costs such as rent, utilit-
ies, maintenance, and protection.
An entertainment facility is any property you 
own, rent, or use for entertainment. Examples 
include a yacht, hunting lodge, fishing camp, 
swimming pool, tennis court, bowling alley, car, 
airplane, apartment, hotel suite, or home in a 
vacation resort.
Club dues and membership fees.  You can’t 
deduct dues (including initiation fees) for mem-
bership in any club organized for business, 
pleasure, recreation, or other social purposes.
This rule applies to any membership organi-
zation if one of its principal purposes is either:
• To conduct entertainment activities for 
members or their guests; or
• To provide members or their guests with 
access to entertainment facilities, dis-
cussed later.
The purposes and activities of a club, not its 
name, will determine whether or not you can 
deduct the dues. You can’t deduct dues paid to:
• Country clubs,
• Golf and athletic clubs,
• Airline clubs,
• Hotel clubs, and
• Clubs operated to provide meals under cir-
cumstances generally considered to be 
conducive to business discussions.
Gift or entertainment.  Any item that might be 
considered either a gift or entertainment will 
generally be considered entertainment. How-
ever, if you give a customer packaged food or 
beverages that you intend the customer to use 
at a later date, treat it as a gift.
Meals
As discussed above, entertainment expenses 
are generally nondeductible. However, you may 
continue to deduct 50% of the cost of business 
meals if you (or an employee) is present and 
the food or beverages are not considered lavish 
or extravagant. You can deduct 100% of your 
meal expenses if the meals are food and bever-
ages provided by a restaurant, and paid or in-
curred after December 31, 2020, and before 
January 1, 2023. The meals may be provided to 
a current or potential business customer, client, 
consultant, or similar business contact.
Food and beverages that are provided dur-
ing entertainment events are not considered en-
tertainment if purchased separately from the 
entertainment, or if the cost of the food and bev-
erages is stated separately from the cost of the 
entertainment on one or more bills, invoices, or 
receipts. However, the entertainment disallow-
ance rule may not be circumvented through in-
flating the amount charged for food and bever-
ages.
Other rules for meals and entertainment ex-
penses. Any allowed expense must be ordi-
nary and necessary. An ordinary expense is 
Page 10 of 42  Fileid: … tions/p463/2022/a/xml/cycle02/source 14:42 - 1-Feb-2023
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 10  Chapter 2 Meals and Entertainment

one that is common and accepted in your trade 
or business. A necessary expense is one that is 
helpful and appropriate for your business. An 
expense doesn't have to be required to be con-
sidered necessary. Expenses must not be lav-
ish or extravagant. An expense isn't considered 
lavish or extravagant if it is reasonable based 
on the facts and circumstances.
Examples. For each example, assume that the 
food and beverage expenses are ordinary and 
necessary expenses under section 162(a) paid 
or incurred during the tax year in carrying on a 
trade or business and are not lavish or extrava-
gant under the circumstances. Also assume 
that the taxpayer and the business contact are 
not engaged in a trade or business that has any 
relation to the entertainment activity.
Example 1.  Taxpayer A invites B, a busi-
ness contact, to a baseball game. A purchases 
tickets for A and B to attend the game. While at 
the game, A buys hot dogs and drinks for A and 
B. The baseball game is entertainment as de-
fined in Regulations section 1. 274-11(b)(1)(i) 
and, thus, the cost of the game tickets is an en-
tertainment expense and is not deductible by A. 
The cost of the hot dogs and drinks, which are 
purchased separately from the game tickets, is 
not an entertainment expense and is not sub-
ject to the section 274(a)(1) disallowance. 
Therefore, A may deduct 50% of the expenses 
associated with the hot dogs and drinks pur-
chased at the game.
Example 2.  Taxpayer C invites D, a busi-
ness contact, to a basketball game. C purcha-
ses tickets for C and D to attend the game in a 
suite, where they have access to food and bev-
erages. The cost of the basketball game tickets, 
as stated on the invoice, includes the food and 
beverages. The basketball game is entertain-
ment as defined in Regulations section 
1.274-11(b)(1)(i) and, thus, the cost of the 
game tickets is an entertainment expense and 
is not deductible by C. The cost of the food and 
beverages, which are not purchased separately 
from the game tickets, is not stated separately 
on the invoice. Thus, the cost of the food and 
beverages is also an entertainment expense 
that is subject to the section 274(a)(1) disallow-
ance. Therefore, C may not deduct any of the 
expenses associated with the basketball game.
Example 3.  Assume the same facts as in 
Example 2, except that the invoice for the bas-
ketball game tickets separately states the cost 
of the food and beverages. As in Example 2 , 
the basketball game is entertainment as defined 
in Regulations section 1. 274-2(b)(1)(i) and, 
thus, the cost of the game tickets, other than the 
cost of the food and beverages, is an 
entertainment expense and is not deductible by 
C. However, the cost of the food and bever-
ages, which is stated separately on the invoice 
for the game tickets, is not an entertainment ex-
pense and is not subject to the section 274(a)
(1) disallowance. Therefore, C may deduct 50% 
of the expenses associated with the food and 
beverages provided at the game.
50% Limit
In general, you can deduct only 50% of your 
business-related meal expenses, unless an ex-
ception applies. However, you can deduct 
100% of your meal expenses if the meals are 
food and beverages provided by a restaurant, 
and paid or incurred after December 31, 2020, 
and before January 1, 2023. See IRS.gov/
Newsroom/IRS-Provides-Guidance-on-Per-
Diem-Rates-and-the-Temporary-100-Percent-
Deduction-for-Food-or-Beverages-From-
Restaurants for additional information. (If you 
are subject to the Department of Transporta-
tion's “hours of service” limits, you can deduct 
80% of your business -related meal expenses. 
See Individuals subject to “hours of service” lim-
its, later.)
The 50% limit applies to employees or their 
employers, and to self -employed persons (in-
cluding independent contractors) or their cli-
ents, depending on whether the expenses are 
reimbursed.
Examples of meals might include:
• Meals while traveling away from home 
(whether eating alone or with others) on 
business, or
• Meal at a business convention or business 
league meeting.
Costs to include or exclude.  Taxes and tips 
relating to a business meal are included as a 
cost of the meal and are subject to the 50% 
limit. However, the cost of transportation to and 
from the meal is not treated as part of the cost 
and would not be subject to the limit.
Application of 50% limit.  The 50% limit on 
meal expenses applies if the expense is other-
wise deductible and isn’t covered by one of the 
exceptions discussed later. Figure A  can help 
you determine if the 50% limit applies to you.
The 50% limit also applies to certain meal 
expenses that aren’t business related. It applies 
to meal expenses you have for the production 
of income, including rental or royalty income. It 
also applies to the cost of meals included in de-
ductible educational expenses.
When to apply the 50% limit.  The 50% limit 
will apply after determining the amount that 
would otherwise qualify for a deduction. You 
first have to determine the amount of meal ex-
penses that would be deductible under the 
other rules discussed in this publication.
Taking turns paying for meals.  If a group of 
business acquaintances takes turns picking up 
each others' meal checks primarily for personal 
reasons, without regard to whether any 
Figure A. Does the 50% Limit Apply to Your Expenses?
There are exceptions to these rules. See Exceptions to the 50% Limit for Meals, later.
All employees and self-employed persons can use this chart.
Were your meal and entertainment expenses reimbursed?
(Count only reimbursements your employer didn’t
include in box 1 of your Form W-2. If self-employed,
count only reimbursements from clients or customers that
aren’t included on Form 1099-MISC, Miscellaneous
Income.)
If an employee, did you adequately account
to your employer under an accountable plan?
If self-employed, did you provide the payer
with adequate records? (See chapter 6.)
Did your expenses exceed the reimbursement?
For the amount reimbursed... For the excess amount...
Yes
No
No
Yes
YesNo
Start Here
Your meal and entertainment 
expenses are NOT subject to 
the limitations. However, since 
the reimbursement wasn’t 
treated as wages or as other 
taxable income, you can’t 
deduct the expenses.
Your meal expenses ARE 
subject to the 50% limit. 
Your entertainment 
expenses are nondeduct-
ible.
Page 11 of 42  Fileid: … tions/p463/2022/a/xml/cycle02/source 14:42 - 1-Feb-2023
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 2 Meals and Entertainment  Page 11

business purposes are served, no member of 
the group can deduct any part of the expense.
Example 1.  You spend $200 (including tax 
and tip) for a business meal. If $110 of that 
amount isn’t allowable because it is lavish and 
extravagant, the remaining $90 is subject to the 
50% limit. Your deduction can’t be more than 
$45 (50% (0.50) × $90).
Example 2.  You purchase two tickets to a 
concert for $200 for you and your client. Your 
deduction is zero because no deduction is al-
lowed for entertainment expenses.
Exception to the 50% Limit 
for Meals
Your meal expense isn’t subject to the 50% limit 
if the expense meets one of the following ex-
ceptions.
1—Expenses treated as compensation. 
In general, expenses for goods, services, and 
facilities, to the extent the expenses are treated 
by the taxpayer, with respect to entertainment, 
amusement, or recreation, as compensation to 
an employee and as wages to the employee for 
tax purposes.
2—Employee's reimbursed expenses.  If 
you are an employee, you aren’t subject to the 
50% limit on expenses for which your employer 
reimburses you under an accountable plan. Ac-
countable plans are discussed in chapter 6.
3—Self-employed reimbursed expenses. 
If you are self -employed, your deductible meal 
expenses aren’t subject to the 50% limit if all of 
the following requirements are met.
• You have these expenses as an independ-
ent contractor.
• Your customer or client reimburses you or 
gives you an allowance for these expenses 
in connection with services you perform.
• You provide adequate records of these ex-
penses to your customer or client. (See 
chapter 5.)
In this case, your client or customer is sub-
ject to the 50% limit on the expenses.
Example. You are a self-employed attorney 
who adequately accounts for meal expenses to 
a client who reimburses you for these expen-
ses. You aren’t subject to the limitation on meal 
expenses. If the client can deduct the expen-
ses, the client is subject to the 50% limit.
If you (as an independent contractor) have 
expenses for meals related to providing serv-
ices for a client but don’t adequately account for 
and seek reimbursement from the client for 
those expenses, you are subject to the 50% 
limit on non -entertainment-related meals and 
the entertainment -related meal expenses are 
nondeductible to you.
4—Recreational expenses for employ-
ees. You aren't subject to the 50% limit for ex-
penses for recreational, social, or similar activi-
ties (including facilities) such as a holiday party 
or a summer picnic.
5—Advertising expenses.  You aren’t 
subject to the 50% limit if you provide meals to 
the general public as a means of advertising or 
promoting goodwill in the community. For ex-
ample, neither the expense of sponsoring a tel-
evision or radio show nor the expense of distrib-
uting free food and beverages to the general 
public is subject to the 50% limit.
6—Sale of meals. You aren’t subject to the 
50% limit if you actually sell meals to the public. 
For example, if you run a restaurant, your ex-
pense for the food you furnish to your custom-
ers isn’t subject to the 50% limit.
Individuals subject to “hours of service” 
limits. You can deduct a higher percentage of 
your meal expenses while traveling away from 
your tax home if the meals take place during or 
incident to any period subject to the Department 
of Transportation's “hours of service” limits. The 
percentage is 80%.
Individuals subject to the Department of 
Transportation's “hours of service” limits include 
the following persons.
• Certain air transportation workers (such as 
pilots, crew, dispatchers, mechanics, and 
control tower operators) who are under 
Federal Aviation Administration regula-
tions.
• Interstate truck operators and bus drivers 
who are under Department of Transporta-
tion regulations.
• Certain railroad employees (such as engi-
neers, conductors, train crews, dispatch-
ers, and control operations personnel) who 
are under Federal Railroad Administration 
regulations.
• Certain merchant mariners who are under 
Coast Guard regulations.
7—Food and beverages provided by a 
restaurant. You can deduct 100% of your 
meal expenses if the meals are food and bever-
ages provided by a restaurant, and paid or in-
curred after December 31, 2020, and before 
January 1, 2023. See 50% Limit  above and 
Figure B. When Are Transportation Expenses Deductible?
Most employees and self-employed persons can use this chart. (Don’t use this chart if your home is 
your principal place of business. See Office in the home, later.)
Temporary
work location
Home Regular or
main job
Always
deductible
Always
deductible
Second job
Never deductible
Never 
de
duct
ible
Deductible if you have a
regular or main job
at another location Always deductib
le
Home: The place where you reside. Transportation expenses between your home and
your main or regular place of work are personal commuting expenses.
Regular or main job: Your principal place of business. If you have more than one job,
you must determine which one is your regular or main job. Consider the time you
spend at each, the activity you have at each, and the income you earn at each.
Temporary work location: A place where your work assignment is realistically
expected to last (and does in fact last) one year or less. Unless you have a regular
place of business, you can only deduct your transportation expenses to a temporary
work location outside your metropolitan area.
Second job: If you regularly work at two or more places in one day, whether or not
for the same employer, you can deduct your transportation expenses of getting from
one workplace to another. If you don’t go directly from your /f_irst job to your second
job, you can only deduct the transportation expenses of going directly from your /f_irst
job to your second job. You can’t deduct your transportation expenses between
your home and a second job on a day off from your main job.
Page 12 of 42  Fileid: … tions/p463/2022/a/xml/cycle02/source 14:42 - 1-Feb-2023
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 12  Chapter 2 Meals and Entertainment

IRS.gov/Newsroom/IRS-Provides-Guidance-
on-Per-Diem-Rates-and-the-Temporary-100-
Percent-Deduction-for-Food-or-Beverages-
From-Restaurants for additional information.
3.
Gifts
If you give gifts in the course of your trade or 
business, you may be able to deduct all or part 
of the cost. This chapter explains the limits and 
rules for deducting the costs of gifts.
$25 limit.  You can deduct no more than $25 
for business gifts you give directly or indirectly 
to each person during your tax year. A gift to a 
company that is intended for the eventual per-
sonal use or benefit of a particular person or a 
limited class of people will be considered an in-
direct gift to that particular person or to the indi-
viduals within that class of people who receive 
the gift.
If you give a gift to a member of a custom-
er's family, the gift is generally considered to be 
an indirect gift to the customer. This rule doesn’t 
apply if you have a bona fide, independent busi-
ness connection with that family member and 
the gift isn’t intended for the customer's even-
tual use.
If you and your spouse both give gifts, both 
of you are treated as one taxpayer. It doesn’t 
matter whether you have separate businesses, 
are separately employed, or whether each of 
you has an independent connection with the re-
cipient. If a partnership gives gifts, the partner-
ship and the partners are treated as one tax-
payer.
Example. You sell products to Local Com-
pany. You and your spouse gave Local Com-
pany three gourmet gift baskets to thank them 
for their business. They paid $80 for each gift 
basket, or $240 total. Three of Local Company's 
executives took the gift baskets home for their 
families' use. You and your spouse have no in-
dependent business relationship with any of the 
executives' other family members. They can de-
duct a total of $75 ($25 limit × 3) for the gift bas-
kets.
Incidental costs. Incidental costs, such as en-
graving on jewelry, or packaging, insuring, and 
mailing, are generally not included in determin-
ing the cost of a gift for purposes of the $25 
limit.
A cost is incidental only if it doesn’t add sub-
stantial value to the gift. For example, the cost 
of gift wrapping is an incidental cost. However, 
the purchase of an ornamental basket for pack-
aging fruit isn’t an incidental cost if the value of 
the basket is substantial compared to the value 
of the fruit.
Exceptions. The following items aren’t consid-
ered gifts for purposes of the $25 limit.
1. An item that costs $4 or less and:
a. Has your name clearly and perma-
nently imprinted on the gift, and
b. Is one of a number of identical items 
you widely distribute. Examples in-
clude pens, desk sets, and plastic 
bags and cases.
2. Signs, display racks, or other promotional 
material to be used on the business prem-
ises of the recipient.
Gift or entertainment.  Any item that might be 
considered either a gift or entertainment will 
generally be considered entertainment. How-
ever, if you give a customer packaged food or 
beverages you intend the customer to use at a 
later date, treat it as a gift.
If you are entitled to a reimbursement 
from your employer but you don’t claim 
it, you can’t claim a deduction for the 
expenses to which that unclaimed reimburse-
ment applies. This type of deduction is consid-
ered a miscellaneous deduction that is no lon-
ger allowable due to the suspension of 
miscellaneous itemized deductions subject to 
the 2% floor under section 67(a).
4.
Transportation
This chapter discusses expenses you can de-
duct for business transportation when you 
aren’t traveling away from home , as defined in 
chapter 1. These expenses include the cost of 
transportation by air, rail, bus, taxi, etc., and the 
cost of driving and maintaining your car.
Transportation expenses include the ordinary 
and necessary costs of all of the following.
• Getting from one workplace to another in 
the course of your business or profession 
when you are traveling within the city or 
general area that is your tax home. Tax 
home is defined in chapter 1.
• Visiting clients or customers.
• Going to a business meeting away from 
your regular workplace.
• Getting from your home to a temporary 
workplace when you have one or more 
regular places of work. These temporary 
workplaces can be either within the area of 
your tax home or outside that area.
Transportation expenses don’t include expen-
ses you have while traveling away from home 
overnight. Those expenses are travel expenses 
discussed in chapter 1 . However, if you use 
your car while traveling away from home over-
night, use the rules in this chapter to figure your 
car expense deduction. See Car Expenses , 
later.
CAUTION
!
Daily transportation expenses you incur while 
traveling from home to one or more regular pla-
ces of business are generally nondeductible 
commuting expenses. However, there may be 
exceptions to this general rule. You can deduct 
daily transportation expenses incurred going 
between your residence and a temporary work 
station outside the metropolitan area where you 
live. Also, daily transportation expenses can be 
deducted if (1) you have one or more regular 
work locations away from your residence; or (2) 
your residence is your principal place of busi-
ness and you incur expenses going between 
the residence and another work location in the 
same trade or business, regardless of whether 
the work is temporary or permanent and regard-
less of the distance.
If you are entitled to a reimbursement 
from your employer but you don’t claim 
it, you can’t claim a deduction for the 
expenses to which that unclaimed reimburse-
ment applies. This type of deduction is consid-
ered a miscellaneous deduction that is no lon-
ger allowable due to the suspension of 
miscellaneous itemized deductions subject to 
the 2% floor under section 67(a).
Illustration of transportation expenses.  Fig-
ure B, earlier, illustrates the rules that apply for 
deducting transportation expenses when you 
have a regular or main job away from your 
home. You may want to refer to it when decid-
ing whether you can deduct your transportation 
expenses.
Temporary work location.  If you have one or 
more regular work locations away from your 
home and you commute to a temporary work lo-
cation in the same trade or business, you can 
deduct the expenses of the daily round -trip 
transportation between your home and the tem-
porary location, regardless of distance.
If your employment at a work location is real-
istically expected to last (and does in fact last) 
for 1 year or less, the employment is temporary 
unless there are facts and circumstances that 
would indicate otherwise.
If your employment at a work location is real-
istically expected to last for more than 1 year or 
if there is no realistic expectation that the em-
ployment will last for 1 year or less, the employ-
ment isn’t temporary, regardless of whether it 
actually lasts for more than 1 year.
If employment at a work location initially is 
realistically expected to last for 1 year or less, 
but at some later date the employment is realis-
tically expected to last more than 1 year, that 
employment will be treated as temporary (un-
less there are facts and circumstances that 
would indicate otherwise) until your expectation 
changes. It won’t be treated as temporary after 
the date you determine it will last more than 1 
year.
If the temporary work location is beyond the 
general area of your regular place of work and 
you stay overnight, you are traveling away from 
home. You may have deductible travel expen-
ses, as discussed in chapter 1.
No regular place of work.  If you have no reg-
ular place of work but ordinarily work in the met-
ropolitan area where you live, you can deduct 
daily transportation costs between home and a 
CAUTION
!
Page 13 of 42  Fileid: … tions/p463/2022/a/xml/cycle02/source 14:42 - 1-Feb-2023
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 4 Transportation  Page 13

temporary work site outside that metropolitan 
area.
Generally, a metropolitan area includes the 
area within the city limits and the suburbs that 
are considered part of that metropolitan area.
You can’t deduct daily transportation costs 
between your home and temporary work sites 
within your metropolitan area. These are nonde-
ductible commuting expenses.
Two places of work. If you work at two places 
in 1 day, whether or not for the same employer, 
you can deduct the expense of getting from one 
workplace to the other. However, if for some 
personal reason you don’t go directly from one 
location to the other, you can’t deduct more 
than the amount it would have cost you to go di-
rectly from the first location to the second.
Transportation expenses you have in going 
between home and a part -time job on a day off 
from your main job are commuting expenses. 
You can’t deduct them.
Armed Forces reservists.  A meeting of an 
Armed Forces reserve unit is a second place of 
business if the meeting is held on a day on 
which you work at your regular job. You can de-
duct the expense of getting from one workplace 
to the other as just discussed under Two places 
of work.
You usually can’t deduct the expense if the 
reserve meeting is held on a day on which you 
don’t work at your regular job. In this case, your 
transportation is generally a nondeductible 
commuting expense. However, you can deduct 
your transportation expenses if the location of 
the meeting is temporary and you have one or 
more regular places of work.
If you ordinarily work in a particular metro-
politan area but not at any specific location and 
the reserve meeting is held at a temporary loca-
tion outside that metropolitan area, you can de-
duct your transportation expenses.
If you travel away from home overnight to at-
tend a guard or reserve meeting, you can de-
duct your travel expenses. These expenses are 
discussed in chapter 1.
If you travel more than 100 miles away from 
home in connection with your performance of 
services as a member of the reserves, you may 
be able to deduct some of your reserve -related 
travel costs as an adjustment to gross income 
rather than as an itemized deduction. For more 
information, see Armed Forces Reservists Trav-
eling More Than 100 Miles From Home  under 
Special Rules in chapter 6.
Commuting expenses.  You can’t deduct the 
costs of taking a bus, trolley, subway, or taxi, or 
of driving a car between your home and your 
main or regular place of work. These costs are 
personal commuting expenses. You can’t de-
duct commuting expenses no matter how far 
your home is from your regular place of work. 
You can’t deduct commuting expenses even if 
you work during the commuting trip.
Example. You sometimes use your cell 
phone to make business calls while commuting 
to and from work. Sometimes business asso-
ciates ride with you to and from work, and you 
have a business discussion in the car. These 
activities don’t change the trip from personal to 
business. You can’t deduct your commuting ex-
penses.
Parking fees.  Fees you pay to park your 
car at your place of business are nondeductible 
commuting expenses. You can, however, de-
duct business -related parking fees when visit-
ing a customer or client.
Advertising display on car.  Putting dis-
play material that advertises your business on 
your car doesn’t change the use of your car 
from personal use to business use. If you use 
this car for commuting or other personal uses, 
you still can’t deduct your expenses for those 
uses.
Car pools. You can’t deduct the cost of us-
ing your car in a nonprofit car pool. Don’t in-
clude payments you receive from the passen-
gers in your income. These payments are 
considered reimbursements of your expenses. 
However, if you operate a car pool for a profit, 
you must include payments from passengers in 
your income. You can then deduct your car ex-
penses (using the rules in this publication).
Hauling tools or instruments.  Hauling 
tools or instruments in your car while commut-
ing to and from work doesn’t make your car ex-
penses deductible. However, you can deduct 
any additional costs you have for hauling tools 
or instruments (such as for renting a trailer you 
tow with your car).
Union members' trips from a union hall. 
If you get your work assignments at a union hall 
and then go to your place of work, the costs of 
getting from the union hall to your place of work 
are nondeductible commuting expenses. Al-
though you need the union to get your work as-
signments, you are employed where you work, 
not where the union hall is located.
Office in the home.  If you have an office in 
your home that qualifies as a principal place of 
business, you can deduct your daily transporta-
tion costs between your home and another 
work location in the same trade or business. 
(See Pub. 587, Business Use of Your Home, for 
information on determining if your home office 
qualifies as a principal place of business.)
Examples of deductible transportation.  The 
following examples show when you can deduct 
transportation expenses based on the location 
of your work and your home.
Example 1. You regularly work in an office 
in the city where you live. Your employer sends 
you to a 1 -week training session at a different 
office in the same city. You travel directly from 
your home to the training location and return 
each day. You can deduct the cost of your daily 
round-trip transportation between your home 
and the training location.
Example 2.  Your principal place of busi-
ness is in your home. You can deduct the cost 
of round-trip transportation between your quali-
fying home office and your client's or custom-
er's place of business.
Example 3. You have no regular office, and 
you don’t have an office in your home. In this 
case, the location of your first business contact 
inside the metropolitan area is considered your 
office. Transportation expenses between your 
home and this first contact are nondeductible 
commuting expenses. Transportation expenses 
between your last business contact and your 
home are also nondeductible commuting ex-
penses. While you can’t deduct the costs of 
these trips, you can deduct the costs of going 
from one client or customer to another.
Car Expenses
If you use your car for business purposes, you 
may be able to deduct car expenses. You can 
generally use one of the two following methods 
to figure your deductible expenses.
• Standard mileage rate.
• Actual car expenses.
If you qualify to use both methods, you 
may want to figure your deduction both 
ways to see which gives you a larger 
deduction.
The cost of using your car as an employee, 
whether measured using actual expenses or 
the standard mileage rate, will no longer be al-
lowed to be claimed as an unreimbursed em-
ployee travel expense as a miscellaneous item-
ized deduction due to the suspension of 
miscellaneous itemized deductions that are 
subject to the 2% floor under section 67(a). The 
suspension applies to tax years beginning after 
December 2017 and before January 2026. De-
ductions for expenses that are deductible in de-
termining adjusted gross income are not sus-
pended. For example, Armed Forces reservists, 
qualified performing artists, and fee -basis state 
or local government officials are allowed to de-
duct unreimbursed employee travel expenses 
as an adjustment to total income on Schedule 1 
(Form 1040), line 12.
If you use actual expenses to figure your de-
duction for a car you lease, there are rules that 
affect the amount of your lease payments you 
can deduct. See Leasing a Car, later.
In this publication, “car” includes a van, 
pickup, or panel truck. For the definition of “car” 
for depreciation purposes, see Car defined un-
der Actual Car Expenses, later.
Standard Mileage Rate
For 2022, the standard mileage rate for the cost 
of operating your car for business use is 58. 5 
cents (0.585) per mile from January 1–June 30 
and 62.5 cents (0.625) per mile from July 1–De-
cember 31.
If you use the standard mileage rate for 
a year, you can’t deduct your actual car 
expenses for that year. You can’t de-
duct depreciation, lease payments, mainte-
nance and repairs, gasoline (including gasoline 
taxes), oil, insurance, or vehicle registration 
fees. See Choosing the standard mileage rate 
and Standard mileage rate not allowed, later.
You can generally use the standard mileage 
rate whether or not you are reimbursed and 
whether or not any reimbursement is more or 
less than the amount figured using the standard 
TIP
CAUTION
!
Page 14 of 42  Fileid: … tions/p463/2022/a/xml/cycle02/source 14:42 - 1-Feb-2023
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 14  Chapter 4 Transportation

mileage rate. See chapter 6 for more informa-
tion on reimbursements.
Choosing the standard mileage rate.  If you 
want to use the standard mileage rate for a car 
you own, you must choose to use it in the first 
year the car is available for use in your busi-
ness. Then, in later years, you can choose to 
use either the standard mileage rate or actual 
expenses.
If you want to use the standard mileage rate 
for a car you lease, you must use it for the entire 
lease period. For leases that began on or be-
fore December 31, 1997, the standard mileage 
rate must be used for the entire portion of the 
lease period (including renewals) that is after 
1997.
You must make the choice to use the stand-
ard mileage rate by the due date (including ex-
tensions) of your return. You can’t revoke the 
choice. However, in later years, you can switch 
from the standard mileage rate to the actual ex-
penses method. If you change to the actual ex-
penses method in a later year, but before your 
car is fully depreciated, you have to estimate 
the remaining useful life of the car and use 
straight line depreciation for the car’s remaining 
estimated useful life, subject to depreciation 
limits (discussed later).
For more information about depreciation in-
cluded in the standard mileage rate, see Excep-
tion under Methods of depreciation, later.
Standard mileage rate not allowed.  You 
can’t use the standard mileage rate if you:
• Use five or more cars at the same time 
(such as in fleet operations);
• Claimed a depreciation deduction for the 
car using any method other than straight 
line for the car’s estimated useful life;
• Used the Modified Accelerated Cost Re-
covery System (MACRS) (as discussed 
later under Depreciation Deduction);
• Claimed a section 179 deduction (dis-
cussed later) on the car;
• Claimed the special depreciation allow-
ance on the car; or
• Claimed actual car expenses after 1997 for 
a car you leased.
Note. You can elect to use the standard 
mileage rate if you used a car for hire (such as a 
taxi) unless the standard mileage rate is other-
wise not allowed, as discussed above.
Five or more cars. If you own or lease five 
or more cars that are used for business at the 
same time, you can’t use the standard mileage 
rate for the business use of any car. However, 
you may be able to deduct your actual expen-
ses for operating each of the cars in your busi-
ness. See Actual Car Expenses , later, for infor-
mation on how to figure your deduction.
You aren’t using five or more cars for busi-
ness at the same time if you alternate using 
(use at different times) the cars for business.
The following examples illustrate the rules 
for when you can and can’t use the standard 
mileage rate for five or more cars.
Example 1. A salesperson owns three cars 
and two vans that they alternate using for call-
ing on their customers. They can use the stand-
ard mileage rate for the business mileage of the 
three cars and the two vans because they don’t 
use them at the same time.
Example 2.  You and your employees use 
your four pickup trucks in your landscaping 
business. During the year, you traded in two of 
your old trucks for two newer ones. You can use 
the standard mileage rate for the business mile-
age of all six of the trucks you owned during the 
year.
Example 3. You own a repair shop and an 
insurance business. You and your employees 
use your two pickup trucks and van for the re-
pair shop. You alternate using your two cars for 
the insurance business. No one else uses the 
cars for business purposes. You can use the 
standard mileage rate for the business use of 
the pickup trucks, the van, and the cars be-
cause you never have more than four vehicles 
used for business at the same time.
Example 4.  You own a car and four vans 
that are used in your housecleaning business. 
Your employees use the vans, and you use the 
car to travel to various customers. You can’t use 
the standard mileage rate for the car or the 
vans. This is because all five vehicles are used 
in your business at the same time. You must 
use actual expenses for all vehicles.
Interest. If you are an employee, you can’t de-
duct any interest paid on a car loan. This ap-
plies even if you use the car 100% for business 
as an employee.
However, if you are self -employed and use 
your car in your business, you can deduct that 
part of the interest expense that represents your 
business use of the car. For example, if you use 
your car 60% for business, you can deduct 60% 
of the interest on Schedule C (Form 1040). You 
can’t deduct the part of the interest expense 
that represents your personal use of the car.
If you use a home equity loan to pur-
chase your car, you may be able to de-
duct the interest. See Pub. 936, Home 
Mortgage Interest Deduction, for more informa-
tion.
Personal property taxes.  If you itemize your 
deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040), you 
can deduct on line 5c state and local personal 
property taxes on motor vehicles. You can take 
this deduction even if you use the standard 
mileage rate or if you don’t use the car for busi-
ness.
If you are self -employed and use your car in 
your business, you can deduct the business 
part of state and local personal property taxes 
on motor vehicles on Schedule C (Form 1040), 
or Schedule F (Form 1040). If you itemize your 
deductions, you can include the remainder of 
your state and local personal property taxes on 
the car on Schedule A (Form 1040).
Parking fees and tolls.  In addition to using 
the standard mileage rate, you can deduct any 
business-related parking fees and tolls. (Park-
ing fees you pay to park your car at your place 
of work are nondeductible commuting expen-
ses.)
TIP
Sale, trade -in, or other disposition.  If you 
sell, trade in, or otherwise dispose of your car, 
you may have a gain or loss on the transaction 
or an adjustment to the basis of your new car. 
See Disposition of a Car, later.
Actual Car Expenses
If you don’t use the standard mileage rate, you 
may be able to deduct your actual car expen-
ses.
Actual car expenses include:
Depreciation
Licenses
Lease 
payments
Registration 
fees
Gas Insurance Repairs
Oil Garage rent Tires
Tolls Parking fees
If you have fully depreciated a car that you 
still use in your business, you can continue to 
claim your other actual car expenses. Continue 
to keep records, as explained later in chapter 5.
Business and personal use.  If you use your 
car for both business and personal purposes, 
you must divide your expenses between busi-
ness and personal use. You can divide your ex-
pense based on the miles driven for each pur-
pose.
Example. You are a contractor and drive 
your car 20,000 miles during the year: 12,000 
miles for business use and 8,000 miles for per-
sonal use. You can claim only 60% (12,000 ÷ 
20,000) of the cost of operating your car as a 
business expense.
Employer-provided vehicle.  If you use a ve-
hicle provided by your employer for business 
purposes, you can deduct your actual unreim-
bursed car expenses. You can’t use the stand-
ard mileage rate. See Vehicle Provided by Your 
Employer in chapter 6.
Interest on car loans. If you are an employee, 
you can’t deduct any interest paid on a car loan. 
This interest is treated as personal interest and 
isn’t deductible. If you are self -employed and 
use your car in that business, see Interest, ear-
lier, under Standard Mileage Rate.
Taxes paid on your car.  If you are an em-
ployee, you can deduct personal property taxes 
paid on your car if you itemize deductions. En-
ter the amount paid on Schedule A (Form 
1040), line 5c.
Sales taxes.  Generally, sales taxes on 
your car are part of your car's basis and are re-
covered through depreciation, discussed later.
Fines and collateral.  You can’t deduct fines 
you pay or collateral you forfeit for traffic viola-
tions.
Casualty and theft losses. If your car is dam-
aged, destroyed, or stolen, you may be able to 
deduct part of the loss not covered by insur-
ance. See Pub. 547, Casualties, Disasters, and 
Thefts, for information on deducting a loss on 
your car.
Page 15 of 42  Fileid: … tions/p463/2022/a/xml/cycle02/source 14:42 - 1-Feb-2023
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 4 Transportation  Page 15

Depreciation and section 179 deductions. 
Generally, the cost of a car, plus sales tax and 
improvements, is a capital expense. Because 
the benefits last longer than 1 year, you gener-
ally can’t deduct a capital expense. However, 
you can recover this cost through the section 
179 deduction (the deduction allowed by sec-
tion 179 of the Internal Revenue Code), special 
depreciation allowance, and depreciation de-
ductions. Depreciation allows you to recover 
the cost over more than 1 year by deducting 
part of it each year. The section 179 deduction, 
special depreciation allowance , and deprecia-
tion deductions are discussed later.
Generally, there are limits on these deduc-
tions. Special rules apply if you use your car 
50% or less in your work or business.
You can claim a section 179 deduction and 
use a depreciation method other than straight 
line only if you don’t use the standard mileage 
rate to figure your business -related car expen-
ses in the year you first place a car in service.
If, in the year you first place a car in service, 
you claim either a section 179 deduction or use 
a depreciation method other than straight line 
for its estimated useful life, you can’t use the 
standard mileage rate on that car in any future 
year.
Car defined. For depreciation purposes, a car 
is any four-wheeled vehicle (including a truck or 
van) made primarily for use on public streets, 
roads, and highways. Its unloaded gross vehi-
cle weight (for trucks and vans, gross vehicle 
weight) must not be more than 6,000 pounds. A 
car includes any part, component, or other item 
physically attached to it or usually included in 
the purchase price.
A car doesn’t include:
• An ambulance, hearse, or combination 
ambulance-hearse used directly in a busi-
ness;
• A vehicle used directly in the business of 
transporting persons or property for pay or 
hire; or
• A truck or van that is a qualified nonperso-
nal use vehicle.
Qualified nonpersonal use vehicles. 
These are vehicles that by their nature aren’t 
likely to be used more than a minimal amount 
for personal purposes. They include trucks and 
vans that have been specially modified so that 
they aren’t likely to be used more than a mini-
mal amount for personal purposes, such as by 
installation of permanent shelving and painting 
the vehicle to display advertising or the compa-
ny's name. Delivery trucks with seating only for 
the driver, or only for the driver plus a folding 
jump seat, are qualified nonpersonal use vehi-
cles.
More information.  See Depreciation De-
duction, later, for more information on how to 
depreciate your vehicle.
Section 179 Deduction
You can elect to recover all or part of the cost of 
a car that is qualifying section 179 property, up 
to a limit, by deducting it in the year you place 
the property in service. This is the section 179 
deduction. If you elect the section 179 deduc-
tion, you must reduce your depreciable basis in 
the car by the amount of the section 179 deduc-
tion.
There is a limit on the total section 179 
deduction, special depreciation allow-
ance, and depreciation deduction for 
cars, trucks, and vans that may reduce or elimi-
nate any benefit from claiming the section 179 
deduction. See Depreciation Limits, later.
You can claim the section 179 deduction 
only in the year you place the car in service. For 
this purpose, a car is placed in service when it 
is ready and available for a specifically as-
signed use in a trade or business. Even if you 
aren’t using the property, it is in service when it 
is ready and available for its specifically as-
signed use.
A car first used for personal purposes can’t 
qualify for the deduction in a later year when its 
use changes to business.
Example. In 2021, you bought a new car 
and used it for personal purposes. In 2022, you 
began to use it for business. Changing its use to 
business use doesn’t qualify the cost of your car 
for a section 179 deduction in 2022. However, 
you can claim a depreciation deduction for the 
business use of the car starting in 2022. See 
Depreciation Deduction, later.
More than 50% business use requirement. 
You must use the property more than 50% for 
business to claim any section 179 deduction. If 
you used the property more than 50% for busi-
ness, multiply the cost of the property by the 
percentage of business use. The result is the 
cost of the property that can qualify for the sec-
tion 179 deduction.
Example. You purchased a new car in April 
2022 for $24,500 and used it 60% for business. 
Based on your business usage, the total cost of 
your car that qualifies for the section 179 de-
duction is $14,700 ($24,500 cost × 60% (0. 60) 
business use). But see Limit on total section 
179, special depreciation allowance, and de-
preciation deduction, discussed later.
Limits. There are limits on:
• The amount of the section 179 deduction;
• The section 179 deduction for sport utility 
and certain other vehicles; and
• The total amount of the section 179 deduc-
tion, special depreciation allowance, and 
depreciation deduction (discussed later) 
you can claim for a qualified property.
Limit on the amount of the section 179 
deduction. For tax years beginning in 2022, 
the total amount you can elect to deduct under 
section 179 generally can’t be more than 
$1,080,000.
If the cost of your section 179 property 
placed in service in tax years beginning in 2022 
is over $2,700,000, you must reduce the 
$1,080,000 dollar limit (but not below zero) by 
the amount of cost over $2,700,000. If the cost 
of your section 179 property placed in service 
during tax years beginning in 2022 is 
$3,780,000 or more, you can’t take a section 
179 deduction.
The total amount you can deduct under sec-
tion 179 each year after you apply the limits 
TIP
listed above cannot be more than the taxable 
income from the active conduct of any trade or 
business during the year.
If you are married and file a joint return, you 
and your spouse are treated as one taxpayer in 
determining any reduction to the dollar limit, re-
gardless of which of you purchased the prop-
erty or placed it in service.
If you and your spouse file separate returns, 
you are treated as one taxpayer for the dollar 
limit. You must allocate the dollar limit (after any 
reduction) between you.
For more information on the above section 
179 deduction limits, see Pub. 946, How To De-
preciate Property.
Limit for sport utility and certain other 
vehicles. You cannot elect to deduct more 
than $27,000 of the cost of any heavy sport util-
ity vehicle (SUV) and certain other vehicles 
placed in service during the tax years beginning 
in 2022. This rule applies to any four -wheeled 
vehicle primarily designed or used to carry pas-
sengers over public streets, roads, or highways 
that isn’t subject to any of the passenger auto-
mobile limits explained under Depreciation Lim-
its, later, and that is rated at more than 6,000 
pounds gross vehicle weight and not more than 
14,000 pounds gross vehicle weight. However, 
the $27,000 limit doesn’t apply to any vehicle:
• Designed to have a seating capacity of 
more than nine persons behind the driver's 
seat;
• Equipped with a cargo area of at least 6 
feet in interior length that is an open area 
or is designed for use as an open area but 
is enclosed by a cap and isn’t readily ac-
cessible directly from the passenger com-
partment; or
• That has an integral enclosure, fully en-
closing the driver compartment and load 
carrying device, doesn’t have seating rear-
ward of the driver's seat, and has no body 
section protruding more than 30 inches 
ahead of the leading edge of the wind-
shield.
Limit on total section 179 deduction, 
special depreciation allowance, and depre-
ciation deduction.  The first -year limit on the 
depreciation deduction, special depreciation al-
lowance, and section 179 deduction for vehi-
cles acquired before September 28, 2017, and 
placed in service during 2022, is $11,200. The 
first-year limit on depreciation, special deprecia-
tion allowance, and section 179 deduction for 
vehicles acquired after September 27, 2017, 
and placed in service during 2022 increases to 
$19,200. If you elect not to claim a special de-
preciation allowance for a vehicle placed in 
service in 2022, the amount increases to 
$11,200. The limit is reduced if your business 
use of the vehicle is less than 100%. See De-
preciation Limits, later, for more information.
Example. In the earlier example  under 
More than 50% business use requirement , you 
had a car with a cost (for purposes of the sec-
tion 179 deduction) of $14,700. However, 
based on your business usage of the car, the 
total of your section 179 deduction, special de-
preciation allowance, and depreciation deduc-
tions is limited to $11,520 ($19,200 limit x 60% 
(0.60) business use) because the car was 
Page 16 of 42  Fileid: … tions/p463/2022/a/xml/cycle02/source 14:42 - 1-Feb-2023
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 16  Chapter 4 Transportation

acquired after September 27, 2017, and placed 
in service during 2022.
Cost of car.  For purposes of the section 179 
deduction, the cost of the car doesn’t include 
any amount figured by reference to any other 
property held by you at any time. For example, 
if you buy a car as a replacement for a car that 
was stolen or that was destroyed in a casualty 
loss, and you use section 1033 to determine the 
basis in your replacement vehicle, your cost for 
purposes of the section 179 deduction doesn’t 
include your adjusted basis in the relinquished 
car. In that case, your cost includes only the 
cash you paid.
Basis of car for depreciation.  The 
amount of the section 179 deduction reduces 
your basis in your car. If you choose the section 
179 deduction, you must subtract the amount of 
the deduction from the cost of your car. The re-
sulting amount is the basis in your car you use 
to figure your depreciation deduction.
When to elect.  If you want to take the section 
179 deduction, you must make the election in 
the tax year you place the car in service for 
business or work.
How to elect. Employees use Form 2106, Em-
ployee Business Expenses, to make the elec-
tion and report the section 179 deduction. All 
others use Form 4562, Depreciation and Amor-
tization, to make an election.
Form 2106 is only used by Armed 
Forces reservists, qualified performing 
artists, fee-basis state or local govern-
ment officials, and employees with impair-
ment-related work expenses. Due to the sus-
pension of miscellaneous itemized deductions 
subject to the 2% floor under section 67(a), em-
ployees who do not fit into one of the listed cat-
egories may not use Form 2106.
File the appropriate form with either of the 
following.
• Your original tax return filed for the year the 
property was placed in service (whether or 
not you file it timely).
• An amended return filed within the time 
prescribed by law. An election made on an 
amended return must specify the item of 
section 179 property to which the election 
applies and the part of the cost of each 
such item to be taken into account. The 
amended return must also include any re-
sulting adjustments to taxable income.
You must keep records that show the 
specific identification of each piece of 
qualifying section 179 property. These 
records must show how you acquired the prop-
erty, the person you acquired it from, and when 
you placed it in service.
Revoking an election.  An election (or any 
specification made in the election) to take a 
section 179 deduction for 2022 can only be re-
voked with the Commissioner's approval.
Recapture of section 179 deduction.  To be 
eligible to claim the section 179 deduction, you 
must use your car more than 50% for business 
or work in the year you acquired it. If your busi-
ness use of the car is 50% or less in a later tax 
CAUTION
!
CAUTION
!
year during the recovery period, you have to re-
capture (include in income) in that later year 
any excess depreciation. Any section 179 de-
duction claimed on the car is included in figur-
ing the excess depreciation. For information on 
this calculation, see Excess depreciation , later 
in this chapter under Car Used 50% or Less for 
Business. For more information on recapture of 
a section 179 deduction, see Pub. 946.
Dispositions. If you dispose of a car on which 
you had claimed the section 179 deduction, the 
amount of that deduction is treated as a depre-
ciation deduction for recapture purposes. You 
treat any gain on the disposition of the property 
as ordinary income up to the amount of the sec-
tion 179 deduction and any allowable deprecia-
tion (unless you establish the amount actually 
allowed). For information on the disposition of a 
car, see Disposition of a Car, later. For more in-
formation on recapture of a section 179 deduc-
tion, see Pub. 946.
Special Depreciation Allowance
You may be able to claim the special deprecia-
tion allowance for your car, truck, or van if it is 
qualified property and was placed in service in 
2022. The allowance for 2022 is an additional 
depreciation deduction for 100% of the car's 
depreciable basis (after any section 179 deduc-
tion, but before figuring your regular deprecia-
tion deduction under MACRS) if the vehicle was 
acquired after September 27, 2017, and placed 
in service during 2022. Further, while it applies 
to a new vehicle, it also applies to a used vehi-
cle only if the vehicle meets the used property 
requirements. For more information on the used 
property requirements, see section 168(k)(2)(E)
(ii). To qualify for the allowance, more than 50% 
of the use of the car must be in a qualified busi-
ness use (as defined under Depreciation De-
duction, later).
Combined depreciation.  The first -year limit 
on the depreciation deduction, special depreci-
ation allowance, and section 179 deduction for 
vehicles acquired before September 28, 2017, 
and placed in service during 2022, is $11,200. 
Your combined section 179 depreciation, spe-
cial depreciation allowance, and regular 
MACRS depreciation deduction is limited to the 
maximum allowable depreciation deduction for 
vehicles acquired after September 27, 2017, 
and placed in service during 2022 is $19,200. If 
you elect not to claim a special depreciation al-
lowance for a vehicle placed in service in 2022, 
the amount is $11,200. See Depreciation Lim-
its, later in this chapter.
Qualified car. To be qualified property, the car 
(including the truck or van) must meet all of the 
following tests.
• You acquired the car after September 27, 
2017, but only if no written binding contract 
to acquire the car existed before Septem-
ber 28, 2017.
• You acquired the car new or used.
• You placed the car in service in your trade 
or business before January 1, 2027.
• You used the car more than 50% in a quali-
fied business use during the tax year.
Election not to claim the special deprecia-
tion allowance. You can elect not to claim the 
special depreciation allowance for your car, 
truck, or van that is qualified property. If you 
make this election, it applies to all 5 -year prop-
erty placed in service during the year.
To make this election, attach a statement to 
your timely filed return (including extensions) in-
dicating the class of property (5 -year for cars) 
for which you are making the election and that 
you are electing not to claim the special depre-
ciation allowance for qualified property in that 
class of property.
Unless you elect not to claim the spe-
cial depreciation allowance, you must 
reduce the car's adjusted basis by the 
amount of the allowance, even if the allowance 
wasn’t claimed.
Depreciation Deduction
If you use actual car expenses to figure your de-
duction for a car you own and use in your busi-
ness, you can claim a depreciation deduction. 
This means you can deduct a certain amount 
each year as a recovery of your cost or other 
basis in your car.
You generally need to know the following 
things about the car you intend to depreciate.
• Your basis in the car.
• The date you place the car in service.
• The method of depreciation and recovery 
period you will use.
Basis. Your basis in a car for figuring deprecia-
tion is generally its cost. This includes any 
amount you borrow or pay in cash, other prop-
erty, or services.
Generally, you figure depreciation on your 
car, truck, or van using your unadjusted basis 
(see Unadjusted basis , later). However, in 
some situations, you will use your adjusted ba-
sis (your basis reduced by depreciation allowed 
or allowable in earlier years). For one of these 
situations, see Exception under Methods of de-
preciation, later.
If you change the use of a car from personal 
to business, your basis for depreciation is the 
lesser of the fair market value or your adjusted 
basis in the car on the date of conversion. Addi-
tional rules concerning basis are discussed 
later in this chapter under Unadjusted basis.
Placed in service.  You generally place a car 
in service when it is available for use in your 
work or business, in an income-producing activ-
ity, or in a personal activity. Depreciation begins 
when the car is placed in service for use in your 
work or business or for the production of in-
come.
For purposes of figuring depreciation, if you 
first start using the car only for personal use and 
later convert it to business use, you place the 
car in service on the date of conversion.
Car placed in service and disposed of in 
the same year.  If you place a car in service 
and dispose of it in the same tax year, you can’t 
claim any depreciation deduction for that car.
Methods of depreciation.  Generally, you fig-
ure depreciation on cars using the Modified 
CAUTION
!
Page 17 of 42  Fileid: … tions/p463/2022/a/xml/cycle02/source 14:42 - 1-Feb-2023
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 4 Transportation  Page 17

Accelerated Cost Recovery (MACRS)  dis-
cussed later in this chapter.
Exception. If you used the standard mile-
age rate in the first year of business use and 
change to the actual expenses method in a later 
year, you can’t depreciate your car under the 
MACRS rules. You must use straight line depre-
ciation over the estimated remaining useful life 
of the car. The amount you depreciate can’t be 
more than the depreciation limit that applies for 
that year. See Depreciation Limits, later.
To figure depreciation under the straight line 
method, you must reduce your basis in the car 
(but not below zero) by a set rate per mile for all 
miles for which you used the standard mileage 
rate. The rate per mile varies depending on the 
year(s) you used the standard mileage rate. For 
the rate(s) to use, see Depreciation adjustment 
when you used the standard mileage rate under 
Disposition of a Car, later.
This reduction of basis is in addition to those 
basis adjustments described later under Unad-
justed basis. You must use your adjusted basis 
in your car to figure your depreciation deduc-
tion. For additional information on the straight 
line method of depreciation, see Pub. 946.
More-than-50%-use test. Generally, you must 
use your car more than 50% for qualified busi-
ness use (defined next) during the year to use 
MACRS. You must meet this 
more-than-50%-use test each year of the recov-
ery period (6 years under MACRS) for your car.
If your business use is 50% or less, you 
must use the straight line method to depreciate 
your car. This is explained later under Car Used 
50% or Less for Business.
Qualified business use.  A qualified business 
use is any use in your trade or business. It 
doesn’t include use for the production of in-
come (investment use), or use provided under 
lease to, or as compensation to, a 5% owner or 
related person. However, you do combine your 
business and investment use to figure your de-
preciation deduction for the tax year.
Use of your car by another person. Don’t 
treat any use of your car by another person as 
use in your trade or business unless that use 
meets one of the following conditions.
• It is directly connected with your business.
• It is properly reported by you as income to 
the other person (and, if you have to, you 
withhold tax on the income).
• It results in a payment of fair market rent. 
This includes any payment to you for the 
use of your car.
Business use changes.  If you used your car 
more than 50% in qualified business use in the 
year you placed it in service, but 50% or less in 
a later year (including the year of disposition), 
you have to change to the straight line method 
of depreciation. See Qualified business use 
50% or less in a later year  under Car Used 50% 
or Less for Business, later.
Property doesn’t cease to be used 
more than 50% in qualified business 
use by reason of a transfer at death.
Use for more than one purpose.  If you use 
your car for more than one purpose during the 
TIP
tax year, you must allocate the use to the vari-
ous purposes. You do this on the basis of mile-
age. Figure the percentage of qualified busi-
ness use by dividing the number of miles you 
drive your car for business purposes during the 
year by the total number of miles you drive the 
car during the year for any purpose.
Change from personal to business use.  If 
you change the use of a car from 100% per-
sonal use to business use during the tax year, 
you may not have mileage records for the time 
before the change to business use. In this case, 
you figure the percentage of business use for 
the year as follows.
1. Determine the percentage of business use 
for the period following the change. Do 
this by dividing business miles by total 
miles driven during that period.
2. Multiply the percentage in (1) by a fraction. 
The numerator (top number) is the number 
of months the car is used for business, 
and the denominator (bottom number) is 
12.
Example. You use a car only for personal 
purposes during the first 6 months of the year. 
During the last 6 months of the year, you drive 
the car a total of 15,000 miles of which 12,000 
miles are for business. This gives you a busi-
ness use percentage of 80% (12,000 ÷ 15,000) 
for that period. Your business use for the year is 
40% (80% (0.80) × 6/12).
Limits. The amount you can claim for section 
179, special depreciation allowance, and de-
preciation deductions may be limited. The maxi-
mum amount you can claim depends on the 
year in which you placed your car in service. 
You have to reduce the maximum amount if you 
did not use the car exclusively for business. 
See Depreciation Limits, later.
Unadjusted basis.  You use your unadjusted 
basis (often referred to as your basis or your ba-
sis for depreciation) to figure your depreciation 
using the MACRS depreciation chart, explained 
later under Modified Accelerated Cost Recov-
ery System (MACRS) . Your unadjusted basis 
for figuring depreciation is your original basis in-
creased or decreased by certain amounts.
To figure your unadjusted basis, begin with 
your car's original basis, which is generally its 
cost. Cost includes sales taxes (see Sales 
taxes, earlier), destination charges, and dealer 
preparation. Increase your basis by any sub-
stantial improvements you make to your car, 
such as adding air conditioning or a new en-
gine. Decrease your basis by any section 179 
deduction, special depreciation allowance, gas 
guzzler tax, and alternative motor vehicle credit.
See Form 8910, Alternative Motor Vehicle 
Credit, for information on the alternative motor 
vehicle credit.
If your business use later falls to 50% 
or less, you may have to recapture (in-
clude in your income) any excess de-
preciation. See Car Used 50% or Less for Busi-
ness, later, for more information.
CAUTION
!
If you acquired the car by gift or inheritance, 
see Pub. 551, Basis of Assets, for information 
on your basis in the car.
Improvements. A major improvement to a 
car is treated as a new item of 5 -year recovery 
property. It is treated as placed in service in the 
year the improvement is made. It doesn’t matter 
how old the car is when the improvement is 
added. Follow the same steps for depreciating 
the improvement as you would for depreciating 
the original cost of the car. However, you must 
treat the improvement and the car as a whole 
when applying the limits on the depreciation de-
ductions. Your car's depreciation deduction for 
the year (plus any section 179 deduction, spe-
cial depreciation allowance, and depreciation 
on any improvements) can’t be more than the 
depreciation limit that applies for that year. See 
Depreciation Limits, later.
Car trade -in. If you traded one car (the “old 
car”) for another car (the “new car”) in 2022, you 
must treat the transaction as a disposition of the 
old car and the purchase of the new car. You 
must treat the old car as disposed of at the time 
of the trade -in. The depreciable basis of the 
new car is the adjusted basis of the old car (fig-
ured as if 100% of the car’s use had been for 
business purposes) plus any additional amount 
you paid for the new car. You then figure your 
depreciation deduction for the new car begin-
ning with the date you placed it in service. You 
must also complete Form 2106, Part II, Sec-
tion D. This method is explained later, begin-
ning at Effect of trade-in on basis.
Form 2106 is only used by Armed 
Forces reservists, qualified performing 
artists, fee-basis state or local govern-
ment officials, and employees with impair-
ment-related work expenses. Due to the sus-
pension of miscellaneous itemized deductions 
subject to the 2% floor under section 67(a), em-
ployees who do not fit into one of the listed cat-
egories may not use Form 2106.
Effect of trade -in on basis.  The discus-
sion that follows applies to trade -ins of cars in 
2022, where the election was made to treat the 
transaction as a disposition of the old car and 
the purchase of the new car. For information on 
how to figure depreciation for cars involved in a 
like-kind exchange (trade -in) in 2022, for which 
the election wasn’t made, see Pub. 946 and 
Regulations section 1.168(i)-6(d)(3).
Note. Like‐ kind exchanges completed after 
December 31, 2017, are generally limited to ex-
changes of real property not held primarily for 
sale. Regulations section 1. 168(i)-6 doesn't re-
flect this change in law.
Traded car used only for business.  If 
you trade in a car you used only in your busi-
ness for another car that will be used only in 
your business, your original basis in the new car 
is your adjusted basis in the old car, plus any 
additional amount you pay for the new car.
Example. You trade in a car that has an ad-
justed basis of $5,000 for a new car. In addition, 
you pay cash of $20,000 for the new car. Your 
original basis of the new car is $25,000 (your 
$5,000 adjusted basis in the old car plus the 
CAUTION
!
Page 18 of 42  Fileid: … tions/p463/2022/a/xml/cycle02/source 14:42 - 1-Feb-2023
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 18  Chapter 4 Transportation

$20,000 cash paid). Your unadjusted basis is 
$25,000 unless you claim the section 179 de-
duction, special depreciation allowance, or 
have other increases or decreases to your origi-
nal basis, discussed under Unadjusted basis , 
earlier.
Traded car used partly in business.  If 
you trade in a car you used partly in your busi-
ness for a new car you will use in your business, 
you must make a “trade -in” adjustment for the 
personal use of the old car. This adjustment has 
the effect of reducing your basis in your old car, 
but not below zero, for purposes of figuring your 
depreciation deduction for the new car. (This 
adjustment isn’t used, however, when you de-
termine the gain or loss on the later disposition 
of the new car. See Pub. 544, Sales and Other 
Dispositions of Assets, for information on how 
to report the disposition of your car.)
To figure the unadjusted basis of your new 
car for depreciation, first add to your adjusted 
basis in the old car any additional amount you 
pay for the new car. Then subtract from that to-
tal the excess, if any, of:
1. The total of the amounts that would have 
been allowable as depreciation during the 
tax years before the trade if 100% of the 
use of the car had been business and in-
vestment use, over
2. The total of the amounts actually allowed 
as depreciation during those years.
For information about figuring depreciation, see 
Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery System 
(MACRS) next.
Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery Sys-
tem (MACRS).  MACRS is the name given to 
the tax rules for getting back (recovering) 
through depreciation deductions the cost of 
property used in a trade or business or to pro-
duce income.
The maximum amount you can deduct is 
limited, depending on the year you placed your 
car in service. See Depreciation Limits, later.
Recovery period. Under MACRS, cars are 
classified as 5 -year property. You actually de-
preciate the cost of a car, truck, or van over a 
period of 6 calendar years. This is because your 
car is generally treated as placed in service in 
the middle of the year, and you claim deprecia-
tion for one -half of both the first year and the 
sixth year.
For more information on the qualifications 
for this shorter recovery period and the percen-
tages to use in figuring the depreciation deduc-
tion, see chapter 4 of Pub. 946.
Depreciation methods.  You can use one 
of the following methods to depreciate your car.
• The 200% declining balance method 
(200% DB) over a 5-year recovery period 
that switches to the straight line method 
when that method provides an equal or 
greater deduction.
• The 150% declining balance method 
(150% DB) over a 5-year recovery period 
that switches to the straight line method 
when that method provides an equal or 
greater deduction.
• The straight line method (SL) over a 5-year 
recovery period.
If you use Table 4 -1 (discussed later) 
to determine your depreciation rate for 
2022, you don’t need to determine in 
what year using the straight line method pro-
vides an equal or greater deduction. This is be-
cause the chart has the switch to the straight 
line method built into its rates.
Before choosing a method, you may wish to 
consider the following facts.
• Using the straight line method provides 
equal yearly deductions throughout the re-
covery period.
• Using the declining balance methods pro-
vides greater deductions during the earlier 
recovery years with the deductions gener-
ally getting smaller each year.
MACRS depreciation chart.  A 2022 MACRS 
Depreciation Chart  and instructions are inclu-
ded in this chapter as Table 4-1. Using this ta-
ble will make it easy for you to figure the 2022 
depreciation deduction for your car. A similar 
chart appears in the Instructions for Form 2106.
You may have to use the tables in Pub. 
946 instead of using this MACRS De-
preciation Chart.
You must use the Depreciation Tables  in 
Pub. 946 rather than the 2022 MACRS Depreci-
ation Chart  in this publication if any one of the 
following three conditions applies to you.
1. You file your return on a fiscal year basis.
2. You file your return for a short tax year 
(less than 12 months).
3. During the year, all of the following condi-
tions apply.
a. You placed some property in service 
from January through September.
b. You placed some property in service 
from October through December.
c. Your basis in the property you placed 
in service from October through De-
cember (excluding nonresidential real 
property, residential rental property, 
and property placed in service and 
disposed of in the same year) was 
more than 40% of your total bases in 
all property you placed in service dur-
ing the year.
Depreciation in future years.  If you use 
the percentages from the chart, you generally 
must continue to use them for the entire recov-
ery period of your car. However, you can’t con-
tinue to use the chart if your basis in your car is 
adjusted because of a casualty. In that case, for 
the year of the adjustment and the remaining re-
covery period, figure the depreciation without 
the chart using your adjusted basis in the car at 
the end of the year of the adjustment and over 
the remaining recovery period. See Figuring the 
Deduction Without Using the Tables  in chap-
ter 4 of Pub. 946.
In future years, don’t use the chart in 
this edition of the publication. Instead, 
use the chart in the publication or the 
form instructions for those future years.
TIP
CAUTION
!
TIP
Disposition of car during recovery pe-
riod. If you dispose of the car before the last 
year of the recovery period, you are generally 
allowed a half-year of depreciation in the year of 
disposition. This rule applies unless the 
mid-quarter convention applies to the vehicle 
being disposed of. See Depreciation deduction 
for the year of disposition under Disposition of a 
Car, later, for information on how to figure the 
depreciation allowed in the year of disposition.
How to use the 2022 chart.  To figure your 
depreciation deduction for 2022, find the per-
centage in the column of Table 4 -1 based on 
the date that you first placed the car in service 
and the depreciation method that you are using. 
Multiply the unadjusted basis  of your car (de-
fined earlier) by that percentage to determine 
the amount of your depreciation deduction. If 
you prefer to figure your depreciation deduction 
without the help of the chart, see Pub. 946.
Your deduction can’t be more than the 
maximum depreciation limit for cars. 
See Depreciation Limits, later.
Example. You bought a used truck in Feb-
ruary 2021 to use exclusively in your landscape 
business. You paid $9,200 for the truck with no 
trade-in. You didn’t claim any section 179 de-
duction, the truck didn’t qualify for the special 
depreciation allowance, and you chose to use 
the 200% DB method to get the largest depreci-
ation deduction in the early years.
You used the MACRS Depreciation Chart in 
2021 to find your percentage. The unadjusted 
basis of the truck equals its cost because you 
used it exclusively for business. You multiplied 
the unadjusted basis of the truck, $9,200, by the 
percentage that applied, 20%, to figure your 
2021 depreciation deduction of $1,840.
In 2022, you used the truck for personal pur-
poses when you repaired your parent’s cabin. 
Your records show that the business use of the 
truck was 90% in 2022. You used Table 4-1 to 
find your percentage. Reading down the first 
column for the date placed in service and 
across to the 200% DB column, you locate your 
percentage, 32%. You multiply the unadjusted 
basis of the truck, $8,280 ($9,200 cost × 90% 
(0.90) business use), by 32% (0.32) to figure 
your 2022 depreciation deduction of $2,650.
Depreciation Limits
There are limits on the amount you can deduct 
for depreciation of your car, truck, or van. The 
section 179 deduction and special depreciation 
allowance are treated as depreciation for pur-
poses of the limits. The maximum amount you 
can deduct each year depends on the date you 
acquired the passenger automobile and the 
year you place the passenger automobile in 
service. These limits are shown in the following 
tables for 2022.
CAUTION
!
Page 19 of 42  Fileid: … tions/p463/2022/a/xml/cycle02/source 14:42 - 1-Feb-2023
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 4 Transportation  Page 19

Maximum
Depreciation Deduction
for Passenger Automobiles 
(Including Trucks and
Vans) Acquired Before September 
28, 2017, and
Placed in Service During 2018–
2022
Date 4th &
Placed in 1st 2nd 3rd Later
Service Year Year Year Years
2022 $11,200 $18,000 $10,800 $6,460
2021 10,200 16,400  9,800  5,860
2020  10,100  16,100  9,700  5,760
2019  14,9001  16,100  9,700  5,760
2018  16,4002   16,000  9,600  5,760
1 $10,100 if the passenger automobile isn’t qualified 
property or if you elect not to claim the special 
depreciation allowance.
2 $10,000 if the passenger automobile isn’t qualified 
property or if you elect not to claim the special 
depreciation allowance.
Maximum
Depreciation Deduction
for Passenger Automobiles 
(Including Trucks and
Vans) Acquired After September 
27, 2017, and
Placed in Service During 2018 or 
Later
Date 4th &
Placed in 1st 2nd 3rd Later
Service Year Year Year Years
2022 $19,2001 $18,000 $10,800 $6,460
2021  18,2002  16,400  9,800  5,860
2019–2020  18,1003  16,100  9,700  5,760
2018  18,0004  16,000  9,600  5,760
1 $11,200 if the passenger automobile isn’t qualified 
property or if you elect not to claim the special 
depreciation allowance.
2 $10,200 if the passenger automobile isn’t qualified 
property or if you elect not to claim the special 
depreciation allowance.
3 $10,100 if the passenger automobile isn’t qualified 
property or if you elect not to claim the special 
depreciation allowance.
4 $10,000 if the passenger automobile isn’t qualified 
property or if you elect not to claim the special 
depreciation allowance.
The maximum amount you can deduct each 
year depends on the year you place the car in 
service. These limits are shown in the following 
tables for prior years.
Maximum
Depreciation Deduction
for Cars Placed in Service
Prior to 2018
Date 4th &
Placed 1st 2nd 3rd Later
in Service Year Year Year Years
2012–2017 $11,1601 $5,100 $3,050 $1,875
2010–2011  11,0602  4,900  2,950 1,775
2008–2009  10,9603  4,800  2,850  1,775
2007 3,060  4,900  2,850 1,775
2006 2,960  4,800  2,850 1,775
2005 2,960  4,700  2,850 1,675
2004 10,6103  4,800  2,850 1,675
5/06/2003–
12/31/2003
10,7104  4,900  2,950 1,775
1/01/2003–
5/05/2003
7,6605  4,900  2,950 1,775
1 $3,160 if the car isn’t qualified property or if you 
elect not to claim the special depreciation 
allowance.
2 $3,060 if the car isn’t qualified property or if you 
elect not to claim the special depreciation 
allowance.
3 $2,960 if the car isn’t qualified property or if you 
elect not to claim the special depreciation 
allowance.
4 $7,660 if you acquired the car before 5/06/2003. 
$3,060 if the car isn’t qualified property or if you 
elect not to claim any special depreciation 
allowance.
5 $3,060 if you acquired the car before 9/11/2001, the 
car isn’t qualified property, or you elect not to claim 
the special depreciation allowance.
Trucks and vans.  For tax years prior to 
2018, the maximum depreciation deductions for 
trucks and vans are generally higher than those 
for cars. A truck or van is a passenger automo-
bile that is classified by the manufacturer as a 
truck or van and rated at 6,000 pounds gross 
vehicle weight or less.
Maximum
Depreciation Deduction
for Trucks and Vans
Placed in Service
Prior to 2018
Date 4th &
 Placed 1st 2nd 3rd Later
in Service Year Year Year Years
2017 $11,5601 $5,700 $3,450 $2,075
2016  11,5601 5,700 3,350 2,075
2015  11,4601 5,600 3,350 1,975
2014  11,4601 5,500 3,350 1,975
2013  11,3601  5,400 3,250 1,975
2012  11,3601  5,300  3,150  1,875
2011  11,2601  5,200  3,150  1,875
2010  11,1601  5,100 3,050  1,875
2009  11,0601  4,900 2,950 1,775
2008  11,1601 5,100 3,050 1,875
2007 3,260 5,200 3,050 1,875
2005–2006 3,260 5,200 3,150 1,875
2004  10,9101 5,300 3,150 1,875
2003  11,0101,2 5,400 3,250 1,975
1 If the special depreciation allowance doesn’t apply 
or you make the election not to claim the special 
depreciation allowance, the first-year limit is $3,560 
for 2017 and 2016, $3,460 for 2015 and 2014, 
$3,360 for 2013 and 2012, $3,260 for 2011, $3,160 
for 2010, $3,060 for 2009, $3,160 for 2008, $3,260 
for 2004, and $3,360 for 2003.
2 If the truck or van was acquired before 5/06/2003, 
the truck or van is qualified property, and you claim 
the special depreciation allowance for the truck or 
van, the maximum deduction is $7,960.
Car used less than full year. The depreci-
ation limits aren’t reduced if you use a car for 
less than a full year. This means that you don’t 
reduce the limit when you either place a car in 
service or dispose of a car during the year. 
However, the depreciation limits are reduced if 
you don’t use the car exclusively for business 
and investment purposes. See Reduction for 
personal use next.
Reduction for personal use.  The deprecia-
tion limits are reduced based on your percent-
age of personal use. If you use a car less than 
100% in your business or work, you must deter-
mine the depreciation deduction limit by multi-
plying the limit amount by the percentage of 
business and investment use during the tax 
year.
Section 179 deduction.  The section 179 de-
duction is treated as a depreciation deduction. 
If you acquired a passenger automobile (includ-
ing trucks and vans) after September 27, 2017, 
and placed it in service in 2022, use it only for 
business, and choose the section 179 deduc-
tion, the special depreciation allowance and de-
preciation deduction for that vehicle for 2022 is 
limited to $19,200.
Example. On September 4, 2022, you 
bought and placed in service a used car for 
$15,000. You used it 80% for your business, 
Page 20 of 42  Fileid: … tions/p463/2022/a/xml/cycle02/source 14:42 - 1-Feb-2023
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 20  Chapter 4 Transportation

and you choose to take a section 179 deduction 
for the car. The car isn’t qualified property for 
purposes of the special depreciation allowance.
Before applying the limit, you figure your 
maximum section 179 deduction to be $12,000. 
This is the cost of your qualifying property (up to 
the maximum $1,080,000 amount) multiplied by 
your business use ($15,000 × 80% (0.80)).
You then figure that your section 179 deduc-
tion for 2022 is limited to $8,960 (80% of 
$11,200). You then figure your unadjusted ba-
sis of $3,040 (($15,000 × 80% (0.80)) − $8,960) 
for determining your depreciation deduction. 
You have reached your maximum depreciation 
deduction for 2022. For 2023, you will use your 
unadjusted basis of $3,040 to figure your depre-
ciation deduction.
Deductions in years after the recovery pe-
riod. If the depreciation deductions for your car 
are reduced under the passenger automobile 
limits (discussed earlier), you will have unrecov-
ered basis in your car at the end of the recovery 
period. If you continue to use your car for busi-
ness, you can deduct that unrecovered basis 
(subject to depreciation limits) after the recov-
ery period ends.
Unrecovered basis.  This is your cost or 
other basis in the car reduced by any clean -fuel 
vehicle deduction (for vehicles placed in service 
before January 1, 2006), alternative motor vehi-
cle credit, electric vehicle credit, gas guzzler 
tax, and depreciation (including any special de-
preciation allowance , discussed earlier, unless 
you elect not to claim it) and section 179 deduc-
tions that would have been allowable if you had 
used the car 100% for business and investment 
use.
The recovery period.  For 5-year property, 
your recovery period is 6 calendar years. A part 
year's depreciation is allowed in the first calen-
dar year, a full year's depreciation is allowed in 
each of the next 4 calendar years, and a part 
year's depreciation is allowed in the 6th calen-
dar year.
Under MACRS, your recovery period is the 
same whether you use declining balance or 
straight line depreciation. You determine your 
unrecovered basis in the 7th year after you 
placed the car in service.
How to treat unrecovered basis.  If you 
continue to use your car for business after the 
recovery period, you can claim a depreciation 
deduction in each succeeding tax year until you 
recover your basis in the car. The maximum 
amount you can deduct each year is deter-
mined by the date you placed the car in service 
and your business -use percentage. For exam-
ple, no deduction is allowed for a year you use 
your car 100% for personal purposes.
Example. In April 2016, you bought and 
placed in service a car you used exclusively in 
your business. The car cost $31,500. You didn’t 
claim a section 179 deduction or the special de-
preciation allowance for the car. You continued 
to use the car 100% in your business through-
out the recovery period (2016 through 2021). 
For those years, you used the MACRS Depreci-
ation Chart (200% DB method), the Maximum 
Depreciation Deduction for Cars Placed in 
Service Prior to 2018  table and the Maximum 
Depreciation Deduction for Passenger Automo-
biles (Including Trucks and Vans) Acquired Be-
fore September 28, 2017, and Placed in Serv-
ice During 2018–2022  table, earlier, for the 
applicable tax year to figure your depreciation 
deductions during the recovery period. Your de-
preciation deductions were subject to the de-
preciation limits, so you will have unrecovered 
basis at the end of the recovery period as 
shown in the following table.
MACRS Deprec.
Year % Amount Limit Allowed
2016 20.00 $6,300 $3,160 $3,160
2017 32.00 10,080 5,100 5,100
2018 19.20 6,048 3,050 3,050
2019 11.52 3,629  1,875 1,875
2020 11.52 3,629 1,875 1,875
2021 5.76 1,814 1,875 1,814
Total $31,500 $16,874
For the correct limit, see the Maximum De-
preciation Deduction for Cars Placed in Service 
Prior to 2018 table and the Maximum Deprecia-
tion Deduction for Passenger Automobiles (In-
cluding Trucks and Vans) Acquired Before Sep-
tember 28, 2017, and Placed in Service During 
2018–2022 table under Depreciation Limits , 
earlier, for the maximum amount of depreciation 
allowed each year.
At the end of 2021, you had an unrecovered 
basis in the car of $14,626 ($31,500 – $16,874). 
If you continued to use the car 100% for busi-
ness in 2022 and later years, you can claim a 
depreciation deduction equal to the lesser of 
$1,875 or your remaining unrecovered basis.
If your business use of the car was less than 
100% during any year, your depreciation de-
duction would be less than the maximum 
amount allowable for that year. However, in de-
termining your unrecovered basis in the car, 
you would still reduce your original basis by the 
maximum amount allowable as if the business 
use had been 100%. For example, if you had 
used your car 60% for business instead of 
100%, your allowable depreciation deductions 
would have been $10,124 ($16,874 × 60% 
(0.60)), but you still would have to reduce your 
basis by $16,874 to determine your unrecov-
ered basis.
Car Used 50% or Less
for Business
If you use your car 50% or less for qualified 
business use  (defined earlier under Deprecia-
tion Deduction ) either in the year the car is 
placed in service or in a later year, special rules 
apply. The rules that apply in these two situa-
tions are explained in the following paragraphs. 
(For this purpose, “car” was defined earlier un-
der Actual Car Expenses  and includes certain 
trucks and vans.)
Qualified business use 50% or less in year 
placed in service.  If you use your car 50% or 
less for qualified business use, the following 
rules apply.
• You can’t take the section 179 deduction.
• You can’t take the special depreciation al-
lowance.
• You must figure depreciation using the 
straight line method over a 5-year recovery 
period. You must continue to use the 
straight line method even if your percent-
age of business use increases to more 
than 50% in a later year.
Instead of making the computation yourself, 
you can use column (c) of Table 4-1 to find the 
percentage to use.
Example. In May 2022, you bought and 
placed in service a car for $17,500. You used it 
40% for your consulting business. Because you 
didn’t use the car more than 50% for business, 
you can’t take any section 179 deduction or 
special depreciation allowance, and you must 
use the straight line method over a 5 -year re-
covery period to recover the cost of your car.
You deduct $700 in 2022. This is the lesser 
of:
1. $700 (($17,500 cost × 40% (0.40) busi-
ness use) × 10% (0.10) recovery percent-
age (from column (c) of Table 4-1)), or
2. $1,264 ($3,160 maximum limit × 40% 
(0.40) business use).
Qualified business use 50% or less in a 
later year. If you use your car more than 50% 
in qualified business use in the tax year it is 
placed in service but the business use drops to 
50% or less in a later year, you can no longer 
use an accelerated depreciation method for that 
car.
For the year the business use drops to 50% 
or less and all later years in the recovery period, 
you must use the straight line depreciation 
method over a 5 -year recovery period. In addi-
tion, for the year your business use drops to 
50% or less, you must recapture (include in 
your gross income) any excess depreciation 
(discussed later). You also increase the adjus-
ted basis of your car by the same amount.
Example. In June 2019, you purchased a 
car for exclusive use in your business. You met 
the more-than-50%-use test for the first 3 years 
of the recovery period (2019 through 2021) but 
failed to meet it in the fourth year (2022). You 
determine your depreciation for 2022 using 
20% (from column (c) of Table 4 -1). You will 
also have to determine and include in your 
gross income any excess depreciation, dis-
cussed next.
Excess depreciation.  You must include 
any excess depreciation in your gross income 
and add it to your car's adjusted basis for the 
first tax year in which you don’t use the car 
more than 50% in qualified business use. Use 
Form 4797, Sales of Business Property, to fig-
ure and report the excess depreciation in your 
gross income.
Excess depreciation is:
1. The amount of the depreciation deduc-
tions allowable for the car (including any 
section 179 deduction claimed and any 
special depreciation allowance claimed) 
for tax years in which you used the car 
more than 50% in qualified business use, 
minus
2. The amount of the depreciation deduc-
tions that would have been allowable for 
those years if you hadn’t used the car 
more than 50% in qualified business use 
Page 21 of 42  Fileid: … tions/p463/2022/a/xml/cycle02/source 14:42 - 1-Feb-2023
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 4 Transportation  Page 21

for the year you placed it in service. This 
means the amount of depreciation figured 
using the straight line method.
Example. In September 2018, you bought 
a car for $20,500 and placed it in service. You 
didn’t claim the section 179 deduction or the 
special depreciation allowance. You used the 
car exclusively in qualified business use for 
2018, 2019, 2020, and 2021. For those years, 
you used the appropriate MACRS Depreciation 
Chart to figure depreciation deductions totaling 
$13,185 ($3,160 for 2018, $5,100 for 2019, 
$3,050 for 2020, and $1,875 for 2021) under 
the 200% DB method.
During 2022, you used the car 30% for busi-
ness and 70% for personal purposes. Since you 
didn’t meet the more -than-50%-use test, you 
must switch from the 200% DB depreciation 
method to the straight line depreciation method 
for 2022, and include in gross income for 2022 
your excess depreciation determined as fol-
lows.
Total depreciation claimed: 
(MACRS 200% DB method) ...... $13,185
Minus total depreciation allowable: 
(Straight line method) 
2018—10% of $20,500 .... $2,050
(Limit: $3,160)
2019—20% of $20,500 .... 4,100
(Limit: $5,100)
2020—20% of $20,500 .... 3,050
(Limit: $3,050)
2021—20% of $20,500 .... 1,875 –11,075
(Limit: $1,875)
Excess depreciation ..... $2,110
For the correct limit, see the Maximum De-
preciation Deduction for Cars Placed in Service 
Prior to 2018 table and the Maximum Deprecia-
tion Deduction for Passenger Automobiles (In-
cluding Trucks and Vans) Acquired Before Sep-
tember 28, 2017, and Placed in Service During 
2018-2022 table under Depreciation Limits, ear-
lier, for the maximum amount of depreciation al-
lowed each year.
In 2022, using Form 4797, you figure and re-
port the $2,110 excess depreciation you must 
include in your gross income. Your adjusted ba-
sis in the car is also increased by $2,110. Your 
2022 depreciation is $1,230 ($20,500 (unadjus-
ted basis) × 30% (0.30) (business -use 
percentage) × 20% (0.20) (from column (c) of 
Table 4 -1 on the line for Jan. 1–Sept. 30, 
2018)). However, your depreciation deduction 
is limited to $563 ($1,875 x 30% (0.30) busi-
ness use).
Leasing a Car
If you lease a car, truck, or van that you use in 
your business, you can use the standard mile-
age rate or actual expenses to figure your de-
ductible expense. This section explains how to 
figure actual expenses for a leased car, truck, 
or van.
Deductible payments.  If you choose to use 
actual expenses, you can deduct the part of 
each lease payment that is for the use of the ve-
hicle in your business. You can’t deduct any 
part of a lease payment that is for personal use 
of the vehicle, such as commuting.
You must spread any advance payments 
over the entire lease period. You can’t deduct 
any payments you make to buy a car, truck, or 
van even if the payments are called “lease pay-
ments.”
If you lease a car, truck, or van for 30 days 
or more, you may have to reduce your lease 
Table 4-1. 2022 MACRS Depreciation Chart
(Use To Figure Depreciation for 2022)
If you claim actual expenses for your car, use the chart below to find the depreciation method 
and percentage to use for your 2022 return for cars placed in service in 2022.
 
First, using the left column, find the date you first placed the car in service in 2022. Then select 
the depreciation method and percentage from column (a), (b), or (c) following the rules 
explained in this chapter.
For cars placed in service before 2022, you must use the same method you used on last 
year's return unless a decline in your business use requires you to change to the straight 
line method. Refer back to the MACRS Depreciation Chart for the year you placed the 
car in service. (See Car Used 50% or Less for Business, earlier.)
 
Multiply the unadjusted basis of your car by your business-use percentage. Multiply the 
result by the percentage you found in the chart to find the amount of your depreciation 
deduction for 2022. (Also see Depreciation Limits, earlier.)
CAUTION
!
If you placed your car in service after September of any year and you placed other business property in service during the same year, you may have to use the Jan. 
1–Sept. 30 percentage instead of the Oct. 1–Dec. 31 percentage for your car. To find out if this applies to you, determine: 1) the basis of all business property 
(including other cars) you placed in service after September of that year, and 2) the basis of all business property you placed in service during that entire year. If the 
basis of the property placed in service after September isn’t more than 40% of the basis of all property (certain property is excluded) placed in service for the entire 
year, use the percentage for Jan. 1–Sept. 30 for figuring depreciation for your car. See Which Convention Applies? in chapter 4 of Pub. 946 for more details.
Example. You buy machinery (basis of $32,000) in May 2022 and a new van (basis of $20,000) in October 2022, both used 100% in your business. You use the percentage for Jan. 1–
Sept. 30, 2022, to figure the depreciation for your van. This is because the $20,000 basis of the property (van) placed in service after September isn’t more than 40% of the basis of all 
property placed in service during the year (40% (0.40) × ($32,000 + 20,000) = $20,800).
(a) (b) (c)
Date Placed in Service 200% Declining 
Balance (200% DB)1
150% Declining 
Balance (150% DB)1
Straight Line 
(SL)
Oct. 1–Dec. 31, 2022 200 DB  5.0% 150 DB  3.75% SL  2.5%
Jan. 1–Sept. 30, 2022 200 DB 20.0 150 DB 15.0 SL 10.0
Oct. 1–Dec. 31, 2021 200 DB 38.0 150 DB 28.88 SL 20.0
Jan. 1–Sept. 30, 2021 200 DB 32.0 150 DB 25.5 SL 20.0
Oct. 1–Dec. 31, 2020 200 DB 22.8 150 DB 20.21 SL 20.0
Jan. 1–Sept. 30, 2020 200 DB 19.2 150 DB 17.85 SL 20.0
Oct. 1–Dec. 31, 2019 200 DB 13.68 150 DB 16.4 SL 20.0
Jan. 1–Sept. 30, 2019 200 DB 11.52 150 DB 16.66 SL 20.0
Oct. 1–Dec. 31, 2018 200 DB 10.94 150 DB 16.41 SL 20.0
Jan. 1–Sept. 30, 2018 200 DB 11.52 150 DB 16.66 SL 20.0
Oct. 1–Dec. 31, 2017 200 DB  9.58 150 DB 14.35 SL 17.5
Jan. 1–Sept. 30, 2017 200 DB  5.76 150 DB  8.33 SL 10.0
 Prior to 20172
1 You can use this column only if the business use of your car is more than 50%.
2 If your car was subject to the maximum limits for depreciation and you have unrecovered basis in the car, you can continue to claim depreciation. See 
Deductions in years after the recovery period under Depreciation Limits, earlier.
Page 22 of 42  Fileid: … tions/p463/2022/a/xml/cycle02/source 14:42 - 1-Feb-2023
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 22  Chapter 4 Transportation

payment deduction by an “inclusion amount,” 
explained next.
Inclusion Amounts
If you lease a car, truck, or van that you use in 
your business for a lease term of 30 days or 
more, you may have to include an inclusion 
amount in your income for each tax year you 
lease the vehicle. To do this, you don’t add an 
amount to income. Instead, you reduce your de-
duction for your lease payment. (This reduction 
has an effect similar to the limit on the deprecia-
tion deduction you would have on the vehicle if 
you owned it.)
The inclusion amount is a percentage of part 
of the fair market value of the leased vehicle 
multiplied by the percentage of business and in-
vestment use of the vehicle for the tax year. It is 
prorated for the number of days of the lease 
term in the tax year.
The inclusion amount applies to each tax 
year that you lease the vehicle if the fair market 
value (defined next) when the lease began was 
more than the amounts shown in the following 
tables.
All vehicles are subject to a single inclusion 
amount threshold for passenger automobiles 
leased and put into service in 2022. You may 
have an inclusion amount for a passenger auto-
mobile if:
Passenger Automobiles
(Including Trucks and Vans)
Year Lease Began Fair Market Value
2022 $56,000
2021  51,000
2018*–2020  50,000
*If the lease term began before 2018, see tables below to find out if 
you have an inclusion amount.
For years prior to 2018, see the inclusion ta-
bles below. You may have an inclusion amount 
for a passenger automobile if:
Cars
(Except for Trucks and Vans)
Year Lease Began Fair Market Value
2013–2017 $19,000
2010–2012  18,500
Trucks and Vans
Year Lease Began Fair Market Value
. 
2014–2017 $19,500
2010–2013   19,000
Fair market value.  Fair market value is the 
price at which the property would change hands 
between a willing buyer and seller, neither hav-
ing to buy or sell, and both having reasonable 
knowledge of all the necessary facts. Sales of 
similar property around the same date may be 
helpful in figuring the fair market value of the 
property.
Figure the fair market value on the first day 
of the lease term. If the capitalized cost of a car 
is specified in the lease agreement, use that 
amount as the fair market value.
Figuring the inclusion amount.  Inclusion 
amounts for tax years 2018–2022 are listed in 
Appendices A-1 through A -5 for passenger ve-
hicles (including trucks and vans). If the fair 
market value of the vehicle is $100,000 or less, 
use the appropriate appendix (depending on 
the year you first placed the vehicle in service) 
to determine the inclusion amount. If the fair 
market value is more than $100,000, see the 
revenue procedure(s) identified in the footnote 
of that year’s appendix for the inclusion amount.
For each tax year during which you lease 
the car for business, determine your inclusion 
amount by following these three steps.
1. Locate the appendix that applies to you. 
To find the inclusion amount, do the fol-
lowing.
a. Find the line that includes the fair mar-
ket value of the car on the first day of 
the lease term.
b. Go across the line to the column for 
the tax year in which the car is used 
under the lease to find the dollar 
amount. For the last tax year of the 
lease, use the dollar amount for the 
preceding year.
2. Prorate the dollar amount from (1b) for the 
number of days of the lease term included 
in the tax year.
3. Multiply the prorated amount from (2) by 
the percentage of business and invest-
ment use for the tax year. This is your in-
clusion amount.
Example. On January 17, 2022, you leased 
a car for 3 years and placed it in service for use 
in your business. The car had a fair market 
value of $62,500 on the first day of the lease 
term. You use the car 75% for business and 
25% for personal purposes during each year of 
the lease. Assuming you continue to use the car 
75% for business, you use Appendix A-5 to ar-
rive at the following inclusion amounts for each 
year of the lease. For the last tax year of the 
lease, 2025, you use the amount for the preced-
ing year.
Tax 
year
Dollar 
amount Proration
Business 
use
Inclusion 
amount
2022 $9  348/365 75% $6
2023 19  365/365 75%  14
2024  27  366/366 75%   20
2025 27 16/365 75%  1
Note. 2024 is a leap year and includes an 
extra calendar day, February 29, 2024.
For each year of the lease that you deduct 
lease payments, you must reduce your deduc-
tion by the inclusion amount figured for that 
year.
Leased car changed from business to per-
sonal use. If you lease a car for business use 
and, in a later year, change it to personal use, 
follow the rules explained earlier under Figuring 
the inclusion amount . For the tax year in which 
you stop using the car for business, use the dol-
lar amount for the previous tax year. Prorate the 
dollar amount for the number of days in the 
lease term that fall within the tax year.
Example. On August 16, 2021, you leased 
a car with a fair market value of $64,500 for 3 
years. You used the car exclusively in your data 
processing business. On November 5, 2022, 
you closed your business and went to work for 
a company where you aren’t required to use a 
car for business. Using Appendix A -4, you fig-
ured your inclusion amount for 2021 and 2022 
as shown in the following table and reduced 
your deductions for lease payments by those 
amounts.
Tax 
year
Dollar 
amount Proration
Business 
use
Inclusion 
amount
2021 $5  137/365  100%  $2
2022 5  309/365  100%   4
Leased car changed from personal to busi-
ness use.  If you lease a car for personal use 
and, in a later year, change it to business use, 
you must determine the car's fair market value 
on the date of conversion. Then figure the inclu-
sion amount using the rules explained earlier 
under Figuring the inclusion amount . Use the 
fair market value on the date of conversion.
Example. In March 2020, you leased a 
truck for 4 years for personal use. On June 1, 
2022, you started working as a self -employed 
advertising consultant and started using the 
leased truck for business purposes. Your re-
cords show that your business use for June 1 
through December 31 was 60%. To figure your 
inclusion amount for 2022, you obtained an ap-
praisal from an independent car leasing com-
pany that showed the fair market value of your 
2020 truck on June 1, 2022, was $57,650. Us-
ing Appendix A -5, you figured your inclusion 
amount for 2022 as shown in the following ta-
ble.
Tax 
year
Dollar 
amount Proration
Business 
use
Inclusion 
amount
2022 $2 214/365 60% $1
Reporting inclusion amounts.  For informa-
tion on reporting inclusion amounts, employees 
should see Car rentals  under Completing 
Forms 2106 in chapter 6. Sole proprietors 
should see the Instructions for Schedule C 
(Form 1040), and farmers should see the In-
structions for Schedule F (Form 1040).
Disposition of a Car
If you dispose of your car, you may have a taxa-
ble gain or a deductible loss. The portion of any 
gain that is due to depreciation (including any 
section 179 deduction, clean -fuel vehicle de-
duction (for vehicles placed in service before 
January 1, 2006), and special depreciation al-
lowance) that you claimed on the car will be 
treated as ordinary income. However, you may 
Page 23 of 42  Fileid: … tions/p463/2022/a/xml/cycle02/source 14:42 - 1-Feb-2023
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 4 Transportation  Page 23

not have to recognize a gain or loss if you dis-
pose of the car because of a casualty or theft.
This section gives some general information 
about dispositions of cars. For information on 
how to report the disposition of your car, see 
Pub. 544.
Note. Like‐ kind exchanges completed after 
December 31, 2017, are generally limited to ex-
changes of real property not held primarily for 
sale.
Casualty or theft.  For a casualty or theft, a 
gain results when you receive insurance or 
other reimbursement that is more than your ad-
justed basis in your car. If you then spend all of 
the proceeds to acquire replacement property 
(a new car or repairs to the old car) within a 
specified period of time, you don’t recognize 
any gain. Your basis in the replacement prop-
erty is its cost minus any gain that isn’t recog-
nized. See Pub. 547 for more information.
Trade-in. When you trade in an old car for a 
new one, the transaction is considered a 
like-kind exchange. Generally, no gain or loss is 
recognized. (For exceptions, see chapter 1 of 
Pub. 544.) In a trade -in situation, your basis in 
the new property is generally your adjusted ba-
sis in the old property plus any additional 
amount you pay. (See Unadjusted basis , ear-
lier.)
Depreciation adjustment when you used 
the standard mileage rate.  If you used the 
standard mileage rate for the business use of 
your car, depreciation was included in that rate. 
The rate of depreciation that was allowed in the 
standard mileage rate is shown in the Rate of 
Depreciation Allowed in Standard Mileage Rate 
table, later. You must reduce your basis in your 
car (but not below zero) by the amount of this 
depreciation.
If your basis is reduced to zero (but not be-
low zero) through the use of the standard mile-
age rate, and you continue to use your car for 
business, no adjustment (reduction) to the 
standard mileage rate is necessary. Use the full 
standard mileage rate (58.5 cents (0.585) per 
mile from January 1–June 30 and 62.5 cents 
(0.625) per mile from July 1–December 31 for 
2022) for business miles driven.
These rates don’t apply for any year in 
which the actual expenses method was 
used.
TIP
Rate of Depreciation Allowed in 
Standard Mileage Rate
Year(s) Depreciation
. 
Rate per Mile
2021–2022 0.26
2020 0.27
2019 0.26
2017–2018 0.25
2015–2016 0.24
2014 0.22
2012–2013 0.23
2011 0.22
2010 0.23
2008–2009 0.21
2007 0.19
2005–2006 0.17
2003–2004 0.16
2001–2002 0.15
2000 0.14
Example. In 2017, you bought and placed 
in service a car for exclusive use in your busi-
ness. The car cost $25,500. From 2017 through 
2022, you used the standard mileage rate to fig-
ure your car expense deduction. You drove 
your car 14,100 miles in 2017, 16,300 miles in 
2018, 15,600 miles in 2019, 16,700 miles in 
2020, 15,100 miles in 2021, and 14,900 miles in 
2022. The depreciation portion of your car ex-
pense deduction is figured as follows.
Year Miles x Rate Depreciation
2017  14,100 × $0.25 $3,525
2018 16,300 × 0.25  4,075
2019 15,600 × 0.26  4,056
2020 16,700 × 0.27  4,509
2021 15,100 × 0.26  3,926
2022 14,900 × 0.26  3,874
Total depreciation $23,965
At the end of 2022, your adjusted basis in the 
car is $1,535 ($25,500 − $23,965).
Depreciation deduction for the year of dis-
position. If you deduct actual car expenses 
and you dispose of your car before the end of 
the recovery period (years 2 through 5), you are 
allowed a reduced depreciation deduction in 
the year of disposition.
Use the depreciation tables in Pub. 946 to 
figure the reduced depreciation deduction for a 
car disposed of in 2022.
The depreciation amounts computed using 
the depreciation tables in Pub. 946 for years 2 
through 5 that you own your car are for a full 
year’s depreciation. Years 1 and 6 apply the 
half-year or mid -quarter convention to the com-
putation for you. If you dispose of the vehicle in 
years 2 through 5 and the half -year convention 
applies, then the full year’s depreciation amount 
must be divided by 2. If the mid-quarter conven-
tion applies, multiply the full year’s depreciation 
by the percentage from the following table for 
the quarter that you disposed of the car.
Quarter Percentage
First ........................ 12.5%
Second ..................... 37.5
Third ........................ 62.5
Fourth ...................... 87.5
If the car is subject to the Depreciation Lim-
its, discussed earlier, reduce (but do not in-
crease) the computed depreciation to this 
amount. See Sale or Other Disposition Before 
the Recovery Period Ends  in chapter 4 of Pub. 
946 for more information.
5.
Recordkeeping
If you deduct travel, gift, or transportation ex-
penses, you must be able to prove (substanti-
ate) certain elements of expense. This chapter 
discusses the records you need to keep to 
prove these expenses.
If you keep timely and accurate re-
cords, you will have support to show 
the IRS if your tax return is ever exam-
ined. You will also have proof of expenses that 
your employer may require if you are reim-
bursed under an accountable plan. These plans 
are discussed in chapter 6 under Reimburse-
ments.
How To Prove Expenses
Table 5-1 is a summary of records you need to 
prove each expense discussed in this publica-
tion. You must be able to prove the elements 
listed across the top portion of the chart. You 
prove them by having the information and re-
ceipts (where needed) for the expenses listed 
in the first column.
You can’t deduct amounts that you ap-
proximate or estimate.
You should keep adequate records to prove 
your expenses or have sufficient evidence that 
will support your own statement. You must gen-
erally prepare a written record for it to be con-
sidered adequate. This is because written evi-
dence is more reliable than oral evidence alone. 
However, if you prepare a record on a com-
puter, it is considered an adequate record.
What Are Adequate 
Records?
You should keep the proof you need in an ac-
count book, diary, log, statement of expense, 
trip sheets, or similar record. You should also 
keep documentary evidence that, together with 
your record, will support each element of an ex-
pense.
RECORDS
CAUTION
!
Page 24 of 42  Fileid: … tions/p463/2022/a/xml/cycle02/source 14:42 - 1-Feb-2023
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 24  Chapter 5 Recordkeeping

Documentary evidence.  You must generally 
have documentary evidence, such as receipts, 
canceled checks, or bills, to support your ex-
penses.
Exception. Documentary evidence isn’t 
needed if any of the following conditions apply.
• You have meals or lodging expenses while 
traveling away from home for which you 
account to your employer under an ac-
countable plan, and you use a per diem al-
lowance method that includes meals 
and/or lodging. (Accountable plans and 
per diem allowances are discussed in 
chapter 6.)
• Your expense, other than lodging, is less 
than $75.
• You have a transportation expense for 
which a receipt isn’t readily available.
Adequate evidence.  Documentary evi-
dence will ordinarily be considered adequate if 
it shows the amount, date, place, and essential 
character of the expense.
For example, a hotel receipt is enough to 
support expenses for business travel if it has all 
of the following information.
• The name and location of the hotel.
• The dates you stayed there.
• Separate amounts for charges such as 
lodging, meals, and telephone calls.
A restaurant receipt is enough to prove an 
expense for a business meal if it has all of the 
following information.
• The name and location of the restaurant.
• The number of people served.
• The date and amount of the expense.
If a charge is made for items other than food 
and beverages, the receipt must show that this 
is the case.
Canceled check.  A canceled check, to-
gether with a bill from the payee, ordinarily es-
tablishes the cost. However, a canceled check 
by itself doesn’t prove a business expense with-
out other evidence to show that it was for a 
business purpose.
Duplicate information.  You don‘t have to re-
cord information in your account book or other 
record that duplicates information shown on a 
receipt as long as your records and receipts 
complement each other in an orderly manner.
You don’t have to record amounts your em-
ployer pays directly for any ticket or other travel 
item. However, if you charge these items to 
your employer, through a credit card or other-
wise, you must keep a record of the amounts 
you spend.
Timely kept records.  You should record the 
elements of an expense or of a business use at 
or near the time of the expense or use and sup-
port it with sufficient documentary evidence. A 
timely kept record has more value than a state-
ment prepared later when there is generally a 
lack of accurate recall.
You don’t need to write down the elements 
of every expense on the day of the expense. If 
you maintain a log on a weekly basis that ac-
counts for use during the week, the log is con-
sidered a timely kept record.
If you give your employer, client, or cus-
tomer an expense account statement, it can 
also be considered a timely kept record. This is 
true if you copy it from your account book, diary, 
log, statement of expense, trip sheets, or similar 
record.
Proving business purpose.  You must gener-
ally provide a written statement of the business 
purpose of an expense. However, the degree of 
proof varies according to the circumstances in 
each case. If the business purpose of an ex-
pense is clear from the surrounding circumstan-
ces, then you don’t need to give a written ex-
planation.
Example. If you are a sales representative 
who calls on customers on an established sales 
route, you don’t have to give a written explana-
tion of the business purpose for traveling that 
route. You can satisfy the requirements by re-
cording the length of the delivery route once, 
the date of each trip at or near the time of the 
trips, and the total miles you drove the car dur-
ing the tax year. You could also establish the 
date of each trip with a receipt, record of deliv-
ery, or other documentary evidence.
Confidential information.  You don’t need to 
put confidential information relating to an ele-
ment of a deductible expense (such as the 
place, business purpose, or business relation-
ship) in your account book, diary, or other re-
cord. However, you do have to record the infor-
mation elsewhere at or near the time of the 
expense and have it available to fully prove that 
element of the expense.
What if I Have Incomplete 
Records?
If you don’t have complete records to prove an 
element of an expense, then you must prove 
the element with:
• Your own written or oral statement contain-
ing specific information about the element, 
and
• Other supporting evidence that is sufficient 
to establish the element.
If the element is the description of a gift, or 
the cost, time, place, or date of an expense, the 
supporting evidence must be either direct evi-
dence or documentary evidence. Direct evi-
dence can be written statements or the oral tes-
timony of your guests or other witnesses setting 
forth detailed information about the element. 
Documentary evidence can be receipts, paid 
bills, or similar evidence.
If the element is either the business relation-
ship of your guests or the business purpose of 
the amount spent, the supporting evidence can 
be circumstantial rather than direct. For exam-
ple, the nature of your work, such as making de-
liveries, provides circumstantial evidence of the 
use of your car for business purposes. Invoices 
of deliveries establish when you used the car 
for business.
Sampling. You can keep an adequate record 
for parts of a tax year and use that record to 
prove the amount of business or investment use 
for the entire year. You must demonstrate by 
other evidence that the periods for which an ad-
equate record is kept are representative of the 
use throughout the tax year.
Example. You use your car to visit the offi-
ces of clients, meet with suppliers and other 
subcontractors, and pick up and deliver items to 
clients. There is no other business use of the 
car, but you and your family use the car for per-
sonal purposes. You keep adequate records 
during the first week of each month that show 
that 75% of the use of the car is for business. 
Invoices and bills show that your business use 
continues at the same rate during the later 
weeks of each month. Your weekly records are 
representative of the use of the car each month 
and are sufficient evidence to support the per-
centage of business use for the year.
Exceptional circumstances.  You can satisfy 
the substantiation requirements with other evi-
dence if, because of the nature of the situation 
in which an expense is made, you can’t get a 
receipt. This applies if all the following are true.
• You were unable to obtain evidence for an 
element of the expense or use that com-
pletely satisfies the requirements ex-
plained earlier under What Are Adequate 
Records.
• You are unable to obtain evidence for an 
element that completely satisfies the two 
rules listed earlier under What if I Have In-
complete Records.
• You have presented other evidence for the 
element that is the best proof possible un-
der the circumstances.
Destroyed records. If you can’t produce a re-
ceipt because of reasons beyond your control, 
you can prove a deduction by reconstructing 
your records or expenses. Reasons beyond 
your control include fire, flood, and other casu-
alties.
Separating and Combining 
Expenses
This section explains when expenses must be 
kept separate and when expenses can be com-
bined.
Separating expenses.  Each separate pay-
ment is generally considered a separate ex-
pense. For example, if you entertain a customer 
or client at dinner and then go to the theater, the 
dinner expense and the cost of the theater tick-
ets are two separate expenses. You must re-
cord them separately in your records.
Combining items.  You can make one daily 
entry in your record for reasonable categories of 
expenses. Examples are taxi fares, telephone 
calls, or other incidental travel costs. Nonenter-
tainment meals should be in a separate cate-
gory. You can include tips for meal-related serv-
ices with the costs of the meals.
Expenses of a similar nature occurring dur-
ing the course of a single event are considered 
a single expense.
Car expenses.  You can account for sev-
eral uses of your car that can be considered 
part of a single use, such as a round trip or un-
interrupted business use, with a single record. 
Minimal personal use, such as a stop for lunch 
on the way between two business stops, isn’t 
an interruption of business use.
Page 25 of 42  Fileid: … tions/p463/2022/a/xml/cycle02/source 14:42 - 1-Feb-2023
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 5 Recordkeeping  Page 25

Example. You make deliveries at several 
different locations on a route that begins and 
ends at your employer's business premises and 
that includes a stop at the business premises 
between two deliveries. You can account for 
these using a single record of miles driven.
Gift expenses.  You don’t always have to 
record the name of each recipient of a gift. A 
general listing will be enough if it is evident that 
you aren’t trying to avoid the $25 annual limit on 
the amount you can deduct for gifts to any one 
person. For example, if you buy a large number 
of tickets to local high school basketball games 
and give one or two tickets to each of many 
customers, it is usually enough to record a gen-
eral description of the recipients.
Allocating total cost.  If you can prove the to-
tal cost of travel or entertainment but you can’t 
prove how much it cost for each person who 
participated in the event, you may have to allo-
cate the total cost among you and your guests 
on a pro rata basis. To do so, you must estab-
lish the number of persons who participated in 
the event.
If your return is examined.  If your return is 
examined, you may have to provide additional 
information to the IRS. This information could 
be needed to clarify or to establish the accuracy 
or reliability of information contained in your re-
cords, statements, testimony, or documentary 
evidence before a deduction is allowed.
How Long To Keep
Records and Receipts
You must keep records as long as they may be 
needed for the administration of any provision 
of the Internal Revenue Code. Generally, this 
means you must keep records that support your 
deduction (or an item of income) for 3 years 
from the date you file the income tax return on 
which the deduction is claimed. A return filed 
early is considered filed on the due date. For a 
more complete explanation of how long to keep 
records, see Pub. 583, Starting a Business and 
Keeping Records.
You must keep records of the business use 
of your car for each year of the recovery period. 
See More-than-50%-use test in chapter 4 under 
Depreciation Deduction.
Reimbursed for expenses.  Employees who 
give their records and documentation to their 
employers and are reimbursed for their expen-
ses generally don’t have to keep copies of this 
information. However, you may have to prove 
your expenses if any of the following conditions 
apply.
• You claim deductions for expenses that 
are more than reimbursements.
• Your expenses are reimbursed under a 
nonaccountable plan.
Table 5-1. How To Prove Certain Business Expenses
IF you have 
expenses for . .
THEN you must keep records that show details of the following elements . . .
Amount Time Place or 
Description
Business Purpose
Business Relationship
Travel Cost of each separate 
expense for travel, 
lodging, and meals. 
Incidental expenses 
may be totaled in 
reasonable categories 
such as taxis, fees and 
tips, etc.
Dates you left 
and returned 
for each trip 
and number 
of days spent 
on business.
Destination or area of 
your travel (name of 
city, town, or other 
designation).
Purpose: Business purpose for the expense or the 
business benefit gained or expected to be gained.
 
Relationship: N/A
Gifts Cost of the gift. Date of the 
gift.
Description of the gift.
Transportation Cost of each separate 
expense. For car 
expenses, the cost of 
the car and any 
improvements, the date 
you started using it for 
business, the mileage 
for each business use, 
and the total miles for 
the year.
Date of the 
expense. For 
car 
expenses, 
the date of 
the use of the 
car.
Your business 
destination.
Purpose: Business purpose for the expense.
 
Relationship: N/A
Table 5-2. Daily Business Mileage and Expense Log      Name: 
Odometer Readings Expenses
Date
Destination
 (City, Town, or Area) Business Purpose  Start  Stop
Miles
 this trip
 Type
(Gas, oil, tolls, etc.) Amount
        
Weekly 
Total
Total
Year-to-Date
Page 26 of 42  Fileid: … tions/p463/2022/a/xml/cycle02/source 14:42 - 1-Feb-2023
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 26  Chapter 5 Recordkeeping

THIS IS NOT AN OFFICIAL INTERNAL REVENUE FORM
Table 5-3. Weekly Traveling Expense Record
From:         To:       Name:  
Expenses Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday Total
1. Travel Expenses:
Airlines
Excess Baggage
Bus – Train
Cab and Limousine
Tips
Porter
2.
Non-Entertainment-Related 
Meals and Lodging:
Breakfast
Lunch
 Dinner
 Hotel and Motel 
(Detail in Schedule B)
3. Other Expenses: 
Postage
Telephone & Telegraph
Stationery & Printing
Stenographer
Sample Room
Advertising
Assistant(s)
Trade Shows
4. Car Expenses: (List all car expenses—the division between business and personal expenses may be made at the end of the year.)
(Detail mileage in Schedule A (if applicable).)
Gas, oil, lube, wash
Repairs, parts
Tires, supplies
Parking fees, tolls
5. Other (Identify)
Total
Note: Attach receipted bills for (1) ALL lodging and (2) any other expenses of $75.00 or more.
Schedule A—Car
Mileage: End
Start
Total
Business Mileage
Schedule B—Lodging
Hotel or Motel
Name
City
WEEKLY REIMBURSEMENTS:
Travel and transportation expenses ........  
Other reimbursements ..................  
TOTAL ...............................  
Page 27 of 42  Fileid: … tions/p463/2022/a/xml/cycle02/source 14:42 - 1-Feb-2023
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 5 Recordkeeping  Page 27

• Your employer doesn’t use adequate ac-
counting procedures to verify expense ac-
counts.
• You are related to your employer as de-
fined under Per Diem and Car Allowances 
in chapter 6.
Reimbursements, adequate accounting , and 
nonaccountable plans  are discussed in chap-
ter 6.
Examples of Records
Table 5-2 and Table 5-3 are examples of work-
sheets that can be used for tracking business 
expenses.
6.
How To Report
This chapter explains where and how to report 
the expenses discussed in this publication. It 
discusses reimbursements and how to treat 
them under accountable and nonaccountable 
plans. It also explains rules for independent 
contractors and clients, fee -basis officials, cer-
tain performing artists, Armed Forces reserv-
ists, and certain disabled employees. The chap-
ter ends with illustrations of how to report travel, 
gift, and car expenses on Forms 2106.
Where To Report
This section provides general information on 
where to report the expenses discussed in this 
publication.
Self-employed. You must report your income 
and expenses on Schedule C (Form 1040) if 
you are a sole proprietor, or on Schedule F 
(Form 1040) if you are a farmer. You don’t use 
Form 2106.
If you claim car or truck expenses, you must 
provide certain information on the use of your 
vehicle. You provide this information on Sched-
ule C (Form 1040) or Form 4562.
If you file Schedule C (Form 1040):
• Report your travel expenses, except 
meals, on line 24a;
• Report your deductible non-entertain-
ment-related meals (actual cost or stand-
ard meal allowance) on line 24b;
• Report your gift expenses and transporta-
tion expenses, other than car expenses, 
on line 27a; and
• Report your car expenses on line 9. Com-
plete Part IV of the form unless you have to 
file Form 4562 for depreciation or amorti-
zation.
If you file Schedule F (Form 1040), do the 
following.
• Report your car expenses on line 10. At-
tach Form 4562 and provide information 
on the use of your car in Part V of Form 
4562.
• Report all other business expenses dis-
cussed in this publication on line 32. You 
can only include 50% of your non-enter-
tainment-related meals on that line. How-
ever, you can deduct 100% of your meal 
expenses if the meals are food and bever-
ages provided by a restaurant, and paid or 
incurred after December 31, 2020, and be-
fore January 1, 2023.
See your form instructions for more information 
on how to complete your tax return.
Both self-employed and an employee. If you 
are both self -employed and an employee, you 
must keep separate records for each business 
activity. Report your business expenses for 
self-employment on Schedule C (Form 1040), 
or Schedule F (Form 1040), as discussed ear-
lier. Report your business expenses for your 
work as an employee on Form 2106, as dis-
cussed next.
Form 2106 is only used by Armed 
Forces reservists, qualified performing 
artists, fee-basis state or local govern-
ment officials, and employees with impair-
ment-related work expenses. Due to the sus-
pension of miscellaneous itemized deductions 
subject to the 2% floor under section 67(a), em-
ployees who do not fit into one of the listed cat-
egories may not use Form 2106.
Employees. If you are an employee, you must 
generally complete Form 2106 to deduct your 
travel and transportation expenses.
• You are an employee deducting expenses 
attributable to your job.
• You weren’t reimbursed by your employer 
for your expenses (amounts included in 
box 1 of your Form W-2 aren’t considered 
reimbursements).
• If you claim car expenses, you use the 
standard mileage rate.
For more information on how to report your 
expenses on Form 2106, see Completing Form 
2106, later.
Gifts. If you didn’t receive any reimburse-
ments (or the reimbursements were all included 
in box 1 of your Form W -2), the only business 
expense you are claiming is for gifts, and the 
special rules discussed later don’t apply to you, 
don’t complete Form 2106.
Statutory employees.  If you received a 
Form W-2 and the “Statutory employee” box in 
box 13 was checked, report your income and 
expenses related to that income on Schedule C 
(Form 1040). Don’t complete Form 2106.
Statutory employees include full -time life in-
surance salespersons, certain agent or com-
mission drivers, traveling salespersons, and 
certain homeworkers.
If you are entitled to a reimbursement 
from your employer but you don’t claim 
it, you can’t claim a deduction for the 
expenses to which that unclaimed reimburse-
ment applies.
Reimbursement for personal expenses.  If 
your employer reimburses you for nondeducti-
CAUTION
!
CAUTION
!
ble personal expenses, such as for vacation 
trips, your employer must report the reimburse-
ment as wage income in box 1 of your Form 
W-2. You can’t deduct personal expenses.
Income-producing property.  If you have 
travel or transportation expenses related to in-
come-producing property, report your deducti-
ble expenses on the form appropriate for that 
activity.
For example, if you have rental real estate 
income and expenses, report your expenses on 
Schedule E (Form 1040), Supplemental Income 
and Loss. See Pub. 527, Residential Rental 
Property, for more information on the rental of 
real estate.
Vehicle Provided by
Your Employer
If your employer provides you with a car, you 
may be able to deduct the actual expenses of 
operating that car for business purposes. The 
amount you can deduct depends on the amount 
that your employer included in your income and 
the business and personal miles you drove dur-
ing the year. You can’t use the standard mile-
age rate.
Form 2106 is only used by Armed 
Forces reservists, qualified performing 
artists, fee-basis state or local govern-
ment officials, and employees with impair-
ment-related work expenses. Due to the sus-
pension of miscellaneous itemized deductions 
subject to the 2% floor under section 67(a), em-
ployees who do not fit into one of the listed cat-
egories may not use Form 2106.
Value reported on Form W -2. Your employer 
can figure and report either the actual value of 
your personal use of the car or the value of the 
car as if you used it only for personal purposes 
(100% income inclusion). Your employer must 
separately state the amount if 100% of the an-
nual lease value was included in your income. If 
you are unsure of the amount included on your 
Form W-2, ask your employer.
Full value included in your income.  You 
may be able to deduct the value of the business 
use of an employer -provided car if your em-
ployer reported 100% of the value of the car in 
your income. On your 2022 Form W -2, the 
amount of the value will be included in box 1, 
Wages, tips, other compensation; and box 14.
To claim your expenses, complete Form 
2106, Part II, Sections A and C. Enter your ac-
tual expenses on line 23 of Section C and in-
clude the entire value of the employer -provided 
car on line 25. Complete the rest of the form.
Less than full value included in your in-
come. If less than the full annual lease value of 
the car was included on your Form W -2, this 
means that your Form W -2 only includes the 
value of your personal use of the car. Don’t en-
ter this value on your Form 2106 because it isn’t 
deductible.
If you paid any actual costs (that your em-
ployer didn’t provide or reimburse you for) to 
operate the car, you can deduct the business 
portion of those costs. Examples of costs that 
CAUTION
!
Page 28 of 42  Fileid: … tions/p463/2022/a/xml/cycle02/source 14:42 - 1-Feb-2023
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 28  Chapter 6 How To Report

you may have are gas, oil, and repairs. Com-
plete Form 2106, Part II, Sections A and C. En-
ter your actual costs on line 23 of Section C and 
leave line 25 blank. Complete the rest of the 
form.
Reimbursements
This section explains what to do when you re-
ceive an advance or are reimbursed for any of 
the employee business expenses discussed in 
this publication.
If you received an advance, allowance, or 
reimbursement for your expenses, how you re-
port this amount and your expenses depends 
on whether your employer reimbursed you un-
der an accountable plan or a nonaccountable 
plan.
This section explains the two types of plans, 
how per diem and car allowances simplify prov-
ing the amount of your expenses, and the tax 
treatment of your reimbursements and expen-
ses. It also covers rules for independent con-
tractors.
No reimbursement. You aren’t reimbursed or 
given an allowance for your expenses if you are 
paid a salary or commission with the under-
standing that you will pay your own expenses. 
In this situation, you have no reimbursement or 
allowance arrangement, and you don’t have to 
read this section on reimbursements. Instead, 
see Completing Form 2106 , later, for informa-
tion on completing your tax return.
Form 2106 is only used by Armed 
Forces reservists, qualified performing 
artists, fee-basis state or local govern-
ment officials, and employees with impair-
ment-related work expenses. Due to the sus-
pension of miscellaneous itemized deductions 
subject to the 2% floor under section 67(a), em-
ployees who do not fit into one of the listed cat-
egories may not use Form 2106.
Reimbursement, allowance, or advance.  A 
reimbursement or other expense allowance ar-
rangement is a system or plan that an employer 
uses to pay, substantiate, and recover the ex-
penses, advances, reimbursements, and 
amounts charged to the employer for employee 
business expenses. Arrangements include per 
diem and car allowances.
A per diem allowance is a fixed amount of 
daily reimbursement your employer gives you 
for your lodging and M&IE when you are away 
from home on business. (The term “incidental 
expenses” is defined in chapter 1 under Stand-
ard Meal Allowance. ) A car allowance is an 
amount your employer gives you for the busi-
ness use of your car.
Your employer should tell you what method 
of reimbursement is used and what records you 
must provide.
Employers. If you are an employer and you re-
imburse employee business expenses, how 
you treat this reimbursement on your employ-
ee's Form W-2 depends in part on whether you 
have an accountable plan. Reimbursements 
treated as paid under an accountable plan, as 
explained next, aren’t reported as pay. Reim-
CAUTION
!
bursements treated as paid under nonaccount-
able plans , as explained later, are reported as 
pay. See Pub. 15 (Circular E), Employer's Tax 
Guide, for information on employee pay.
Accountable Plans
To be an accountable plan, your employer's re-
imbursement or allowance arrangement must 
include all of the following rules.
1. Your expenses must have a business con-
nection—that is, you must have paid or in-
curred deductible expenses while per-
forming services as an employee of your 
employer.
2. You must adequately account to your em-
ployer for these expenses within a reason-
able period of time.
3. You must return any excess reimburse-
ment or allowance within a reasonable pe-
riod of time.
Adequate accounting  and returning excess 
reimbursements are discussed later.
An excess reimbursement or allowance is 
any amount you are paid that is more than the 
business-related expenses that you adequately 
accounted for to your employer.
Reasonable period of time. The definition 
of reasonable period of time depends on the 
facts and circumstances of your situation. How-
ever, regardless of the facts and circumstances 
of your situation, actions that take place within 
the times specified in the following list will be 
treated as taking place within a reasonable pe-
riod of time.
• You receive an advance within 30 days of 
the time you have an expense.
• You adequately account for your expenses 
within 60 days after they were paid or in-
curred.
• You return any excess reimbursement 
within 120 days after the expense was paid 
or incurred.
• You are given a periodic statement (at 
least quarterly) that asks you to either re-
turn or adequately account for outstanding 
advances and you comply within 120 days 
of the statement.
Employee meets accountable plan rules.  If 
you meet the three rules for accountable plans, 
your employer shouldn’t include any reimburse-
ments in your income in box 1 of your Form 
W-2. If your expenses equal your reimburse-
ments, you don’t complete Form 2106. You 
have no deduction since your expenses and re-
imbursements are equal.
If your employer included reimburse-
ments in box 1 of your Form W -2 and 
you meet all the rules for accountable 
plans, ask your employer for a corrected Form 
W-2.
Accountable plan rules not met.  Even 
though you are reimbursed under an accounta-
ble plan, some of your expenses may not meet 
all three rules. All reimbursements that fail to 
meet all three rules for accountable plans are 
generally treated as having been reimbursed 
under a nonaccountable plan (discussed later).
TIP
Failure to return excess reimburse-
ments. If you are reimbursed under an ac-
countable plan, but you fail to return, within a 
reasonable time, any amounts in excess of the 
substantiated amounts, the amounts paid in ex-
cess of the substantiated expenses are treated 
as paid under a nonaccountable plan. See Rea-
sonable period of time , earlier, and Returning 
Excess Reimbursements, later.
Reimbursement of nondeductible ex-
penses. You may be reimbursed under your 
employer's accountable plan for expenses rela-
ted to that employer's business, some of which 
would be allowable as employee business ex-
pense deductions and some of which would 
not. The reimbursements you receive for the 
nondeductible expenses don’t meet rule (1) for 
accountable plans, and they are treated as paid 
under a nonaccountable plan.
Example. Your employer's plan reimburses 
you for travel expenses while away from home 
on business and also for meals when you work 
late at the office, even though you aren’t away 
from home. The part of the arrangement that re-
imburses you for the nondeductible meals when 
you work late at the office is treated as paid un-
der a nonaccountable plan.
The employer makes the decision 
whether to reimburse employees under 
an accountable plan or a nonaccounta-
ble plan. If you are an employee who receives 
payments under a nonaccountable plan, you 
can’t convert these amounts to payments under 
an accountable plan by voluntarily accounting 
to your employer for the expenses and voluntar-
ily returning excess reimbursements to the em-
ployer.
Adequate Accounting
One of the rules for an accountable plan is that 
you must adequately account to your employer 
for your expenses. You adequately account by 
giving your employer a statement of expense, 
an account book, a diary, or a similar record in 
which you entered each expense at or near the 
time you had it, along with documentary evi-
dence (such as receipts) of your travel, mile-
age, and other employee business expenses. 
(See Table 5-1 in chapter 5 for details you need 
to enter in your record and documents you 
need to prove certain expenses.) A per diem or 
car allowance satisfies the adequate account-
ing requirement under certain conditions. See 
Per Diem and Car Allowances, later.
You must account for all amounts you re-
ceived from your employer during the year as 
advances, reimbursements, or allowances. This 
includes amounts you charged to your em-
ployer by credit card or other method. You must 
give your employer the same type of records 
and supporting information that you would have 
to give to the IRS if the IRS questioned a de-
duction on your return. You must pay back the 
amount of any reimbursement or other expense 
allowance for which you don’t adequately ac-
count or that is more than the amount for which 
you accounted.
TIP
Page 29 of 42  Fileid: … tions/p463/2022/a/xml/cycle02/source 14:42 - 1-Feb-2023
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 6 How To Report  Page 29

Per Diem and Car Allowances
If your employer reimburses you for your expen-
ses using a per diem or a car allowance, you 
can generally use the allowance as proof for the 
amount of your expenses. A per diem or car al-
lowance satisfies the adequate accounting re-
quirements for the amount of your expenses 
only if all the following conditions apply.
• Your employer reasonably limits payments 
of your expenses to those that are ordinary 
and necessary in the conduct of the trade 
or business.
• The allowance is similar in form to and not 
more than the federal rate (defined later).
• You prove the time (dates), place, and 
business purpose of your expenses to your 
employer (as explained in Table 5-1) within 
a reasonable period of time.
• You aren’t related to your employer (as de-
fined next). If you are related to your em-
ployer, you must be able to prove your ex-
penses to the IRS even if you have already 
adequately accounted to your employer 
and returned any excess reimbursement.
If the IRS finds that an employer's travel allow-
ance practices are not based on reasonably ac-
curate estimates of travel costs (including rec-
ognition of cost differences in different areas for 
per diem amounts), you won’t be considered to 
have accounted to your employer. In this case, 
you must be able to prove your expenses to the 
IRS.
Related to employer.  You are related to your 
employer if:
1. Your employer is your brother or sister, 
half brother or half sister, spouse, ances-
tor, or lineal descendant;
2. Your employer is a corporation in which 
you own, directly or indirectly, more than 
10% in value of the outstanding stock; or
3. Certain relationships (such as grantor, fi-
duciary, or beneficiary) exist between you, 
a trust, and your employer.
You may be considered to indirectly own stock 
for purposes of (2) if you have an interest in a 
corporation, partnership, estate, or trust that 
owns the stock or if a member of your family or 
your partner owns the stock.
The federal rate.  The federal rate can be fig-
ured using any one of the following methods.
1. For per diem amounts:
a. The regular federal per diem rate.
b. The standard meal allowance.
c. The high-low rate.
2. For car expenses:
a. The standard mileage rate.
b. A fixed and variable rate (FAVR).
For per diem amounts, use the rate in 
effect for the locality where you stop for 
sleep or rest.
Regular federal per diem rate.  The regu-
lar federal per diem rate is the highest amount 
that the federal government will pay to its 
employees for lodging and M&IE (or M&IE only) 
TIP
while they are traveling away from home in a 
particular area. The rates are different for differ-
ent localities. Your employer should have these 
rates available. You can also find federal per 
diem rates at GSA.gov/travel/plan-book/per-
diem-rates.
The standard meal allowance.  The 
standard meal allowance is the federal M&IE 
rate. For travel in 2022, the rate for most small 
localities in the United States is $59 per day. 
Most major cities and many other localities 
qualify for higher rates. You can find this infor-
mation at GSA.gov/travel/plan-book/per-diem-
rates.
You receive an allowance only for M&IE 
when your employer does one of the following.
• Provides you with lodging (furnishes it in 
kind).
• Reimburses you, based on your receipts, 
for the actual cost of your lodging.
• Pays the hotel, motel, etc., directly for your 
lodging.
• Doesn’t have a reasonable belief that you 
had (or will have) lodging expenses, such 
as when you stay with friends or relatives 
or sleep in the cab of your truck.
• Figures the allowance on a basis similar to 
that used in figuring your compensation, 
such as number of hours worked or miles 
traveled.
High-low rate.  This is a simplified method 
of figuring the federal per diem rate for travel 
within the continental United States. It elimi-
nates the need to keep a current list of the per 
diem rates for each city.
Under the high -low method, the per diem 
amount for travel during January through Sep-
tember of 2022 is $296 (which includes $74 for 
M&IE) for certain high -cost locations. All other 
areas have a per diem amount of $202 (which 
includes $64 for M&IE). For more information, 
see Notice 2021 -52, which can be found at 
IRS.gov/irb/2021-38_IRB#NOT-2021-52.
Effective October 1, 2022, the per diem 
rate for certain high -cost locations in-
creased to $297 (which includes $74 
for M&IE). The rate for all other locations in-
creased to $204 (which includes $64 for M&IE). 
Employers who didn’t use the high -low method 
during the first 9 months of 2022 can’t begin to 
use it before 2023. For more information, see 
Notice 2022 -44, which can be found at 
IRS.gov/irb/2022-41_IRB#NOT-2022-44, and 
Revenue Procedure 2019 -48 at IRS.gov/irb/
2019-51_IRB#RP-2019-48.
Prorating the standard meal allowance 
on partial days of travel.  The standard meal 
allowance is for a full 24 -hour day of travel. If 
you travel for part of a day, such as on the days 
you depart and return, you must prorate the 
full-day M&IE rate. This rule also applies if your 
employer uses the regular federal per diem rate 
or the high-low rate.
You can use either of the following methods 
to figure the federal M&IE for that day.
1. Method 1:
a. For the day you depart, add 3/4 of the 
standard meal allowance amount for 
that day.
CAUTION
!
b. For the day you return, add 3/4 of the 
standard meal allowance amount for 
the preceding day.
2. Method 2: Prorate the standard meal al-
lowance using any method you consis-
tently apply in accordance with reasonable 
business practice. For example, an em-
ployer can treat 2 full days of per diem 
(that includes M&IE) paid for travel away 
from home from 9 a.m. of one day to 5 
p.m. of the next day as being no more than 
the federal rate. This is true even though a 
federal employee would be limited to a re-
imbursement of M&IE for only 11/2 days of 
the federal M&IE rate.
The standard mileage rate.  This is a set 
rate per mile that you can use to figure your de-
ductible car expenses. For 2022, the standard 
mileage rate for the cost of operating your car 
for business use is 58.5 cents (0.585) per mile 
from January 1–June 30 and 62.5 cents (0. 625) 
per mile from July 1–December 31.
Fixed and variable rate (FAVR).  This is 
an allowance your employer may use to reim-
burse your car expenses. Under this method, 
your employer pays an allowance that includes 
a combination of payments covering fixed and 
variable costs, such as a cents -per-mile rate to 
cover your variable operating costs (such as 
gas, oil, etc.) plus a flat amount to cover your 
fixed costs (such as depreciation (or lease pay-
ments), insurance, etc.). If your employer choo-
ses to use this method, your employer will re-
quest the necessary records from you.
Reporting your expenses with a per diem or 
car allowance. If your reimbursement is in the 
form of an allowance received under an ac-
countable plan, the following facts affect your 
reporting.
• The federal rate.
• Whether the allowance or your actual ex-
penses were more than the federal rate.
The following discussions explain where to re-
port your expenses depending upon how the 
amount of your allowance compares to the fed-
eral rate.
Allowance less than or equal to the fed-
eral rate.  If your allowance is less than or 
equal to the federal rate, the allowance won’t be 
included in box 1 of your Form W -2. You don’t 
need to report the related expenses or the al-
lowance on your return if your expenses are 
equal to or less than the allowance.
However, if your actual expenses are more 
than your allowance, you can complete Form 
2106. If you are using actual expenses, you 
must be able to prove to the IRS the total 
amount of your expenses and reimbursements 
for the entire year. If you are using the standard 
meal allowance or the standard mileage rate, 
you don’t have to prove that amount.
Page 30 of 42  Fileid: … tions/p463/2022/a/xml/cycle02/source 14:42 - 1-Feb-2023
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 30  Chapter 6 How To Report

Form 2106 is only used by Armed 
Forces reservists, qualified performing 
artists, fee-basis state or local govern-
ment officials, and employees with impair-
ment-related work expenses. Due to the sus-
pension of miscellaneous itemized deductions 
subject to the 2% floor under section 67(a), em-
ployees who do not fit into one of the listed cat-
egories may not use Form 2106.
Example 1. In April, a member of a reserve 
component of the Armed Forces takes a 2 -day 
business trip to Denver. The federal rate for 
Denver is $278 ($199 lodging + $79 M&IE) per 
day. As required by their employer's accounta-
ble plan, they account for the time (dates), 
place, and business purpose of the trip. Their 
employer reimburses them $278 a day ($556 
total) for living expenses. Their living expenses 
in Denver aren’t more than $278 a day.
Their employer doesn’t include any of the 
reimbursement on their Form W -2 and they 
don’t deduct the expenses on their return.
Example 2. In June, a fee -basis local gov-
ernment official takes a 2 -day business trip to 
Boston. Their employer uses the high -low 
method to reimburse employees. Since Boston 
is a high -cost area, they are given an advance 
of $296 (which includes $74 for M&IE) a day 
($592 total) for their lodging and M&IE. Their 
actual expenses totaled $700.
Since their $700 of expenses are more than 
their $592 advance, they include the excess ex-
penses when they itemize their deductions. 
They complete Form 2106 (showing all of their 
expenses and reimbursements). They must 
also allocate their reimbursement between their 
meals and other expenses as discussed later 
under Completing Form 2106.
CAUTION
!
Example 3.  A fee -basis state government 
official drives 5,000 miles during January 
through June 2022 and 5,000 miles during July 
through December 2022 for business. Under 
their employer's accountable plan, they account 
for the time (dates), place, and business pur-
pose of each trip. Their employer pays them a 
mileage allowance of 40 cents (0.40) a mile.
Since their $6,050 expense figured under 
the standard mileage rate ((5,000 miles x 58. 5 
cents (0.585) per mile) + (5,000 miles x 62. 5 
cents (0.625) per mile)) is more than their 
$4,000 reimbursement (10,000 miles × 40 cents 
(0.40)), they itemize their deductions to claim 
the excess expense. They complete Form 2106 
(showing all their expenses and reimburse-
ments) and enter $2,050 ($6,050 − $4,000) as 
an itemized deduction.
Allowance more than the federal rate.  If 
your allowance is more than the federal rate, 
your employer must include the allowance 
amount up to the federal rate under code L in 
box 12 of your Form W -2. This amount isn’t tax-
able. However, the excess allowance will be in-
cluded in box 1 of your Form W -2. You must re-
port this part of your allowance as if it were 
wage income.
If your actual expenses are less than or 
equal to the federal rate, you don’t complete 
Form 2106 or claim any of your expenses on 
your return.
However, if your actual expenses are more 
than the federal rate, you can complete Form 
2106 and deduct those excess expenses. You 
must report on Form 2106 your reimbursements 
up to the federal rate (as shown under code L in 
box 12 of your Form W -2) and all your expen-
ses. You should be able to prove these 
amounts to the IRS.
Form 2106 is only used by Armed 
Forces reservists, qualified performing 
artists, fee-basis state or local govern-
ment officials, and employees with impair-
ment-related work expenses. Due to the sus-
pension of miscellaneous itemized deductions 
subject to the 2% floor under section 67(a), em-
ployees who do not fit into one of the listed cat-
egories may not use Form 2106.
Example 1.  A performing artist lives and 
works in Austin. In July, their employer sent 
them to Albuquerque for 4 days on business. 
Their employer paid the hotel directly for their 
lodging and reimbursed them $80 a day ($320 
total) for M&IE. Their actual meal expenses 
weren’t more than the federal rate for Albuquer-
que, which is $69 per day.
Their employer included the $44 that was 
more than the federal rate (($80 − $69) × 4) in 
box 1 of their Form W -2. Their employer shows 
$276 ($69 a day × 4) under code L in box 12 of 
their Form W -2. This amount isn’t included in 
their income. They don’t have to complete Form 
2106; however, they must include the $44 in 
their gross income as wages (by reporting the 
total amount shown in box 1 of their Form W-2).
Example 2. A performing artist also lives in 
Austin and works for the same employer as in 
Example 1. In May, the employer sent them to 
San Diego for 4 days and paid the hotel directly 
for their hotel bill. The employer reimbursed 
them $75 a day for their M&IE. The federal rate 
for San Diego is $74 a day.
They can prove that their actual non -enter-
tainment-related meal expenses totaled $380. 
Their employer's accountable plan won’t pay 
more than $75 a day for travel to San Diego, so 
they don’t give their employer the records that 
prove that they actually spent $380. However, 
they do account for the time (dates), place, and 
business purpose of the trip. This is their only 
business trip this year.
They were reimbursed $300 ($75 × 4 days), 
which is $4 more than the federal rate of $296 
($74 × 4 days). The employer includes the $4 
as income on their employee’s Form W -2 in 
box 1. The employer also enters $296 under 
code L in box 12 of the employee’s Form W-2.
They complete Form 2106 to figure their de-
ductible expenses. They enter the total of their 
actual expenses for the year ($380) on Form 
2106. They also enter the reimbursements that 
weren’t included in their income ($296). Their 
total deductible expense, before the 50% limit, 
is $96. Since their meals consisted of food and 
beverages that were provided by a restaurant 
and paid or incurred after 2020 and before 
2023, they can deduct 100% of their meal ex-
penses. They will include the $96 as an item-
ized deduction.
Example 3.  A fee -basis state government 
official drives 5,000 miles during January 
through June 2022 and 5,000 miles during July 
through December 2022 for business. Under 
their employer's accountable plan, they get re-
imbursed 65 cents (0.65) a mile, which is more 
than the standard mileage rate. Their total reim-
bursement is $6,500.
Their employer must include the reimburse-
ment amount up to the standard mileage rate, 
$6,050 ((5,000 miles x 58.5 cents (0.585) per 
CAUTION
!
Reporting Travel, Nonentertainment Meal, Gift,
and Car Expenses and Reimbursements
IF the type of reimbursement (or 
other expense allowance)
 arrangement is under:
THEN the employer reports on 
Form W-2:
AND the employee
reports on
 Form 2106: 
An accountable plan with:
Actual expense reimbursement: Adequate 
accounting made and excess returned.
No amount. No amount.
Actual expense reimbursement: Adequate 
accounting and return of excess both required 
but excess not returned.
The excess amount as wages in 
box 1.
No amount.
Per diem or mileage allowance up to the 
federal rate: Adequate accounting made and 
excess returned.
No amount. All expenses and reimbursements 
only if excess expenses are 
claimed. Otherwise, form is not 
filed.
Per diem or mileage allowance up to the 
federal rate: Adequate accounting and return 
of excess both required but excess not 
returned.
The excess amount as wages in 
box 1. The amount up to the 
federal rate is reported only under 
code L in box 12 of Form W-2—it 
isn’t reported in box 1.
No amount.
Per diem or mileage allowance exceeds the 
federal rate: Adequate accounting up to the 
federal rate only and excess not returned.
The excess amount as wages in 
box 1. The amount up to the 
federal rate is reported only under 
code L in box 12 of Form W-2—it 
isn’t reported in box 1.
All expenses (and reimbursements 
reported under code L in box 12 of 
Form W-2) only if expenses in 
excess of the federal rate are 
claimed. Otherwise, form isn’t filed.
A nonaccountable plan with:
Either adequate accounting or return of 
excess, or both, not required by plan.
The entire amount as wages in 
box 1.
All expenses.
No reimbursement plan: The entire amount as wages in 
box 1.
All expenses.
Table 6-1. 
Page 31 of 42  Fileid: … tions/p463/2022/a/xml/cycle02/source 14:42 - 1-Feb-2023
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 6 How To Report  Page 31

mile) + (5,000 miles x 62.5 cents (0.625) per 
mile)), under code L in box 12 of the employ-
ee’s Form W-2. That amount isn’t taxable. Their 
employer must also include $450 ($6,500 − 
$6,050) in box 1 of the employee's Form W -2. 
This is the reimbursement that is more than the 
standard mileage rate.
If their expenses are equal to or less than 
the standard mileage rate, they wouldn’t com-
plete Form 2106. If their expenses are more 
than the standard mileage rate, they would 
complete Form 2106 and report their total ex-
penses and reimbursement (shown under code 
L in box 12 of their Form W -2). They would then 
claim the excess expenses as an itemized de-
duction.
Returning Excess 
Reimbursements
Under an accountable plan, you are required to 
return any excess reimbursement or other ex-
pense allowances for your business expenses 
to the person paying the reimbursement or al-
lowance. Excess reimbursement means any 
amount for which you didn’t adequately account 
within a reasonable period of time. For exam-
ple, if you received a travel advance and you 
didn’t spend all the money on business -related 
expenses or you don’t have proof of all your ex-
penses, you have an excess reimbursement.
Adequate accounting and reasonable period 
of time were discussed earlier in this chapter.
Travel advance. You receive a travel advance 
if your employer provides you with an expense 
allowance before you actually have the ex-
pense, and the allowance is reasonably expec-
ted to be no more than your expense. Under an 
accountable plan, you are required to ade-
quately account to your employer for this ad-
vance and to return any excess within a reason-
able period of time.
If you don’t adequately account for or don't 
return any excess advance within a reasonable 
period of time, the amount you don’t account for 
or return will be treated as having been paid un-
der a nonaccountable plan (discussed later).
Unproven amounts. If you don’t prove that 
you actually traveled on each day for which you 
received a per diem or car allowance (proving 
the elements described in Table 5-1), you must 
return this unproven amount of the travel ad-
vance within a reasonable period of time. If you 
don’t do this, the unproven amount will be con-
sidered paid under a nonaccountable plan (dis-
cussed later).
Per diem allowance more than federal 
rate. If your employer's accountable plan pays 
you an allowance that is higher than the federal 
rate, you don’t have to return the difference be-
tween the two rates for the period you can 
prove business -related travel expenses. How-
ever, the difference will be reported as wages 
on your Form W -2. This excess amount is con-
sidered paid under a nonaccountable plan (dis-
cussed later).
Example. Your employer sends you on a 
5-day business trip to Phoenix in March 2022 
and gives you a $400 ($80 × 5 days) advance 
to cover your M&IE. The federal per diem for 
M&IE for Phoenix is $69. Your trip lasts only 3 
days. Under your employer's accountable plan, 
you must return the $160 ($80 × 2 days) ad-
vance for the 2 days you didn’t travel. For the 3 
days you did travel, you don’t have to return the 
$33 difference between the allowance you re-
ceived and the federal rate for Phoenix (($80 − 
$69) × 3 days). However, the $33 will be repor-
ted on your Form W-2 as wages.
Nonaccountable Plans
A nonaccountable plan is a reimbursement or 
expense allowance arrangement that doesn’t 
meet one or more of the three rules listed earlier 
under Accountable Plans.
In addition, even if your employer has an ac-
countable plan, the following payments will be 
treated as being paid under a nonaccountable 
plan.
• Excess reimbursements you fail to return 
to your employer. 
• Reimbursement of nondeductible expen-
ses related to your employer's business. 
See Reimbursement of nondeductible ex-
penses, earlier, under Accountable Plans.
An arrangement that repays you for business 
expenses by reducing the amount reported as 
your wages, salary, or other pay will be treated 
as a nonaccountable plan. This is because you 
are entitled to receive the full amount of your 
pay whether or not you have any business ex-
penses.
If you aren’t sure if the reimbursement or ex-
pense allowance arrangement is an accounta-
ble or nonaccountable plan, ask your employer.
Reporting your expenses under a nonac-
countable plan.  Your employer will combine 
the amount of any reimbursement or other ex-
pense allowance paid to you under a nonac-
countable plan with your wages, salary, or other 
pay. Your employer will report the total in box 1 
of your Form W-2.
You must complete Form 2106 and itemize 
your deductions to deduct your expenses for 
travel, transportation, or non -entertainment-re-
lated meals. Your meal and entertainment ex-
penses will be subject to the 50% Limit  dis-
cussed in chapter 2. However, you can deduct 
100% of business meals if the meals are food 
and beverages provided by a restaurant, and 
paid or incurred after 2020 and before 2023.
Form 2106 is only used by Armed 
Forces reservists, qualified performing 
artists, fee-basis state or local govern-
ment officials, and employees with impair-
ment-related work expenses. Due to the sus-
pension of miscellaneous itemized deductions 
subject to the 2% floor under section 67(a), em-
ployees who do not fit into one of the listed cat-
egories may not use Form 2106.
Example 1.  Your employer gives you 
$1,000 a month ($12,000 total for the year) for 
your business expenses. You don’t have to pro-
vide any proof of your expenses to your em-
ployer, and you can keep any funds that you 
don’t spend.
CAUTION
!
You are a performing artist and are being re-
imbursed under a nonaccountable plan. Your 
employer will include the $12,000 on your Form 
W-2 as if it were wages. If you want to deduct 
your business expenses, you must complete 
Form 2106 and itemize your deductions.
Example 2.  You are paid $2,000 a month 
by your employer. On days that you travel away 
from home on business, your employer desig-
nates $50 a day of your salary as paid to reim-
burse your travel expenses. Because your em-
ployer would pay your monthly salary whether 
or not you were traveling away from home, the 
arrangement is a nonaccountable plan. No part 
of the $50 a day designated by your employer is 
treated as paid under an accountable plan.
Rules for Independent 
Contractors and Clients
This section provides rules for independent 
contractors who incur expenses on behalf of a 
client or customer. The rules cover the reporting 
and substantiation of certain expenses dis-
cussed in this publication, and they affect both 
independent contractors and their clients or 
customers.
You are considered an independent con-
tractor if you are self -employed and you per-
form services for a customer or client.
Accounting to Your Client
If you received a reimbursement or an allow-
ance for travel, or gift expenses that you incur-
red on behalf of a client, you should provide an 
adequate accounting of these expenses to your 
client. If you don’t account to your client for 
these expenses, you must include any reim-
bursements or allowances in income. You must 
keep adequate records of these expenses 
whether or not you account to your client for 
these expenses.
If you don’t separately account for and seek 
reimbursement for meal and entertainment ex-
penses in connection with providing services for 
a client, you are subject to the 50% limit on 
those expenses. See 50% Limit in chapter 2.
Adequate accounting.  As a self -employed 
person, you adequately account by reporting 
your actual expenses. You should follow the re-
cordkeeping rules in chapter 5.
How to report.  For information on how to 
report expenses on your tax return, see 
Self-employed at the beginning of this chapter.
Required Records for
Clients or Customers
If you are a client or customer, you generally 
don’t have to keep records to prove the reim-
bursements or allowances you give, in the 
course of your business, to an independent 
contractor for travel or gift expenses incurred on 
your behalf. However, you must keep records if:
• You reimburse the contractor for entertain-
ment expenses incurred on your behalf, 
and
Page 32 of 42  Fileid: … tions/p463/2022/a/xml/cycle02/source 14:42 - 1-Feb-2023
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 32  Chapter 6 How To Report

• The contractor adequately accounts to you 
for these expenses.
Contractor adequately accounts.  If the con-
tractor adequately accounts to you for non -en-
tertainment-related meal expenses, you (the cli-
ent or customer) must keep records 
documenting each element of the expense, as 
explained in chapter 5 . Use your records as 
proof for a deduction on your tax return. If 
non-entertainment-related meal expenses are 
accounted for separately, you are subject to the 
50% limit on meals. However, you can deduct 
100% of business meals if the meals are food 
and beverages provided by a restaurant, and 
paid or incurred after 2020 and before 2023. If 
the contractor adequately accounts to you for 
reimbursed amounts, you don’t have to report 
the amounts on an information return.
Contractor doesn’t adequately account.  If 
the contractor doesn’t adequately account to 
you for allowances or reimbursements of 
non-entertainment-related meal expenses, you 
don’t have to keep records of these items. You 
aren’t subject to the 50% limit on meals in this 
case. You can deduct the reimbursements or 
allowances as payment for services if they are 
ordinary and necessary business expenses. 
However, you must file Form 1099 -MISC to re-
port amounts paid to the independent contrac-
tor if the total of the reimbursements and any 
other fees is $600 or more during the calendar 
year.
How To Use Per Diem
Rate Tables
This section contains information about the per 
diem rate substantiation methods available and 
the choice of rates you must make for the last 3 
months of the year.
The Two Substantiation 
Methods
High-low method.  IRS Notices list the locali-
ties that are treated under the high-low substan-
tiation method as high -cost localities for all or 
part of the year. Notice 2021 -52, available at 
IRS.gov/irb/2021-38_IRB#NOT-2021-52, lists 
the high-cost localities that are eligible for $296 
(which includes $74 for meals and incidental 
expenses (M&IE)) per diem, effective October 
1, 2021. For travel on or after October 1, 2021, 
all other localities within the continental United 
States (CONUS) are eligible for $202 (which in-
cludes $64 for M&IE) per diem under the 
high-low method.
Notice 2022 -44, available at IRS.gov/irb/
2022-41_IRB#NOT-2022-44, lists the high -cost 
localities that are eligible for $297 (which in-
cludes $74 for M&IE) per diem, effective Octo-
ber 1, 2022. For travel on or after October 1, 
2022, the per diem for all other localities in-
creased to $204 (which includes $64 for M&IE).
Temporary 100% deduction of the full meal 
portion of a per diem rate or allowance.  A 
100% deduction is allowed for certain business 
meals paid or incurred after 2020 and before 
2023. A special rule allows this 100% deduction 
for the full meal portion of a per diem rate or al-
lowance. See 50% Limit  in chapter 2 and 
IRS.gov/Newsroom/IRS-Provides-Guidance-
on-Per-Diem-Rates-and-the-Temporary-100-
Percent-Deduction-for-Food-or-Beverages-
From-Restaurants for additional information.
Regular federal per diem rate method.  Reg-
ular federal per diem rates are published by the 
General Services Administration (GSA). Both 
tables include the separate rate for M&IE for 
each locality. The rates listed for FY2022 at 
GSA.gov/travel/plan-book/per-diem-rates are 
effective October 1, 2021, and those listed for 
FY2023 are effective October 1, 2022. The 
standard rate for all locations within CONUS not 
specifically listed for FY2022 is $155 ($96 for 
lodging and $59 for M&IE). For FY2023, this 
rate increases to $157 ($98 for lodging and $59 
for M&IE).
Transition Rules
The transition period covers the last 3 months 
of the calendar year, from the time that new 
rates are effective (generally, October 1) 
through December 31. During this period, you 
may generally change to the new rates or finish 
out the year with the rates you had been using.
High-low method. If you use the high-low sub-
stantiation method, when new rates become ef-
fective (generally, October 1) you can either 
continue with the rates you used for the first part 
of the year or change to the new rates. How-
ever, you must continue using the high -low 
method for the rest of the calendar year 
(through December 31). If you are an employer, 
you must use the same rates for all employees 
reimbursed under the high -low method during 
that calendar year. 
The new rates and localities for the high -low 
method are included each year in a notice that 
is generally published in mid to late September. 
You can find the notice in the weekly Internal 
Revenue Bulletin (IRB) at IRS.gov/IRB, or visit 
IRS.gov and enter “Special Per Diem Rates” in 
the search box.
Federal per diem rate method.  New CONUS 
per diem rates become effective on October 1 
of each year and remain in effect through Sep-
tember 30 of the following year. Employees be-
ing reimbursed under the per diem rate method 
during the first 9 months of a year (January 1–
September 30) must continue under the same 
method through the end of that calendar year 
(December 31). However, for travel by these 
employees from October 1 through December 
31, you can choose to continue using the same 
per diem rates or use the new rates.
The new federal CONUS per diem rates are 
published each year, generally early in Septem-
ber. Go to GSA.gov/travel/plan-book/per-diem-
rates.
Per diem rates for localities listed for 
FY2023 may change at any time. To be 
sure you have the most current rate, 
check GSA.gov/travel/plan-book/per-diem-
rates.
CAUTION
!
Completing Form
2106
For tax years beginning after 2017, the Form 
2106 will be used by Armed Forces reservists, 
qualified performing artists, fee -basis state or 
local government officials, and employees with 
impairment-related work expenses. Due to the 
suspension of miscellaneous itemized deduc-
tions subject to the 2% floor under section 
67(a), employees who do not fit into one of the 
listed categories may not use Form 2106.
This section briefly describes how employ-
ees complete Forms 2106. Table 6 -1 explains 
what the employer reports on Form W -2 and 
what the employee reports on Form 2106. The 
instructions for the forms have more information 
on completing them.
If you are self -employed, don’t file 
Form 2106. Report your expenses on 
Schedule C (Form 1040) or Schedule F 
(Form 1040). See the instructions for the form 
that you must file.
Car expenses.  If you used a car to perform 
your job as an employee, you may be able to 
deduct certain car expenses. These are gener-
ally figured on Form 2106, Part II, and then 
claimed on Form 2106, Part I, line 1, column A.
Information on use of cars.  If you claim 
any deduction for the business use of a car, you 
must answer certain questions and provide in-
formation about the use of the car. The informa-
tion relates to the following items.
• Date placed in service.
• Mileage (total, business, commuting, and 
other personal mileage).
• Percentage of business use.
• After-work use.
• Use of other vehicles.
• Whether you have evidence to support the 
deduction.
• Whether or not the evidence is written.
Employees must complete Form 2106, Part II, 
Section A, to provide this information.
Standard mileage rate.  If you claim a de-
duction based on the standard mileage rate in-
stead of your actual expenses, you must com-
plete Form 2106, Part II, Section B. The amount 
on line 22 (Section B) is carried to Form 2106, 
Part I, line 1. In addition, on Part I, line 2, you 
can deduct parking fees and tolls that apply to 
the business use of the car. See Standard Mile-
age Rate  in chapter 4 for information on using 
this rate.
Actual expenses. If you claim a deduction 
based on actual car expenses, you must com-
plete Form 2106, Part II, Section C. In addition, 
unless you lease your car, you must complete 
Section D to show your depreciation deduction 
and any section 179 deduction you claim.
If you are still using a car that is fully depre-
ciated, continue to complete Section C. Since 
you have no depreciation deduction, enter zero 
on line 28. In this case, don’t complete Sec-
tion D.
CAUTION
!
Page 33 of 42  Fileid: … tions/p463/2022/a/xml/cycle02/source 14:42 - 1-Feb-2023
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 6 How To Report  Page 33

Car rentals.  If you claim car rental expen-
ses on Form 2106, line 24a, you may have to 
reduce that expense by an inclusion amount, as 
described in chapter 4. If so, you can show your 
car expenses and any inclusion amount as fol-
lows.
1. Figure the inclusion amount without taking 
into account your business-use percent-
age for the tax year.
2. Report the inclusion amount from (1) on 
Form 2106, Part II, line 24b.
3. Report on line 24c the net amount of car 
rental expenses (total car rental expenses 
minus the inclusion amount figured in (1)).
The net amount of car rental expenses will be 
adjusted on Form 2106, Part II, line 27, to reflect 
the percentage of business use for the tax year.
Transportation expenses.  Show your trans-
portation expenses that didn’t involve overnight 
travel on Form 2106, line 2, column A. Also in-
clude on this line business expenses you have 
for parking fees and tolls. Don’t include expen-
ses of operating your car or expenses of com-
muting between your home and work.
Employee business expenses other than 
nonentertainment meals.  Show your other 
employee business expenses on Form 2106, 
lines 3 and 4, column A. Don’t include expen-
ses for nonentertainment meals on those lines. 
Line 4 is for expenses such as gifts, educational 
expenses (tuition and books), of-
fice-in-the-home expenses, and trade and pro-
fessional publications.
If line 4 expenses are the only ones 
you are claiming, you received no reim-
bursements (or the reimbursements 
were all included in box 1 of your Form W -2), 
and the special rules  discussed later don’t ap-
ply to you, don’t complete Form 2106.
Non-entertainment-related meal expenses. 
Show the full amount of your expenses for non-
entertainment business -related meals on Form 
2106, line 5, column B. Include meals while 
away from your tax home overnight and other 
business meals. See the Meals Deduction From 
Restaurants Worksheet in the 2022 Instructions 
for Form 2106 for reporting information.
“Hours of service” limits.  If you are sub-
ject to the Department of Transportation's 
“hours of service” limits (as explained earlier un-
der Individuals subject to “hours of service” lim-
its in chapter 2), use 80% instead of 50% for 
meals while away from your tax home.
Reimbursements. Enter on Form 2106, line 7, 
the amounts your employer (or third party) reim-
bursed you that weren’t reported to you in box 1 
of your Form W-2. This includes any amount re-
ported under code L in box 12 of Form W-2.
Allocating your reimbursement.  If you 
were reimbursed under an accountable plan 
and want to deduct excess expenses that 
weren’t reimbursed, you may have to allocate 
your reimbursement. This is necessary when 
TIP
your employer pays your reimbursement in the 
following manner.
• Pays you a single amount that covers 
non-entertainment-related meals and/or 
entertainment, as well as other business 
expenses.
• Doesn’t clearly identify how much is for de-
ductible non-entertainment-related meals.
You must allocate that single payment so that 
you know how much to enter on Form 2106, 
line 7, column A and column B.
Example. Your employer paid you an ex-
pense allowance of $12,000 this year under an 
accountable plan. The $12,000 payment con-
sisted of $5,000 for airfare and $7,000 for 
non-entertainment-related meals, and car ex-
penses. Your employer didn’t clearly show how 
much of the $7,000 was for the cost of deducti-
ble non -entertainment-related meals. You ac-
tually spent $14,000 during the year ($5,500 for 
airfare, $4,500 for non -entertainment-related 
meals, and $4,000 for car expenses).
Since the airfare allowance was clearly iden-
tified, you know that $5,000 of the payment 
goes in column A, line 7, of Form 2106. To allo-
cate the remaining $7,000, you use the work-
sheet from the Instructions for Form 2106. Your 
completed worksheet follows.
Reimbursement Allocation Work-
sheet
(Keep for your records.)
1. Enter the total amount of 
reimbursements your 
employer gave you that 
weren’t reported to you in 
box 1 of Form W-2 ......... $7,000
2. Enter the total amount of your 
expenses for the periods 
covered by this 
reimbursement ............ 8,500
3. Enter the part of the amount 
on line 2 that was your total 
expense for 
non-entertainment-related 
meals ................... 4,500
4. Divide line 3 by line 2. Enter 
the result as a decimal 
(rounded to at least three 
places) .................. 0.529 
5. Multiply line 1 by line 4. Enter 
the result here and in column 
B, line 7 ................. 3,703
6. Subtract line 5 from line 1. 
Enter the result here and in 
column A, line 7 ........... $3,297
On line 7 of Form 2106, you enter $8,297 
($5,000 airfare and $3,297 of the $7,000) in col-
umn A and $3,703 (of the $7,000) in column B.
After you complete the form.  If you are a 
government official paid on a fee basis, a per-
forming artist, an Armed Forces reservist, or a 
disabled employee with impairment -related 
work expenses, see Special Rules, later.
Limits on employee business expenses. 
Your employee business expenses may be 
subject to either of the limits described next. 
They are figured in the following order on the 
specified form.
1. Limit on meals and entertainment. 
Certain non -entertainment-related meal expen-
ses are subject to a 50% limit. However, you 
can deduct 100% of business meals if the 
meals are food and beverages provided by a 
restaurant and paid or incurred after 2020 and 
before 2023. Generally, entertainment expen-
ses are nondeductible if paid or incurred after 
December 2017. If you are an employee, you 
figure this limit on line 9 of Form 2106. See the 
Meals Deduction From Restaurants Worksheet 
in the 2022 Instructions for Form 2106 for re-
porting information. (See 50% Limit  in chap-
ter 2.)
2. Limit on total itemized deductions. 
Limitations on itemized deductions are suspen-
ded for tax years beginning after 2017 and be-
fore tax year January 2026, per section 68(g).
Special Rules
This section discusses special rules that apply 
only to Armed Forces reservists, government 
officials who are paid on a fee basis, performing 
artists, and disabled employees with impair-
ment-related work expenses. For tax years be-
ginning after 2017, they are the only taxpayers 
who can use Form 2106.
Armed Forces Reservists 
Traveling More Than 100 Miles 
From Home
If you are a member of a reserve component of 
the Armed Forces of the United States and you 
travel more than 100 miles away from home in 
connection with your performance of services 
as a member of the reserves, you can deduct 
your travel expenses as an adjustment to gross 
income rather than as a miscellaneous itemized 
deduction. The amount of expenses you can 
deduct as an adjustment to gross income is 
limited to the regular federal per diem rate (for 
lodging and M&IE) and the standard mileage 
rate (for car expenses) plus any parking fees, 
ferry fees, and tolls. See Per Diem and Car Al-
lowances, earlier, for more information.
Member of a reserve component.  You are a 
member of a reserve component of the Armed 
Forces of the United States if you are in the 
Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Air Force, or Coast 
Guard Reserve; the Army National Guard of the 
United States; the Air National Guard of the Uni-
ted States; or the Reserve Corps of the Public 
Health Service.
How to report.  If you have reserve -related 
travel that takes you more than 100 miles from 
home, you should first complete Form 2106. 
Then include your expenses for reserve travel 
over 100 miles from home, up to the federal 
rate, from Form 2106, line 10, in the total on 
Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 12.
You can’t deduct expenses of travel that 
doesn’t take you more than 100 miles from 
home as an adjustment to gross income.
Officials Paid on a Fee Basis
Certain fee -basis officials can claim their em-
ployee business expenses on Form 2106.
Page 34 of 42  Fileid: … tions/p463/2022/a/xml/cycle02/source 14:42 - 1-Feb-2023
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 34  Chapter 6 How To Report

Fee-basis officials are persons who are em-
ployed by a state or local government and who 
are paid in whole or in part on a fee basis. They 
can deduct their business expenses in perform-
ing services in that job as an adjustment to 
gross income rather than as a miscellaneous 
itemized deduction.
If you are a fee -basis official, include your 
employee business expenses from Form 2106, 
line 10, in the total on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), 
line 12.
Expenses of Certain
Performing Artists
If you are a performing artist, you may qualify to 
deduct your employee business expenses as 
an adjustment to gross income. To qualify, you 
must meet all of the following requirements.
1. During the tax year, you perform services 
in the performing arts as an employee for 
at least two employers.
2. You receive at least $200 each from any 
two of these employers.
3. Your related performing-arts business ex-
penses are more than 10% of your gross 
income from the performance of those 
services.
4. Your adjusted gross income isn’t more 
than $16,000 before deducting these busi-
ness expenses.
Special rules for married persons. If you are 
married, you must file a joint return unless you 
lived apart from your spouse at all times during 
the tax year. If you file a joint return, you must 
figure requirements (1), (2), and (3) separately 
for both you and your spouse. However, re-
quirement (4) applies to your and your spouse's 
combined adjusted gross income.
Where to report.  If you meet all of the above 
requirements, you should first complete Form 
2106. Then you include your performing-arts-re-
lated expenses from Form 2106, line 10, in the 
total on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 12.
If you don’t meet all of the above require-
ments, you don’t qualify to deduct your expen-
ses as an adjustment to gross income.
Impairment-Related Work 
Expenses of Disabled Employees
If you are an employee with a physical or men-
tal disability, your impairment -related work ex-
penses aren’t subject to the 2% -of-adjus-
ted-gross-income limit that applies to most 
other employee business expenses. After you 
complete Form 2106, enter your impairment -re-
lated work expenses from Form 2106, line 10, 
on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 16, and iden-
tify the type and amount of this expense on the 
line next to line 16.
Impairment-related work expenses are your 
allowable expenses for attendant care at your 
workplace and other expenses in connection 
with your workplace that are necessary for you 
to be able to work.
You are disabled if you have:
• A physical or mental disability (for exam-
ple, blindness or deafness) that function-
ally limits your being employed; or
• A physical or mental impairment (for exam-
ple, a sight or hearing impairment) that 
substantially limits one or more of your ma-
jor life activities, such as performing man-
ual tasks, walking, speaking, breathing, 
learning, or working.
You can deduct impairment -related expen-
ses as business expenses if they are:
• Necessary for you to do your work satis-
factorily;
• For goods and services not required or 
used, other than incidentally, in your per-
sonal activities; and
• Not specifically covered under other in-
come tax laws.
Example 1. You are blind. You must use a 
reader to do your work. You use the reader both 
during your regular working hours at your place 
of work and outside your regular working hours 
away from your place of work. The reader's 
services are only for your work. You can deduct 
your expenses for the reader as business ex-
penses.
Example 2. You are deaf. You must use a 
sign language interpreter during meetings while 
you are at work. The interpreter's services are 
used only for your work. You can deduct your 
expenses for the interpreter as business expen-
ses.
How To Get Tax Help
If you have questions about a tax issue; need 
help preparing your tax return; or want to down-
load free publications, forms, or instructions, go 
to IRS.gov to find resources that can help you 
right away.
Preparing and filing your tax return.  After 
receiving all your wage and earnings state-
ments (Form W -2, W-2G, 1099-R, 1099-MISC, 
1099-NEC, etc.); unemployment compensation 
statements (by mail or in a digital format) or 
other government payment statements (Form 
1099-G); and interest, dividend, and retirement 
statements from banks and investment firms 
(Forms 1099), you have several options to 
choose from to prepare and file your tax return. 
You can prepare the tax return yourself, see if 
you qualify for free tax preparation, or hire a tax 
professional to prepare your return.
Free options for tax preparation.  Go to 
IRS.gov to see your options for preparing and 
filing your return online or in your local commun-
ity, if you qualify, which include the following.
• Free File. This program lets you prepare 
and file your federal individual income tax 
return for free using brand-name tax-prep-
aration-and-filing software or Free File filla-
ble forms. However, state tax preparation 
may not be available through Free File. Go 
to IRS.gov/FreeFile to see if you qualify for 
free online federal tax preparation, e-filing, 
and direct deposit or payment options.
• VITA. The Volunteer Income Tax Assis-
tance (VITA) program offers free tax help 
to people with low-to-moderate incomes, 
persons with disabilities, and limited-Eng-
lish-speaking taxpayers who need help 
preparing their own tax returns. Go to 
IRS.gov/VITA, download the free IRS2Go 
app, or call 800-906-9887 for information 
on free tax return preparation.
• TCE. The Tax Counseling for the Elderly 
(TCE) program offers free tax help for all 
taxpayers, particularly those who are 60 
years of age and older. TCE volunteers 
specialize in answering questions about 
pensions and retirement-related issues 
unique to seniors. Go to IRS.gov/TCE, 
download the free IRS2Go app, or call 
888-227-7669 for information on free tax 
return preparation.
• MilTax. Members of the U.S. Armed 
Forces and qualified veterans may use Mil-
Tax, a free tax service offered by the De-
partment of Defense through Military One-
Source.
For more information, go to 
MilitaryOneSource (MilitaryOneSource.mil/
MilTax).
Also, the IRS offers Free Fillable Forms, 
which can be completed online and then filed 
electronically regardless of income.
Using online tools to help prepare your re-
turn. Go to IRS.gov/Tools for the following.
• The Earned Income Tax Credit Assistant 
(IRS.gov/EITCAssistant) determines if 
you’re eligible for the earned income credit 
(EIC).
• The Online EIN Application (IRS.gov/EIN) 
helps you get an employer identification 
number (EIN) at no cost.
• The Tax Withholding Estimator (IRS.gov/
W4app) makes it easier for you to estimate 
the federal income tax you want your em-
ployer to withhold from your paycheck. 
This is tax withholding. See how your with-
holding affects your refund, take-home 
pay, or tax due.
• The First Time Homebuyer Credit Account 
Look-up (IRS.gov/HomeBuyer) tool pro-
vides information on your repayments and 
account balance.
• The Sales Tax Deduction Calculator 
(IRS.gov/SalesTax) figures the amount you 
can claim if you itemize deductions on 
Schedule A (Form 1040).
Getting answers to your tax ques-
tions. On IRS.gov, you can get 
up-to-date information on current 
events and changes in tax law.
• Go to IRS.gov/Help: A variety of tools to 
help you get answers to some of the most 
common tax questions.
• Go to IRS.gov/ITA: The Interactive Tax As-
sistant, a tool that will ask you questions 
and, based on your input, provide answers 
on a number of tax law topics.
• Go to IRS.gov/Forms: Find forms, instruc-
tions, and publications. You will find details 
on the most recent tax changes and inter-
active links to help you find answers to 
your questions.
Page 35 of 42  Fileid: … tions/p463/2022/a/xml/cycle02/source 14:42 - 1-Feb-2023
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 463 (2022)   Page 35

• You may also be able to access tax law in-
formation in your electronic filing software.
Need someone to prepare your tax return? 
There are various types of tax return preparers, 
including enrolled agents, certified public ac-
countants (CPAs), accountants, and many oth-
ers who don’t have professional credentials. If 
you choose to have someone prepare your tax 
return, choose that preparer wisely. A paid tax 
preparer is:
• Primarily responsible for the overall sub-
stantive accuracy of your return,
• Required to sign the return, and
• Required to include their preparer tax iden-
tification number (PTIN).
Although the tax preparer always signs the 
return, you're ultimately responsible for provid-
ing all the information required for the preparer 
to accurately prepare your return. Anyone paid 
to prepare tax returns for others should have a 
thorough understanding of tax matters. For 
more information on how to choose a tax pre-
parer, go to Tips for Choosing a Tax Preparer 
on IRS.gov.
Coronavirus. Go to IRS.gov/Coronavirus for 
links to information on the impact of the corona-
virus, as well as tax relief available for individu-
als and families, small and large businesses, 
and tax-exempt organizations.
Employers can register to use Business 
Services Online. The Social Security Adminis-
tration (SSA) offers online service at SSA.gov/
employer for fast, free, and secure online W -2 
filing options to CPAs, accountants, enrolled 
agents, and individuals who process Form W -2, 
Wage and Tax Statement, and Form W -2c, 
Corrected Wage and Tax Statement.
IRS social media.  Go to IRS.gov/SocialMedia 
to see the various social media tools the IRS 
uses to share the latest information on tax 
changes, scam alerts, initiatives, products, and 
services. At the IRS, privacy and security are 
our highest priority. We use these tools to share 
public information with you. Don’t post your so-
cial security number (SSN) or other confidential 
information on social media sites. Always pro-
tect your identity when using any social net-
working site.
The following IRS YouTube channels pro-
vide short, informative videos on various tax -re-
lated topics in English, Spanish, and ASL.
• Youtube.com/irsvideos.
• Youtube.com/irsvideosmultilingua.
• Youtube.com/irsvideosASL.
Watching IRS videos.  The IRS Video portal 
(IRSVideos.gov) contains video and audio pre-
sentations for individuals, small businesses, 
and tax professionals.
Online tax information in other languages. 
You can find information on IRS.gov/
MyLanguage if English isn’t your native lan-
guage.
Free Over-the-Phone Interpreter (OPI) Serv-
ice. The IRS is committed to serving our multi-
lingual customers by offering OPI services. The 
OPI Service is a federally funded program and 
is available at Taxpayer Assistance Centers 
(TACs), other IRS offices, and every VITA/TCE 
return site. OPI Service is accessible in more 
than 350 languages.
Accessibility Helpline available for taxpay-
ers with disabilities.  Taxpayers who need in-
formation about accessibility services can call 
833-690-0598. The Accessibility Helpline can 
answer questions related to current and future 
accessibility products and services available in 
alternative media formats (for example, braille, 
large print, audio, etc.). The Accessibility Help-
line does not have access to your IRS account. 
For help with tax law, refunds, or account -rela-
ted issues, go to IRS.gov/LetUsHelp
Note. Form 9000, Alternative Media Prefer-
ence, or Form 9000(SP) allows you to elect to 
receive certain types of written correspondence 
in the following formats.
• Standard Print.
• Large Print.
• Braille.
• Audio (MP3).
• Plain Text File (TXT).
• Braille Ready File (BRF).
Disasters. Go to Disaster Assistance and 
Emergency Relief for Individuals and 
Businesses to review the available disaster tax 
relief.
Getting tax forms and publications.  Go to 
IRS.gov/Forms to view, download, or print all of 
the forms, instructions, and publications you 
may need. Or, you can go to IRS.gov/
OrderForms to place an order.
Getting tax publications and instructions in 
eBook format.  You can also download and 
view popular tax publications and instructions 
(including the Instructions for Form 1040) on 
mobile devices as eBooks at IRS.gov/eBooks.
Note. IRS eBooks have been tested using 
Apple's iBooks for iPad. Our eBooks haven’t 
been tested on other dedicated eBook readers, 
and eBook functionality may not operate as in-
tended.
Access your online account (individual tax-
payers only).  Go to IRS.gov/Account to se-
curely access information about your federal tax 
account.
• View the amount you owe and a break-
down by tax year.
• See payment plan details or apply for a 
new payment plan.
• Make a payment or view 5 years of pay-
ment history and any pending or sched-
uled payments.
• Access your tax records, including key 
data from your most recent tax return, and 
transcripts.
• View digital copies of select notices from 
the IRS.
• Approve or reject authorization requests 
from tax professionals.
• View your address on file or manage your 
communication preferences.
Tax Pro Account.  This tool lets your tax pro-
fessional submit an authorization request to ac-
cess your individual taxpayer IRS online 
account. For more information, go to IRS.gov/
TaxProAccount.
Using direct deposit.  The fastest way to re-
ceive a tax refund is to file electronically and 
choose direct deposit, which securely and elec-
tronically transfers your refund directly into your 
financial account. Direct deposit also avoids the 
possibility that your check could be lost, stolen, 
destroyed, or returned undeliverable to the IRS. 
Eight in 10 taxpayers use direct deposit to re-
ceive their refunds. If you don’t have a bank ac-
count, go to IRS.gov/DirectDeposit for more in-
formation on where to find a bank or credit 
union that can open an account online.
Getting a transcript of your return.  The 
quickest way to get a copy of your tax transcript 
is to go to IRS.gov/Transcripts. Click on either 
"Get Transcript Online" or "Get Transcript by 
Mail" to order a free copy of your transcript. If 
you prefer, you can order your transcript by call-
ing 800-908-9946.
Reporting and resolving your tax -related 
identity theft issues. 
• Tax-related identity theft happens when 
someone steals your personal information 
to commit tax fraud. Your taxes can be af-
fected if your SSN is used to file a fraudu-
lent return or to claim a refund or credit.
• The IRS doesn’t initiate contact with tax-
payers by email, text messages (including 
shortened links), telephone calls, or social 
media channels to request or verify per-
sonal or financial information. This in-
cludes requests for personal identification 
numbers (PINs), passwords, or similar in-
formation for credit cards, banks, or other 
financial accounts.
• Go to IRS.gov/IdentityTheft, the IRS Iden-
tity Theft Central webpage, for information 
on identity theft and data security protec-
tion for taxpayers, tax professionals, and 
businesses. If your SSN has been lost or 
stolen or you suspect you’re a victim of 
tax-related identity theft, you can learn 
what steps you should take.
• Get an Identity Protection PIN (IP PIN). IP 
PINs are six-digit numbers assigned to tax-
payers to help prevent the misuse of their 
SSNs on fraudulent federal income tax re-
turns. When you have an IP PIN, it pre-
vents someone else from filing a tax return 
with your SSN. To learn more, go to 
IRS.gov/IPPIN.
Ways to check on the status of your refund. 
• Go to IRS.gov/Refunds.
• Download the official IRS2Go app to your 
mobile device to check your refund status.
• Call the automated refund hotline at 
800-829-1954.
Note. The IRS can’t issue refunds before 
mid-February for returns that claimed the EIC or 
the additional child tax credit (ACTC). This ap-
plies to the entire refund, not just the portion as-
sociated with these credits.
Page 36 of 42  Fileid: … tions/p463/2022/a/xml/cycle02/source 14:42 - 1-Feb-2023
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 36 Publication 463 (2022)

Making a tax payment.  Go to IRS.gov/
Payments for information on how to make a 
payment using any of the following options.
• IRS Direct Pay: Pay your individual tax bill 
or estimated tax payment directly from 
your checking or savings account at no 
cost to you.
• Debit or Credit Card: Choose an approved 
payment processor to pay online or by 
phone.
• Electronic Funds Withdrawal: Schedule a 
payment when filing your federal taxes us-
ing tax return preparation software or 
through a tax professional.
• Electronic Federal Tax Payment System: 
Best option for businesses. Enrollment is 
required.
• Check or Money Order: Mail your payment 
to the address listed on the notice or in-
structions.
• Cash: You may be able to pay your taxes 
with cash at a participating retail store.
• Same-Day Wire: You may be able to do 
same-day wire from your financial institu-
tion. Contact your financial institution for 
availability, cost, and cut-off times.
Note. The IRS uses the latest encryption 
technology to ensure that the electronic pay-
ments you make online, by phone, or from a 
mobile device using the IRS2Go app are safe 
and secure. Paying electronically is quick, easy, 
and faster than mailing in a check or money or-
der.
What if I can’t pay now?  Go to IRS.gov/
Payments for more information about your op-
tions.
• Apply for an online payment agreement 
(IRS.gov/OPA) to meet your tax obligation 
in monthly installments if you can’t pay 
your taxes in full today. Once you complete 
the online process, you will receive imme-
diate notification of whether your agree-
ment has been approved.
• Use the Offer in Compromise Pre-Qualifier 
to see if you can settle your tax debt for 
less than the full amount you owe. For 
more information on the Offer in Compro-
mise program, go to IRS.gov/OIC.
Filing an amended return.  Go to IRS.gov/
Form1040X for information and updates.
Checking the status of your amended re-
turn. Go to IRS.gov/WMAR to track the status 
of Form 1040-X amended returns.
Note. It can take up to 3 weeks from the 
date you filed your amended return for it to 
show up in our system, and processing it can 
take up to 16 weeks.
Understanding an IRS notice or letter 
you’ve received.  Go to IRS.gov/Notices to 
find additional information about responding to 
an IRS notice or letter.
Note. You can use Schedule LEP (Form 
1040), Request for Change in Language Prefer-
ence, to state a preference to receive notices, 
letters, or other written communications from 
the IRS in an alternative language. You may not 
immediately receive written communications in 
the requested language. The IRS’s commitment 
to LEP taxpayers is part of a multi -year timeline 
that is scheduled to begin providing translations 
in 2023. You will continue to receive communi-
cations, including notices and letters in English 
until they are translated to your preferred lan-
guage.
Contacting your local IRS office.  Keep in 
mind, many questions can be answered on 
IRS.gov without visiting an IRS Taxpayer Assis-
tance Center (TAC). Go to IRS.gov/LetUsHelp 
for the topics people ask about most. If you still 
need help, IRS TACs provide tax help when a 
tax issue can’t be handled online or by phone. 
All TACs now provide service by appointment, 
so you’ll know in advance that you can get the 
service you need without long wait times. Be-
fore you visit, go to IRS.gov/TACLocator to find 
the nearest TAC and to check hours, available 
services, and appointment options. Or, on the 
IRS2Go app, under the Stay Connected tab, 
choose the Contact Us option and click on “Lo-
cal Offices.”
The Taxpayer Advocate 
Service (TAS) Is Here To 
Help You
What Is TAS?
TAS is an independent organization within the 
IRS that helps taxpayers and protects taxpayer 
rights. Their job is to ensure that every taxpayer 
is treated fairly and that you know and under-
stand your rights under the Taxpayer Bill of 
Rights.
How Can You Learn About Your 
Taxpayer Rights?
The Taxpayer Bill of Rights describes 10 basic 
rights that all taxpayers have when dealing with 
the IRS. Go to TaxpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov to 
help you understand what these rights mean to 
you and how they apply. These are your rights. 
Know them. Use them.
What Can TAS Do For You?
TAS can help you resolve problems that you 
can’t resolve with the IRS. And their service is 
free. If you qualify for their assistance, you will 
be assigned to one advocate who will work with 
you throughout the process and will do every-
thing possible to resolve your issue. TAS can 
help you if:
• Your problem is causing financial difficulty 
for you, your family, or your business;
• You face (or your business is facing) an 
immediate threat of adverse action; or
• You’ve tried repeatedly to contact the IRS 
but no one has responded, or the IRS 
hasn’t responded by the date promised.
How Can You Reach TAS?
TAS has offices in every state, the District of 
Columbia, and Puerto Rico . Your local advo-
cate’s number is in your local directory and at 
TaxpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov/Contact-Us. You 
can also call them at 877-777-4778.
How Else Does TAS Help 
Taxpayers?
TAS works to resolve large -scale problems that 
affect many taxpayers. If you know of one of 
these broad issues, report it to them at IRS.gov/
SAMS.
TAS for Tax Professionals
TAS can provide a variety of information for tax 
professionals, including tax law updates and 
guidance, TAS programs, and ways to let TAS 
know about systemic problems you’ve seen in 
your practice.
Low Income Taxpayer 
Clinics (LITCs)
LITCs are independent from the IRS. LITCs 
represent individuals whose income is below a 
certain level and need to resolve tax problems 
with the IRS, such as audits, appeals, and tax 
collection disputes. In addition, LITCs can pro-
vide information about taxpayer rights and re-
sponsibilities in different languages for individu-
als who speak English as a second language. 
Services are offered for free or a small fee for 
eligible taxpayers. To find an LITC near you, go 
to TaxpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov/about-us/Low-
Income-Taxpayer-Clinics-LITC or see IRS Pub. 
4134, Low Income Taxpayer Clinic List.
Page 37 of 42  Fileid: … tions/p463/2022/a/xml/cycle02/source 14:42 - 1-Feb-2023
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 463 (2022)   Page 37

Page 38 of 42  Fileid: … tions/p463/2022/a/xml/cycle02/source 14:42 - 1-Feb-2023
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendices
Appendices A-1 through A -5 show 
the lease inclusion amounts that 
you may need to report if you first 
leased a passenger automobile (in-
cluding a truck and van) in 2018 
through 2022 for 30 days or more.
If any of these apply to you, use 
the appendix for the year you first 
leased the car. (See Leasing a Car 
in chapter 4.)
Appendix A-1. Inclusion Amounts for Passenger Automobiles First Leased in 2018
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
. . . . . . . 
 $50,000  $51,000  $1  $3  $5  $5  $6
 51,000  52,000 4 9 13 16 19
 52,000  53,000 7 15 22 27 31
 53,000  54,000 10 21 31 37 44
 54,000  55,000 12 27 40 48 56
 55,000  56,000 15 33 49 59 68
 56,000  57,000 18 39 58 69 81
 57,000  58,000 20 45 67 80 93
 58,000  59,000 23 51 76 91 105
 59,000  60,000 26 57 85 101 117
 60,000  62,000 30 66 98 118 135
 62,000  64,000 36 78 116 139 160
 64,000  66,000 41 90 134 160 185
 66,000  68,000 46 102 152 181 210
 68,000  70,000 52 114 169 203 235
 70,000  72,000 57 126 187 225 259
 72,000  74,000 63 138 205 246 284
 74,000  76,000 68 150 223 267 309
 76,000  78,000 74 162 241 288 333
 78,000  80,000 79 174 259 310 357
 80,000  85,000 89 195 290 347 401
 85,000  90,000 102 225 335 400 463
 90,000  95,000 116 255 379 454 525
 95,000  100,0002 130 285 423 508 586
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the vehicle is more than $100,000, see Rev. Proc. 2018-25 (2018-18 I.R.B. 543), available at IRS.gov/irb/2018-18_IRB#REV-PROC-2018-25.
Page 38 Publication 463 (2022)

Page 39 of 42  Fileid: … tions/p463/2022/a/xml/cycle02/source 14:42 - 1-Feb-2023
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-2. Inclusion Amounts for Passenger Automobiles First Leased in 2019
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
. . . . . . . 
 $50,000  $51,000  $0  $1  $1  $3  $3
 51,000  52,000  4  11  15  20  23
 52,000  53,000  9  20  30  36  43
 53,000  54,000  13  30  44  53  63
 54,000  55,000  17  40  58  70  83
 55,000  56,000  22  49  72  88  102
 56,000  57,000  26  59  86  105  122
 57,000  58,000  31  68  101  122  142
 58,000  59,000  35  78  115  139  161
 59,000  60,000  39  88  129  156  181
 60,000  62,000  46  102  151  181  211
 62,000  64,000  55  121  179  216  250
 64,000  66,000  63  140  208  251  289
 66,000  68,000  72  160  236  284  329
 68,000  70,000  81  179  265  318  369
 70,000  72,000  90  198  293  353  408
 72,000  74,000  98  217  322  387  448
 74,000  76,000  107  236  351  421  487
 76,000  78,000  116  255  379  456  526
 78,000  80,000  125  275  407  489  567
 80,000  85,000  140  308  458  549  635
 85,000  90,000  162  356  529  635  734
 90,000  95,000  184  404  600  720  833
 95,000  100,0002  206  452  671  806  931
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the vehicle is more than $100,000, see Rev. Proc. 2019-26 (2019-24 I.R.B. 1323), available at IRS.gov/irb/2019-24_IRB#REV-PROC-2019-26.
Appendix A-3. Inclusion Amounts for Passenger Automobiles First Leased in 2020
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
. . . . . . . 
 $50,000  $51,000  $0  $1  $0  $2  $2
51,000 52,000 2 6 9 10 13
52,000 53,000 5 11 17 20 24
53,000 54,000 7 17 24 30 35
54,000 55,000 10 22 32 39 46
55,000 56,000 12 27 41 48 57
56,000 57,000 15 32 49 58 68
57,000 58,000 17 38 56 68 79
58,000 59,000 19 44 64 77 90
59,000 60,000 22 49 72 87 100
60,000 62,000 26 56 84 102 117
62,000 64,000 30 68 99 121 139
64,000 66,000 35 78 116 139 161
66,000 68,000 40 89 131 159 183
68,000 70,000 45 99 148 177 205
70,000 72,000 50 110 163 197 227
72,000 74,000 55 121 179 215 249
74,000 76,000 60 131 195 235 271
76,000 78,000 64 142 211 254 293
78,000 80,000 69 153 227 272 315
80,000 85,000 78 172 254 306 353
85,000 90,000 90 198 295 353 408
90,000 95,000 102 225 334 401 463
95,000 100,0002 114 252 373 449 518
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the vehicle is more than $100,000, see Rev. Proc. 2020-37 (2020-33 I.R.B. 381), available at IRS.gov/irb/2020-33_IRB#REV-PROC-2020-37.
Publication 463 (2022) Page 39

Page 40 of 42  Fileid: … tions/p463/2022/a/xml/cycle02/source 14:42 - 1-Feb-2023
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Appendix A-4. Inclusion Amounts for Passenger Automobiles First Leased in 2021
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
. . . . . . . 
 $51,000  $52,000  $0  $0  $1  $0  $1
52,000 53,000 1 1 1 2 2
53,000 54,000 1 2 2 3 4
54,000 55,000 1 3 3 5 5
55,000 56,000 2 3 5 6 6
56,000 57,000 2 4 6 7 8
57,000 58,000 2 5 7 8 10
58,000 59,000 3 5 8 10 11
59,000 60,000 3 6 9 11 13
60,000 62,000 3 7 11 13 15
62,000 64,000 4 9 13 15 18
64,000 66,000 5 10 15 18 21
66,000 68,000 5 12 17 21 24
68,000 70,000 6 13 20 23 27
70,000 72,000 7 14 22 26 30
72,000 74,000 7 16 24 29 33
74,000 76,000 8 18 26 31 36
76,000 78,000 9 19 28 34 39
78,000 80,000 9 21 30 37 42
80,000 85,000 11 23 34 41 48
85,000 90,000 12 27 40 47 55
90,000 95,000 14 30 45 55 62
95,000 100,0002 16 34 50 61 70
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the vehicle is more than $100,000, see Rev. Proc. 2021-31 (2021-34 I.R.B. 324), available at IRS.gov/irb/2021-34_IRB#REV-PROC-2021-31.
Appendix A-5. Inclusion Amounts for Passenger Automobiles First Leased in 2022
Fair Market Value Tax Year of Lease1
Over Not Over 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th and Later
. . . . . . . 
 $56,000  $57,000  $1  $1  $1  $2  $2
57,000 58,000 2 4 5 7 7
58,000 59,000 3 7 9 11 13
59,000 60,000 4 9 14 16 19
60,000 62,000 6 13 20 23 28
62,000 64,000 9 19 27 34 38
64,000 66,000 11 24 36 43 50
66,000 68,000 14 30 43 53 61
68,000 70,000 16 35 52 63 72
70,000 72,000 19 40 61 72 83
72,000 74,000 21 46 68 82 95
74,000 76,000 24 51 77 91 106
76,000 78,000 26 57 85 101 117
78,000 80,000 29 62 93 111 128
80,000 85,000 33 72 107 128 148
85,000 90,000 39 86 127 152 176
90,000 95,000 45 100 147 177 204
95,000 100,0002 52 113 167 201 233
1 For the last tax year of the lease, use the dollar amount for the preceding year.
2 If the fair market value of the vehicle is more than $100,000, see Rev. Proc. 2022-17, available at IRS.gov/pub/irs-drop/rp-22-17.pdf.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.
See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Index
 
"Hours of service" limits 12
Form 2106 34
50% limit on meals 5
A
Accountable plans 29-32
Accounting to employer 29
Adequate accounting 29
Independent contractors 32
Adequate records 24
Advertising:
Car display 14
Expenses 12
Signs, display racks, or other 
promotional material to be 
used on recipient's business 
premises 13
Page 40 Publication 463 (2022)

Page 41 of 42  Fileid: … tions/p463/2022/a/xml/cycle02/source 14:42 - 1-Feb-2023
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Airline clubs 10
Allocating costs 5, 26
Allowance 
(See Reimbursements)
Armed forces:
Assigned overseas 3
Assistance (See Tax help)
Athletic clubs 10
B
Basis of car 17
(See also Depreciation of car)
Bona fide business purpose 5
Business travel 6
Outside U.S. 7
Business use of car 15
More-than-50%-use test. 18
Qualified business use 18
C
Canceled checks:
As evidence of business 
expenses 25
Car expenses 14-23
Actual expenses 15
Allowances for 30-32
Business and personal use 15
Combining expenses 25
Disposition of car 23
Fixed and variable rate (FAVR) 
allowance 30
Form 2106 33
Leasing a car, truck, or van 22, 
23
Mileage rate (See Standard 
mileage rate)
Taxes paid on car 15
Traffic tickets 15
Car pools 14
Car rentals 23
Form 2106 34
Car, defined 16
Car, truck, or van rentals 22, 23
Casualty and theft losses:
Cars 15
Depreciation 24
Club dues 10
Commuting expenses 14
Conventions 9
Country clubs 10
Cruise ships 9
D
Daily business mileage and 
expense log (Table 6-2) 26
Depreciation of car 16
(See also Section 179 
deductions)
Adjustment for using standard 
mileage rate 24
Basis 17
Sales taxes 15
Unrecovered basis 21
Casualty or theft, effect 24
Deduction 16, 24
Excess depreciation 21
Modified Accelerated Cost 
Recovery System 
(MACRS) 19
Trade-in, effect 18, 24
Trucks and vans 20
Depreciation of Car:
Section 179 deduction 20
Disabled employees:
Impairment-related work 
expenses 35
Documentary evidence 25
E
Employer-provided vehicles 15
Reporting requirements 28
Entertainment expenses 13
50% limit:
Determination of 
applicability (Figure 
A) 11
Entertainment, defined 10
Form 2106 34
Estimates of expenses 24
Exceptions to the 50% Limit 12
Excess reimbursements 
(See Reimbursements)
F
Fair market value of car 23
Farmers:
Form 1040, Schedule F 28
Federal crime investigations or 
prosecutions:
Federal employees engaged 
in 4
Federal rate for per diem 6, 30
Fee-basis officials 35
Fees you pay 14
Fixed and variable rate (FAVR) 
allowance 30
Form 1040, Schedule C 28
Form 1040, Schedule F 28
Form 2106 17, 28, 32, 33
Form 4562 28
Form 4797 21
Form W-2:
Employer-provided vehicles 28
Reimbursement of personal 
expenses 28
Statutory employees 28
G
Gifts 10, 13
$25 limit 13
Combining for recordkeeping 
purposes 26
Reporting requirements 28
Golf clubs 10
H
Hauling tools 14
High-low method:
Introduction 33
Transition rules 33
High-low rate method 30
Home office 14
Hotel clubs 10
I
Identity theft 36
Impairment-related work 
expenses 35
Incidental expenses:
Defined 6
Gifts 13
No meals, incidentals only 6
Income-producing property 28
Incomplete records 25
Indefinite job assignment 4
Independent contractors 32
Interest on car loans 15
Itinerants 3
L
Leasing a car, truck, or van 22, 
23
Luxury water travel 9
M
MACRS (Modified Accelerated 
Cost Recovery System) 19
2022 chart (Table 4-1) 22
Main place of business or 
work 3
Married taxpayers:
Performing artists 35
Meal expenses 5
50% limit 11
Determination of 
applicability (Figure 
A) 11
Exceptions 12
Actual cost method 5
Form 2106 34
Major cities with higher 
allowances 6
Standard meal allowance 5, 6, 
30
Meals and Entertainment 
expenses 10
Mileage rate (See Standard 
mileage rate)
Military (See Armed forces)
Missing children, photographs 
of 2
Modified Accelerated Cost 
Recovery System 
(MACRS) 19
2022 chart (Table 4-1) 22
N
Nonaccountable plans 32
O
Office in the home 14
Officials paid on fee basis 34
Overseas travel:
Conventions 9
Meal allowance 6
Part of trip outside U.S. 7
P
Parking fees 14, 15
Per diem allowances 30-32
Defined 29
Federal rate for 30
Per diem rates:
High-cost localities 33
High-low method 33
Regular federal method 33
Standard rate for unlisted 
localities 33
Transition rules 33
Performing artists 35
Personal property taxes 15
Personal trips 7
Outside U.S. 8
Placed in service, cars 17
Probationary work period 4
Proving business purpose 25
Public transportation:
Outside of U.S. travel 7
Publications (See Tax help)
R
Recordkeeping 
requirements 24-28
Adequate records 24
Daily business mileage and 
expense log (Table 6-2) 26
Destroyed records 25
How to prove expenses 
(Table 5-1) 26
Incomplete records 25
Reimbursed expenses 26
Sampling to prove 
expenses 25
Separating and combining 
expenses 25, 26
Three-year period of 
retention 26
Weekly travel expense and 
entertainment record 
(Table 6-3) 27
Regular federal method:
Introduction 33
Transition rules 33
Reimbursements 29-33
Accountable plans 29
Excess 32
Form 2106 34
Nonaccountable plans 32
Nondeductible expenses 29
Personal expenses 28
Recordkeeping 26
Reporting (Table 6-1) 31
Unclaimed 28
Reporting requirements 28
Per diem or car allowance 30
Reimbursements 29-33
Reservists:
Transportation expenses 14
Traveling more than 100 miles 
from home 34
Returning excess 
reimbursements 32
S
Section 179 deduction:
Amended return 17
Deduction 16
Limits 16
Self-employed persons 12
Reporting requirements 28
Spouse, expenses for 5
Standard meal allowance 5, 6, 
30
Standard mileage rate 2, 14, 30
Depreciation adjustment for 
using 24
Form 2106 33
Statutory employees 28
T
Tables and figures 26
50% limit determination (Figure 
A) 11
Maximum depreciation 
deduction for cars placed in 
service prior to 2018 
table 20
Maximum depreciation 
deduction for Passenger 
Automobiles (Including 
Trucks and Vans) acquired 
after September 27, 2017, 
and placed in service during 
2018 or later 20
Publication 463 (2022) Page 41

Page 42 of 42  Fileid: … tions/p463/2022/a/xml/cycle02/source 14:42 - 1-Feb-2023
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tables and figures (Cont.)
Maximum depreciation 
deduction for Passenger 
Automobiles (Including 
Trucks and Vans) acquired 
before September 28, 2017, 
and placed in service during 
2018–2022 20
Modified Accelerated Cost 
Recovery System (MACRS) 
2022 chart (Table 4-1) 22
Proving expenses 
(Table 5-1) 26
Reporting reimbursements 
(Table 6-1) 31
Transportation expenses, 
determination of deductibility 
(Figure B) 13
Travel expenses, determination 
of deductibility (Table 1-1) 5
Weekly travel expense and 
entertainment record 
(Table 6-3) 27
Tax help 35
Tax home, determination of 3
Temporary job assignments 4
Temporary work location 13
Tickets:
Traffic violations 15
Tools:
Hauling tools 14
Trade-in of car 18, 24
Traffic tickets 15
Transients 3
Transition rules 33
Example:
High-low method 33
High-low method 33
Regular federal method 33
Transportation expenses 13
Car expenses 14-23
Deductible (Figure B) 13
five or more cars 15
Form 2106 34
Transportation workers 6, 12
Travel advance 29, 32
(See also Reimbursements)
Travel expenses 3-10
Another individual 
accompanying taxpayer 5
Away from home 3, 4
Deductible 4, 10
Summary of (Table 1-1) 5
Defined 3
Going home on days off 4
In U.S. 6
Lodging 6
Luxury water travel 9
Outside U.S. 7
Travel to family home 4
Trucks and vans:
Depreciation 20
Transportation workers 12
Transportation workers' 
expenses 6
Two places of work 14
U
Unclaimed reimbursements 28
Unions:
Trips from union hall to place of 
work 14
Unrecovered basis of car 21
V
Volunteers 2
W
Weekly travel expense and 
entertainment record 
(Table 6-3) 27
Page 42 Publication 463 (2022)