Userid: CPM Schema: tipx Leadpct: 100% Pt. size: 8  Draft  Ok to Print
AH XSL/XML Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source (Init. & Date) _______
Page 1 of 142  8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Department 
of the 
T reasury
Internal 
Revenue 
Service
TAX GUIDE
2023
Get forms and other information faster and easier at:
• IRS.gov (English) 
• IRS.gov/Spanish (Español) 
• IRS.gov/Chinese (中文) 
• IRS.gov/Korean (한국어) 
• IRS.gov/Russian (Pусский) 
• IRS.gov/Vietnamese (Tiếng Việt) 
Your Federal
Income Tax
For Individuals
Publication 17
Catalog Number 10311G
For use in preparing
2023 Returns
Mar 18, 2024

Page 2 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Your Federal
Income Tax
For Individuals
Contents
What's New ....................... 1
Reminders ........................ 2
Introduction ....................... 3
Part One. The Income Tax Return .......... 6
1 Filing Information ................ 6
2 Filing Status ................... 21
3 Dependents ................... 26
4 T ax Withholding and Estimated T ax..... 37
Part Two. Income and Adjustments 
to Income ..................... 46
5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings .... 47
6 Interest Income ................. 54
7 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad 
Retirement Benefits .............. 62
8 Other Income .................. 67
9 Individual Retirement Arrangements 
(IRAs) ..................... 78
Part Three. Standard Deduction, Itemized 
Deductions, and Other Deductions ...... 93
10 Standard Deduction .............. 93
11 T axes ...................... 97
12 Other Itemized Deductions ......... 101
Part Four. Figuring Your Taxes, and 
Refundable and Nonrefundable Credits .. 107
13 How T o Figure Y our T ax........... 107
14 Child T ax Credit and Credit for Other 
Dependents ................. 109
2023 Tax Table ..................... 112
2023 Tax Computation Worksheet ........ 124
2023 Tax Rate Schedules .............. 124
Your Rights as a Taxpayer ............. 126
How To Get Tax Help ................. 127
Index .......................... 130
Where To File ..................... 140
The explanations and examples in this publication 
reflect the interpretation by the Internal Revenue Service 
(IRS) of:
• T ax laws enacted by Congress,
• T reasury regulations, and
• Court decisions.
However, the information given does not cover every 
situation and is not intended to replace the law or change 
its meaning.
All material in this 
publication may be 
reprinted freely. A 
citation to Y our Federal 
Income T ax (2023) 
would be appropriate.
This publication covers some subjects on which a 
court may have made a decision more favorable to 
taxpayers than the interpretation by the IRS. Until these 
differing interpretations are resolved by higher court 
decisions or in some other way, this publication will 
continue to present the interpretations by the IRS.
All taxpayers have important rights when working with 
the IRS. These rights are described in Y our Rights as a 
T axpayer in the back of this publication.
Department 
of the 
T reasury
Internal 
Revenue 
Service

Page 3 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
What's New
This section summarizes important 
tax changes that took effect in 
2023. Most of these changes are 
discussed in more detail 
throughout this publication.
Future developments.  For the 
latest information about the tax law 
topics covered in this publication, 
such as legislation enacted after it 
was published, go to IRS.gov/
Pub17.
Due date of return.  File Form 
1040 or 1040-SR by April 15, 2024. 
If you live in Maine or Massachu-
setts, you have until April 17, 2024, 
because of the Patriots’ Day and 
Emancipation Day holidays. See 
chapter 1, later.
Additonal child tax credit 
amount increased.  The maxi-
mum additional child tax credit 
amount has increased to $1,600 
for each qualifying child.
New clean vehicle credit.  The 
credit for new qualified plug -in 
electric drive motor vehicles has 
changed. This credit is now known 
as the clean vehicle credit. The 
maximum amount of the credit and 
some of the requirements to claim 
the credit have changed. The credit 
is still reported on Form 8936 and 
Schedule 3 (Form 1040), line 6f. 
For more information, see Form 
8936.
Previously owned clean vehicle 
credit. This credit is available for 
previously owned clean vehicles 
acquired and placed in service af-
ter 2022. For more information, see 
Form 8936.
Who must file.  Generally, the 
amount of income you can receive 
before you must file a return has 
been increased. For more informa-
tion, see chapter 1, later.
Standard deduction amount in-
creased. For 2023, the standard 
deduction amount has been in-
creased for all filers. The amounts 
are:
• Single or Married filing sepa-
rately—$13,850;
• Married filing jointly or Qualify-
ing surviving 
spouse—$27,700; and
• Head of household—$20,800.
See chapter 10, later.
New lines on Schedule 3 (Form 
1040). This year Schedule 3 
(Form 1040) has new lines.
• Line 5a will be used to report 
the residential clean energy 
credit from Form 5695.
• Line 5b will be used to report 
the energy efficient home im-
provement credit from Form 
5695.
• Line 6m will be used to report 
the credit for previously 
owned clean vehicles from 
Form 8936.
• Line 13c will be used to report 
the elective payment election 
amount from Form 3800.
Credits for qualified sick and 
family leave wages.  The credits 
for qualified sick and family leave 
wages paid in 2023 for leave taken 
before April 1, 2021, and for leave 
taken after March 31, 2021, and 
before October 1, 2021, are now 
reported on Schedule 3, line 13z. 
See Schedule H (Form 1040) for 
more information.
Alternative motor vehicle credit. 
The alternative motor vehicle credit 
has expired.
Self-employed health insurance 
deduction. Use Form 7206 and 
its instructions to determine any 
amount of the self-employed health 
insurance deduction you may be 
able to claim and report on Sched-
ule 1 (Form 1040), line 17.
Qualified charitable distribution 
one-time election.  Beginning in 
2023, you can elect to make a 
one-time distribution up to $50,000 
from an individual retirement ac-
count to charities through a charita-
ble remainder unitrust, or a charita-
ble gift annuity funded only by 
qualified distributions. See Pub. 
590-B for more information.
Increase in required minimum 
distribution age. If you reach age 
72 in 2023, the required beginning 
date for your first required mini-
mum distribution is April 1, 2025. 
See Pub. 590–B for more informa-
tion.
IRA contribution limit increased. 
Beginning in 2023, the IRA contri-
bution limit is increased to $6,500 
($7,500 for individuals age 50 or 
older) from $6,000 ($7,000 for indi-
viduals age 50 or older).
Deferred compensation contri-
bution limit increased.  If you 
participate in a 401(k) plan, 403(b) 
plan, or the federal government’s 
Thrift Savings Plan, the total an-
nual amount you can contribute is 
increased to $22,500 ($30,000 if 
age 50 or older) for 2023. This also 
applies to most 457 plans.
Insurance premiums for retired 
public safety officers. Eligible re-
tired public safety officers can ex-
clude from income up to $3,000 of 
distributions from their eligible re-
tirement plan that is paid directly to 
them and is used to pay for health 
insurance premiums.
Exception to the 10% additional 
tax for early distributions.  The 
exception to the 10% additional tax 
for early distributions include the 
following.
• Distributions from a retirement 
plan in connection with feder-
ally declared disasters.
• Distribution from a retirement 
plan made to someone who is 
terminally ill.
• Distributions to firefighters at 
age 50 or with 25 years of 
service under the plan.
See Form 5329 and Pub. 590-B 
for more information.
Direct File.  The IRS is taking 
steps to implement a Direct File pi-
lot during the 2024 filing season. 
This pilot will give eligible taxpay-
ers an option to prepare and elec-
tronically file their 2023 federal tax 
returns directly with the IRS for 
free. The Direct File pilot will be of-
fered to eligible taxpayers in partic-
ipating states who have relatively 
simple tax returns reporting only 
certain types of income and claim-
ing limited credits and deductions. 
See IRS.gov/DirectFile for pilot in-
formation and updates.
Health flexible spending ar-
rangements (health FSAs) un-
der cafeteria plans. For tax years 
beginning in 2023, the dollar limita-
tion under section 1251(i) on volun-
tary employee salary reductions for 
contributions to health FSAs is 
$3,050.
Temporary allowance of 100% 
business meal deduction has 
expired. Section 210 of the T ax-
payer Certainty and Disaster T ax 
Relief Act of 2020 provided for the 
temporary allowance of a 100% 
business meal deduction for food 
or beverages provided by a restau-
rant and paid or incurred after De-
cember 31, 2020, and before Janu-
ary 1, 2023.
Disaster tax relief.  The special 
rules that provide for tax -favored 
withdrawals and repayments now 
apply to disasters that occur on or 
after January 26, 2021. See Disas-
ter-Related Relief in Pub. 590-B for 
more information.
Distributions to terminally ill in-
dividuals. The exception to the 
10% additional tax for early distri-
butions is expanded to apply to 
distributions made after December 
29, 2022, to an individual who has 
been certified by a physician as 
having a terminal illness. See Pub. 
590-B for more information.
Certain corrective distributions 
not subject to 10% early distri-
bution tax.  Beginning with distri-
butions made on December 29, 
2022, and after, the 10% additional 
tax on early distributions will not 
apply to the income attributed to a 
corrective IRA distribution, as long 
as the corrective distribution is 
made on or before the due date (in-
cluding extensions) of the income 
tax return.
Delayed refund for returns 
claiming the additional child tax 
credit (ACTC). The IRS cannot is-
sue refunds before mid -February 
2024 for returns that properly claim 
ACTC. This time frame applies to 
the entire refund, not just the por-
tion associated with ACTC.
Standard mileage rate.  The 
2023 rate for business use of a ve-
hicle is 65.5 cents a mile. The 2023 
rate for use of your vehicle to do 
volunteer work for certain charita-
ble organizations is 14 cents a 
mile. The 2023 rate for operating 
expenses for a car when you use it 
for medical reasons is 22 cents a 
mile.
Modified adjusted gross income 
(AGI) limit for traditional IRA 
contributions. For 2023, if you 
are covered by a retirement plan at 
work, your deduction for contribu-
tions to a traditional IRA is reduced 
(phased out) if your modified AGI 
is:
• More than $116,000 but less 
than $136,000 for a married 
couple filing a joint return or a 
qualifying surviving spouse,
• More than $73,000 but less 
than $83,000 for a single indi-
vidual or head of household, 
or
• Less than $10,000 for a mar-
ried individual filing a separate 
return.
If you either live with your spouse 
or file a joint return, and your 
spouse is covered by a retirement 
plan at work but you aren't, your 
deduction is phased out if your 
modified AGI is more than 
$218,000 but less than $228,000. If 
your modified AGI is $228,000 or 
more, you can't take a deduction 
for contributions to a traditional 
IRA. See How Much Can Y ou De-
duct in chapter 9, later.
Modified AGI limit for Roth IRA 
contributions.  For 2023, your 
Roth IRA contribution limit is re-
duced (phased out) in the following 
situations.
• Y our filing status is married fil-
ing jointly or qualifying surviv-
ing spouse and your modified 
Publication 17 (2023) 1

Page 4 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
AGI is at least $218,000. Y ou 
can't make a Roth IRA contri-
bution if your modified AGI is 
$228,000 or more.
• Y our filing status is single, 
head of household, or married 
filing separately and you didn't 
live with your spouse at any 
time in 2023 and your modi-
fied AGI is at least $138,000. 
Y ou can't make a Roth IRA 
contribution if your modified 
AGI is $153,000 or more.
• Y our filing status is married fil-
ing separately, you lived with 
your spouse at any time dur-
ing the year, and your modi-
fied AGI is more than zero. 
Y ou can't make a Roth IRA 
contribution if your modified 
AGI is $10,000 or more. See 
Can Y ou Contribute to a Roth 
IRA in chapter 9, later.
2024 modified AGI limits.  Y ou 
can find information about the 2024 
contribution and modified AGI lim-
its in Pub. 590-A.
Tax law changes for 2024. When 
you figure how much income tax 
you want withheld from your pay 
and when you figure your estima-
ted tax, consider tax law changes 
effective in 2024. For more infor-
mation, see Pub. 505.
Alternative minimum tax (AMT) 
exemption amount increased. 
The AMT exemption amount is in-
creased to $81,300 ($126,500 if 
married filing jointly or qualifying 
surviving spouse; $63,250 if mar-
ried filing separately). The income 
levels at which the AMT exemption 
begins to phase out have in-
creased to $578,150 ($1,156,300 if 
married filing jointly or qualifying 
surviving spouse).
Reporting requirements for 
Form 1099-K. Form 1099-K is is-
sued by third party settlement or-
ganizations and credit card compa-
nies to report payment transactions 
made to you for goods and serv-
ices.
Y ou must report all income on 
your tax return unless excluded by 
law, whether you received the in-
come electronically or not, and 
whether you received a Form 
1099-K or not. The box 1a and 
other amounts reported on Form 
1099-K are additional pieces of in-
formation to help determine the 
correct amounts to report on your 
return.
If you received a Form 1099 -K 
that shows payments you didn’t re-
ceive or is otherwise incorrect, 
contact the Form 1099 -K issuer. 
Don’t contact the IRS; the IRS can’t 
correct an incorrect Form 1099 -K. 
If you can’t get it corrected, or you 
sold a personal item at a loss, see 
the instructions for Schedule 1, 
lines 8z and 24z, later, for more re-
porting information.
All IRS information about Form 
1099-K is available by going to 
IRS.gov/1099K.
Reminders
Listed below are important 
reminders and other items that may 
help you file your 2023 tax return. 
Many of these items are explained 
in more detail later in this 
publication.
Publication 17 changes.  We re-
moved the following 2019 chapters 
from this publication: 6, 8, 9, 10, 
13, 14, 15, 16, 18, 19, 20, 22, 24, 
25, 26, 29, 30, 31, 33, 34, 35, and 
36. Y ou can find most of the infor-
mation previously found in those 
chapters in the primary publication. 
Please see Publication 17 
Changes, later.
Special rules for eligible gains 
invested in Qualified Opportu-
nity Funds. If you have an eligible 
gain, you can invest that gain into a 
Qualified Opportunity Fund (QOF) 
and elect to defer part or all of the 
gain that is otherwise includible in 
income. The gain is deferred until 
the date you sell or exchange the 
investment or December 31, 2026, 
whichever is earlier. Y ou may also 
be able to permanently exclude 
gain from the sale or exchange of 
an investment in a QOF if the in-
vestment is held for at least 10 
years. For information about what 
types of gains entitle you to elect 
these special rules, see the In-
structions for Schedule D (Form 
1040). For information on how to 
elect to use these special rules, 
see the Instructions for Form 8949.
Secure your tax records from 
identity theft. Identity theft occurs 
when someone uses your personal 
information, such as your name, 
SSN, or other identifying informa-
tion, without your permission, to 
commit fraud or other crimes. An 
identity thief may use your SSN to 
get a job or may file a tax return us-
ing your SSN to receive a refund. 
For more information about identity 
theft and how to reduce your risk 
from it, see chapter 1, later.
Taxpayer identification num-
bers. Y ou must provide the tax-
payer identification number for 
each person for whom you claim 
certain tax benefits. This applies 
even if the person was born in 
2023. Generally, this number is the 
person's SSN. See chapter 1, later.
Filing status name changed to 
qualifying surviving spouse. 
The filing status qualifying 
widow(er) is now called qualifying 
surviving spouse. The rules for the 
filing status have not changed. The 
same rules that applied for qualify-
ing widow(er) apply to qualifying 
surviving spouse.
New lines 1a through 1z on 
Forms 1040 and 1040 -SR.  This 
year, line 1 is expanded and there 
are new lines 1a through 1z. Some 
amounts that in prior years were re-
ported on Form 1040, and some 
amounts reported on Form 
1040-SR, are now reported on 
Schedule 1.
• Scholarships and fellowship 
grants are now reported on 
Schedule 1, line 8r.
• Pension or annuity from a 
nonqualified deferred com-
pensation plan or a non-gov-
ernmental section 457 plan 
are now reported on Schedule 
1, line 8t.
• Wages earned while incarcer-
ated are now reported on 
Schedule 1, line 8u.
New line 6c on Forms 1040 and 
1040-SR. A checkbox was added 
on line 6c. T axpayers who elect to 
use the lump -sum election method 
for their benefits will check this box. 
See Instructions for Form 1040.
Child tax credit (CTC) enhance-
ments have expired.  Many 
changes to the CTC for 2021 im-
plemented by the American Res-
cue Plan Act of (the ARP) 2021 
have expired. For tax year 2023, 
the follow apply.
• The enhanced credit allowed 
for qualifying children under 
age 6 and children under age 
18 has expired. For 2023, the 
initial amount of the CTC is 
$2,000 for each qualifying 
child. The credit amount be-
gins to phase out where modi-
fied AGI income exceeds 
$200,000 ($400,000 in the 
case of a joint return). The 
amount of the CTC that can 
be claimed as a refundable 
credit is limited as it was in 
2020 except that the maxi-
mum ACTC amount for each 
qualifying child increased to 
$1,600.
• The increased age allowance 
for a qualifying child has ex-
pired. A child must be under 
age 17 at the end of 2023 to 
be a qualifying child.
For more information, see the In-
structions for Schedule 8812 (Form 
1040).
Changes to the earned income 
credit (EIC).  The enhancements 
for taxpayers without a qualifying 
child implemented by the ARP 
don't apply for 2023. This means, 
to claim the EIC without a qualify-
ing child in 2023, you must be at 
least age 25 but under age 65 at 
the end of 2023. If you are married 
filing a joint return, either you or 
your spouse must be at least age 
25 but under age 65 at the end of 
2023. It doesn't matter which 
spouse meets the age require-
ment, as long as one of the spou-
ses does.
Premium tax credit (PTC).  The 
ARP expanded the PTC by elimi-
nating the limitation that a taxpay-
er's household income may not ex-
ceed 400% of the federal poverty 
line and generally increases the 
credit amounts. For more informa-
tion, see Pub. 974 and Form 8962 
and its instructions.
Credits for sick and family leave 
for certain self -employed indi-
viduals are not available.  The 
credits for sick and family leave for 
certain self -employed individuals 
were not extended and you can no 
longer claim these credits.
Identity verification.  The IRS 
launched an improved identity veri-
fication and sign -in process that 
enables more people to securely 
access and use IRS online tools 
and applications. T o provide verifi-
cation services, the IRS is using 
ID.me, a trusted technology pro-
vider. The new process is one 
more step the IRS is taking to en-
sure that taxpayer information is 
provided only to the person who le-
gally has a right to the data. T ax-
payers using the new mo-
bile-friendly verification procedure 
can gain entry to existing IRS on-
line services such as the Child T ax 
Credit Update Portal , Online Ac-
count, Get T ranscript Online, Get 
an Identity Protection PIN (IP PIN) , 
and Online Payment Agreement . 
Additional IRS applications will 
transition to the new method over 
the next year. Each online service 
will also provide information that 
will instruct taxpayers on the steps 
they need to follow for access to 
the service. Y ou can also see 
IR-2021-228 for more information.
Adoption credit.  The adoption 
credit and the exclusion for em-
ployer-provided adoption benefits 
are both $15,950 per eligible child 
2 Publication 17 (2023)

Page 5 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
in 2023. The amount begins to 
phase out if you have modified AGI 
in excess of $239,230 and is com-
pletely phased out if your modified 
AGI is $279,230 or more.
ACTC and bona fide residents 
of Puerto Rico.  Bona fide resi-
dents of Puerto Rico are no longer 
required to have three or more 
qualifying children to be eligible to 
claim the ACTC. Bona fide resi-
dents of Puerto Rico may be eligi-
ble to claim the ACTC if they have 
one or more qualifying children.
Foreign-source income.  If you 
are a U.S. citizen with income from 
sources outside the United States 
(foreign income), you must report 
all such income on your tax return 
unless it is exempt by law or a tax 
treaty. This is true whether you live 
inside or outside the United States 
and whether or not you receive a 
Form W -2 or Form 1099 from the 
foreign payer. This applies to 
earned income (such as wages 
and tips) as well as unearned in-
come (such as interest, dividends, 
capital gains, pensions, rents, and 
royalties).
If you live outside the United 
States, you may be able to exclude 
part or all of your foreign earned in-
come. For details, see Pub. 54.
Foreign financial assets.  If you 
had foreign financial assets in 
2023, you may have to file Form 
8938 with your return. See Form 
8938 and its instructions or go to 
IRS.gov/Form8938 for details.
Automatic 6-month extension to 
file tax return. Y ou can get an au-
tomatic 6 -month extension of time 
to file your tax return. See chap-
ter 1, later.
Payment of taxes.  Y ou can pay 
your taxes by making electronic 
payments online; from a mobile de-
vice using the IRS2Go app; or in 
cash, or by check or money order. 
Paying electronically is quick, easy, 
and faster than mailing in a check 
or money order. See chapter 1 , 
later.
Faster ways to file your return. 
The IRS offers fast, accurate ways 
to file your tax return information 
without filing a paper tax return. 
Y ou can use IRS e-file (electronic 
filing). See chapter 1, later.
Free electronic filing.  Y ou may 
be able to file your 2023 taxes on-
line for free. See chapter 1, later.
Change of address.  If you 
change your address, notify the 
IRS. See chapter 1, later.
Refund on a late -filed return.  If 
you were due a refund but you did 
not file a return, you must generally 
file your return within 3 years from 
the date the return was due (includ-
ing extensions) to get that refund. 
See chapter 1, later.
Frivolous tax returns.  The IRS 
has published a list of positions 
that are identified as frivolous. The 
penalty for filing a frivolous tax re-
turn is $5,000. See chapter 1, later.
Filing erroneous claim for re-
fund or credit.  Y ou may have to 
pay a penalty if you file an errone-
ous claim for refund or credit. See 
chapter 1, later.
Access your online account. 
Y ou must authenticate your identity. 
T o securely log into your federal tax 
account, go to IRS.gov/Account. 
View the amount you owe, review 
your last 5 years of payment his-
tory, access online payment op-
tions, and create or modify an on-
line payment agreement. Y ou can 
also access your tax records on-
line.
Health care coverage.  If you 
need health care coverage, go to 
HealthCare.gov to learn about 
health insurance options for you 
and your family, how to buy health 
insurance, and how you might 
qualify to get financial assistance 
to buy health insurance.
Disclosure, Privacy Act, and pa-
perwork reduction information. 
The IRS Restructuring and Reform 
Act of 1998, the Privacy Act of 
1974, and the Paperwork Reduc-
tion Act of 1980 require that when 
we ask you for information, we 
must first tell you what our legal 
right is to ask for the information, 
why we are asking for it, how it will 
be used, what could happen if we 
do not receive it, and whether your 
response is voluntary, required to 
obtain a benefit, or mandatory un-
der the law. A complete statement 
on this subject can be found in your 
tax form instructions.
Preparer e-file mandate. Most 
paid preparers must e-file returns 
they prepare and file. Y our preparer 
may make you aware of this re-
quirement and the options availa-
ble to you.
Treasury Inspector General for 
Tax Administration.  If you want 
to confidentially report misconduct, 
waste, fraud, or abuse by an IRS 
employee, you can call 
800-366-4484 (call 800 -877-8339 
if you are deaf, hard of hearing, or 
have a speech disability, and are 
using TTY/TDD equipment). Y ou 
can remain anonymous.
Photographs of missing chil-
dren. The IRS is a proud partner 
with the National Center for 
Missing & Exploited Children® 
(NCMEC). Photographs of missing 
children selected by the Center 
may appear in this publication on 
pages that would otherwise be 
blank. Y ou can help bring these 
children home by looking at the 
photographs and calling 
1-800-THE-LOST 
(1-800-843-5678) if you recognize 
a child.
Introduction
This publication covers the general 
rules for filing a federal income tax 
return. It supplements the informa-
tion contained in your tax form in-
structions. It explains the tax law to 
make sure you pay only the tax you 
owe and no more.
How this publication is ar-
ranged. Pub. 17 closely follows 
Form 1040, U.S. Individual Income 
T ax Return, and Form 1040 -SR, 
U.S. T ax Return for Seniors, and 
their three Schedules 1 through 3. 
Pub. 17 is divided into four parts. 
Each part is further divided into 
chapters, most of which generally 
discuss one line of the form or one 
line of one of the three schedules. 
The introduction at the beginning 
of each part lists the schedule(s) 
discussed in that part.
The table of contents inside the 
front cover, the introduction to each 
part, and the index in the back of 
the publication are useful tools to 
help you find the information you 
need.
What is in this publication.  This 
publication begins with the rules for 
filing a tax return. It explains:
1. Who must file a return,
2. When the return is due,
3. How to e-file your return, and
4. Other general information.
It will help you identify which filing 
status you qualify for, whether you 
can claim any dependents, and 
whether the income you receive is 
taxable. The publication goes on to 
explain the standard deduction, the 
kinds of expenses you may be able 
to deduct, and the various kinds of 
credits you may be able to take to 
reduce your tax.
Throughout this publication are 
examples showing how the tax law 
applies in typical situations. Also 
throughout this publication are 
flowcharts and tables that present 
tax information in an easy -to-un-
derstand manner.
Many of the subjects discussed 
in this publication are discussed in 
greater detail in other IRS publica-
tions. References to those other 
publications are provided for your 
information.
Icons. Small graphic symbols, 
or icons, are used to draw your at-
tention to special information. See 
T able 1 for an explanation of each 
icon used in this publication.
What is not covered in this pub-
lication. Some material that you 
may find helpful is not included in 
this publication but can be found in 
your tax form instructions booklet. 
This includes lists of:
• Where to report certain items 
shown on information docu-
ments, and
• T ax T opics you can read at 
IRS.gov/T axT opics.
If you operate your own busi-
ness or have other self -employ-
ment income, such as from baby-
sitting or selling crafts, see the 
following publications for more in-
formation.
• Pub. 334, T ax Guide for Small 
Business.
• Pub. 225, Farmer's T ax Guide.
• Pub. 587, Business Use of 
Y our Home.
Help from the IRS.  There are 
many ways you can get help from 
the IRS. These are explained un-
der How T o Get T ax Help at the 
end of this publication.
Comments and suggestions. 
We welcome your comments about 
this publication and suggestions for 
future editions.
Y ou can send us comments 
through IRS.gov/FormComments. 
Or, you can write to the Internal 
Revenue Service, T ax Forms and 
Publications, 1111 Constitution 
Ave. NW, IR -6526, Washington, 
DC 20224.
Although we can’t respond indi-
vidually to each comment received, 
we do appreciate your feedback 
and will consider your comments 
and suggestions as we revise our 
tax forms, instructions, and publi-
cations. Don’t send tax questions, 
tax returns, or payments to the 
above address.
Getting answers to your tax 
questions. If you have a tax 
Publication 17 (2023) 3

Page 6 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
question not answered by this pub-
lication or the How T o Get T ax Help 
section at the end of this publica-
tion, go to the IRS Interactive T ax 
Assistant page at IRS.gov/Help/ITA 
where you can find topics by using 
the search feature or viewing the 
categories listed.
Getting tax forms, instruc-
tions, and publications.  Go to 
IRS.gov/Forms to download cur-
rent and prior -year forms, instruc-
tions, and publications.
Ordering tax forms, instruc-
tions, and publications.  Go to 
IRS.gov/OrderForms to order cur-
rent forms, instructions, and publi-
cations; call 800-829-3676 to order 
prior-year forms and instructions. 
The IRS will process your order for 
forms and publications as soon as 
possible. Don’t resubmit requests 
you’ve already sent us. Y ou can get 
forms and publications faster on-
line.
IRS mission.  Provide America's 
taxpayers top -quality service by 
helping them understand and meet 
their tax responsibilities and en-
force the law with integrity and fair-
ness to all.
Publication 17 Changes
Note. This publication does not cover the topics listed in the following table. Please see the primary publication.
Chapter Removed Title of Chapter Primary Source
6 Tip Income Pub. 531, Reporting Tip Income
8 Dividends and Other Distributions Pub. 550, Investment Income and 
Expenses
9 Rental Income and Expenses Pub. 527, Residential Rental Property 
(Including Rental of Vacation Homes)
10 Retirement Plans, Pensions, and Annuities Pub. 575, Pension and Annuity Income
13 Basis of Property Pub. 551, Basis of Assets
14 Sale of Property Pub. 550
15 Selling Y our Home Pub. 523, Selling Y our Home
16 Reporting Gains and Losses Pub. 550
18 Alimony Pub. 504, Divorced or Separated 
Individuals
19 Education-Related Adjustments Pub. 970, T ax Benefits for Education
20 Other Adjustments to Income Pub. 463, T ravel, Gift, and Car Expenses
22 Medical and Dental Expenses Pub. 502, Medical and Dental Expenses
24 Interest Expense Pub. 550
Pub. 936, Home Mortgage Interest 
Deduction
25 Charitable Contributions Pub. 561, Determining the Value of 
Donated Property
Pub. 526, Charitable Contributions
26 Nonbusiness Casualty and Theft Losses Pub. 547, Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
29 T ax on Unearned Income of Certain Minor 
Children
Form 8615, T ax for Certain Children Who 
Have Unearned Income
30 Child and Dependent Care Credit Pub. 503, Child and Dependent Care 
Expenses
31 Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled Pub. 524, Credit for the Elderly or the 
Disabled
33 Education Credits Pub. 970, T ax Benefits for Education
34 Earned Income Credit (EIC) Pub. 596, Earned Income Credit (EIC)
35 Premium T ax Credit Pub. 974, Premium T ax Credit (PTC)
36 Other Credits
4 Publication 17 (2023)

Page 7 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
T able 1. Legend of Icons
Icon Explanation
CAUTION
!
Items that may cause you particular problems, or an alert about pending legislation that may be enacted after 
this publication goes to print.
An Internet site or an email address.
An address you may need.
RECORDS
Items you should keep in your personal records.
Items you may need to figure or a worksheet you may need to complete and keep for your records.
An important phone number.
TIP
Helpful information you may need.
Publication 17 (2023) 5

Part One.
The Income Tax 
Return
The four chapters in this part provide basic information on the tax system. 
They take you through the first steps of filling out a tax return. They also 
provide information about dependents, and discuss recordkeeping 
requirements, IRS e-file (electronic filing), certain penalties, and the two 
methods used to pay tax during the year: withholding and estimated tax.
The Form 1040 and Form 1040-SR schedules that are discussed in these 
chapters are:
• Schedule 1, Additional Income and Adjustments to Income; and
• Schedule 3 (Part II), Other Payments and Refundable Credits.
1.
Filing 
Information
What's New
Due date of return.  File Form 1040 or 
1040-SR by April 15, 2024. If you live in Maine 
or Massachusetts, you have until April 17, 2024, 
because of the Patriots’ Day and Emancipation 
Day holidays.
New lines on Schedule 3. This year Schedule 
3 has new lines.
• Line 5a will be used to report the residen-
tial clean energy credit from Form 5695.
• Line 5b will be used to report the energy 
efficient home improvement credit from 
Form 5695.
• Line 6m will be used to report the credit for 
previously owned clean vehicles from Form 
8936.
• Line 13c will be used to report the elective 
payment election amount from Form 3800.
Who must file.  Generally, the amount of in-
come you can receive before you must file a re-
turn has been increased. See T able 1-1, T a-
ble 1-2, and T able 1-3 for the specific amounts.
Reminders
File online.  Rather than filing a return on pa-
per, you may be able to file electronically using 
IRS e-file. For more information, see Why 
Should I File Electronically, later.
Access your online account (individual tax-
payers only).  Go to IRS.gov/Account to se-
curely access information about your federal tax 
account.
• View the amount you owe and a break-
down by tax year.
• See payment plan details or apply for a 
new payment plan.
• Make a payment, view 5 years of payment 
history and any pending or scheduled pay-
ments.
• Access your tax records, including key 
data from your most recent tax return, your 
economic impact payment amounts, and 
transcripts.
• View digital copies of select notices from 
the IRS.
• Approve or reject authorization requests 
from tax professionals.
• View your address on file or manage your 
communication preferences.
• Go to IRS.gov/SecureAccess to view the 
required identity authentication process.
Change of address.  If you change your ad-
dress, you should notify the IRS. Y ou can use 
Form 8822 to notify the IRS of the change. See 
Change of Address, later, under What Happens 
After I File.
Enter your social security number. Y ou must 
enter your social security number (SSN) in the 
spaces provided on your tax return. If you file a 
joint return, enter the SSNs in the same order 
as the names.
Direct deposit of refund.  Instead of getting a 
paper check, you may be able to have your re-
fund deposited directly into your account at a 
bank or other financial institution. See Direct 
Deposit under Refunds, later. If you choose di-
rect deposit of your refund, you may be able to 
split the refund among two or three accounts.
Pay online or by phone. If you owe additional 
tax, you may be able to pay online or by phone. 
See How T o Pay, later.
Installment agreement.  If you can’t pay the 
full amount due with your return, you may ask to 
make monthly installment payments. See In-
stallment Agreement , later, under Amount Y ou 
Owe. Y ou may be able to apply online for a pay-
ment agreement if you owe federal tax, interest, 
and penalties.
Automatic 6 -month extension.  Y ou can get 
an automatic 6 -month extension to file your tax 
return if, no later than the date your return is 
due, you file Form 4868. See Automatic 
Extension, later.
Service in combat zone.  Y ou are allowed ex-
tra time to take care of your tax matters if you 
are a member of the Armed Forces who served 
in a combat zone, or if you served in a combat 
zone in support of the Armed Forces. See Indi-
viduals Serving in Combat Zone , later, under 
When Do I Have T o File.
Adoption taxpayer identification number.  If 
a child has been placed in your home for purpo-
ses of legal adoption and you won't be able to 
get a social security number for the child in time 
to file your return, you may be able to get an 
adoption taxpayer identification number (ATIN). 
For more information, see Social Security Num-
ber (SSN), later.
Taxpayer identification number for aliens. If 
you or your dependent is a nonresident or resi-
dent alien who doesn't have and isn't eligible to 
get a social security number, file Form W -7, Ap-
plication for IRS Individual T axpayer Identifica-
tion Number, with the IRS. For more informa-
tion, see Social Security Number (SSN), later.
Individual taxpayer identification number 
(ITIN) renewal. Some ITINs must be renewed. 
If you haven't used your ITIN on a U.S. tax re-
turn at least once for tax years 2020, 2021, or 
2022, it has expired and must be renewed if you 
need to file a U.S. federal tax return. Y ou don't 
need to renew your ITIN if you don't need to file 
a federal tax return. Y ou can find more informa-
tion at IRS.gov/ITIN.
ITINs assigned before 2013 have ex-
pired and must be renewed if you need 
to file a tax return. If you previously 
submitted a renewal application and it was ap-
proved, you do not need to renew again unless 
you haven't used your ITIN on a federal tax re-
turn at least once for tax years 2020, 2021, or 
2022.
Frivolous tax submissions.  The IRS has 
published a list of positions that are identified as 
frivolous. The penalty for filing a frivolous tax re-
turn is $5,000. Also, the $5,000 penalty will ap-
ply to other specified frivolous submissions. For 
more information, see Civil Penalties, later.
Introduction
This chapter discusses the following topics.
• Whether you have to file a return.
TIP
Page 8 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
6 Chapter 1 Filing Information Publication 17 (2023)

• How to file electronically.
• How to file for free.
• When, how, and where to file your return.
• What happens if you pay too little or too 
much tax.
• What records you should keep and how 
long you should keep them.
• How you can change a return you have al-
ready filed.
Do I Have To
File a Return?
Y ou must file a federal income tax return if you 
are a citizen or resident of the United States or 
a resident of Puerto Rico and you meet the filing 
requirements for any of the following categories 
that apply to you.
1. Individuals in general. (There are special 
rules for individuals whose spouse has 
died, executors, administrators, legal rep-
resentatives, U.S. citizens and residents 
living outside the United States, residents 
of Puerto Rico, and individuals with in-
come from U.S. territories.)
2. Dependents.
3. Certain children under age 19 or full-time 
students.
4. Self-employed persons.
5. Aliens.
The filing requirements for each category are 
explained in this chapter.
The filing requirements apply even if you 
don't owe tax.
Even if you don't have to file a return, it 
may be to your advantage to do so. 
See Who Should File, later.
File only one federal income tax return 
for the year regardless of how many 
jobs you had, how many Forms W -2 
you received, or how many states you lived in 
during the year. Don't file more than one original 
return for the same year, even if you haven’t re-
ceived your refund or haven’t heard from the 
IRS since you filed.
Individuals—In General
If you are a U.S. citizen or resident, whether you 
must file a return depends on three factors.
1. Y our gross income.
2. Y our filing status.
3. Y our age.
T o find out whether you must file, see T a-
ble 1-1, T able 1-2, and T able 1-3. Even if no ta-
ble shows that you must file, you may need to 
file to get money back. See Who Should File , 
later.
Gross income.  This includes all income you 
receive in the form of money, goods, property, 
and services that isn't exempt from tax. It also 
includes income from sources outside the Uni-
ted States or from the sale of your main home 
TIP
CAUTION
!
(even if you can exclude all or part of it). Include 
part of your social security benefits if:
1. Y ou were married, filing a separate return, 
and you lived with your spouse at any time 
during 2023; or
2. Half of your social security benefits plus 
your other gross income and any tax-ex-
empt interest is more than $25,000 
($32,000 if married filing jointly).
If either (1) or (2) applies, see the Instructions 
for Form 1040 or Pub. 915 to figure the social 
security benefits you must include in gross in-
come.
Common types of income are discussed in 
Part T wo of this publication.
Community property states.  Community 
property states include Arizona, California, 
Idaho, Louisiana, Nevada, New Mexico, T exas, 
Washington, and Wisconsin. If you and your 
spouse lived in a community property state, you 
must usually follow state law to determine what 
is community property and what is separate in-
come. For details, see Form 8958 and Pub. 
555.
Nevada, Washington, and California do-
mestic partners.  A registered domestic part-
ner in Nevada, Washington, or California must 
generally report half the combined community 
income of the individual and their domestic 
partner. See Pub. 555.
Self-employed individuals.  If you are 
self-employed, your gross income includes the 
amount on line 7 of Schedule C (Form 1040), 
Profit or Loss From Business; and line 9 of 
Schedule F (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From 
Farming. See Self-Employed Persons, later, for 
more information about your filing requirements.
If you don't report all of your self -em-
ployment income, your social security 
benefits may be lower when you retire.
Filing status.  Y our filing status depends on 
whether you are single or married and on your 
family situation. Y our filing status is determined 
on the last day of your tax year, which is De-
cember 31 for most taxpayers. See chapter 2 
for an explanation of each filing status.
Age. If you are 65 or older at the end of the 
year, you can generally have a higher amount of 
gross income than other taxpayers before you 
must file. See T able 1-1. Y ou are considered 65 
on the day before your 65th birthday. For exam-
ple, if your 65th birthday is on January 1, 2024, 
you are considered 65 for 2023.
Surviving Spouses,
Executors, Administrators,
and Legal Representatives
Y ou must file a final return for a decedent (a per-
son who died) if both of the following are true.
• Y our spouse died in 2023 or you are the 
executor, administrator, or legal represen-
tative.
• The decedent met the filing requirements 
at the date of death.
CAUTION
!
T able 1-1.2023 Filing Requirements for Most Taxpayers
IF your filing status is...
AND at the end of 2023 you 
were...*
THEN file a return if 
your gross income 
was at least...**
Single under 65 $13,850
65 or older $15,700
Married filing jointly*** under 65 (both spouses) $27,700
65 or older (one spouse) $29,200
65 or older (both spouses) $30,700
Married filing separately any age $5 
Head of household under 65 $20,800
65 or older $22,650
Qualifying surviving spouse under 65 $27,700
65 or older $29,200
* If you were born on January 1, 1959, you are considered to be age 65 at the end of 2023. (If your spouse 
died in 2023 or if you are preparing a return for someone who died in 2023, see Pub. 501.)
** Gross income means all income you received in the form of money, goods, property, and services that 
isn't exempt from tax, including any income from sources outside the United States or from the sale of 
your main home (even if you can exclude part or all of it). Don't include any social security benefits unless 
(a) you are married filing a separate return and you lived with your spouse at any time during 2023, or (b) 
one-half of your social security benefits plus your other gross income and any tax-exempt interest is more 
than $25,000 ($32,000 if married filing jointly). If (a) or (b) applies, see the Instructions for Form 1040 or 
Pub. 915 to figure the taxable part of social security benefits you must include in gross income. Gross 
income includes gains, but not losses, reported on Form 8949 or Schedule D. Gross income from a 
business means, for example, the amount on Schedule C, line 7, or Schedule F , line 9. But, in figuring 
gross income, don't reduce your income by any losses, including any loss on Schedule C, line 7, or 
Schedule F , line 9.
*** If you didn't live with your spouse at the end of 2023 (or on the date your spouse died) and your gross 
income was at least $5, you must file a return regardless of your age.
Page 9 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17 (2023) Chapter 1 Filing Information 7

For more information on rules for filing a de-
cedent's final return, see Pub. 559.
U.S. Citizens and Resident Aliens 
Living Abroad
T o determine whether you must file a return, in-
clude in your gross income any income you re-
ceived abroad, including any income you can 
exclude under the foreign earned income exclu-
sion. For information on special tax rules that 
may apply to you, see Pub. 54. It is available on-
line and at most U.S. embassies and consu-
lates. See How T o Get T ax Help in the back of 
this publication.
Residents of Puerto Rico
If you are a U.S. citizen and also a bona fide 
resident of Puerto Rico, you must generally file 
a U.S. income tax return for any year in which 
you meet the income requirements. This is in 
addition to any legal requirement you may have 
to file an income tax return with Puerto Rico.
If you are a bona fide resident of Puerto Rico 
for the entire year, your U.S. gross income 
doesn't include income from sources within
Puerto Rico. It does, however, include any in-
come you received for your services as an em-
ployee of the United States or a U.S. agency. If 
you receive income from Puerto Rican sources 
that isn't subject to U.S. tax, you must reduce 
your standard deduction. As a result, the 
amount of income you must have before you are 
required to file a U.S. income tax return is lower 
than the applicable amount in T able 1-1 or T a-
ble 1-2. For more information, see Pub. 570.
Individuals With Income From
U.S. Territories
If you had income from Guam, the Common-
wealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, Ameri-
can Samoa, or the U.S. Virgin Islands, special 
rules may apply when determining whether you 
must file a U.S. federal income tax return. In ad-
dition, you may have to file a return with the indi-
vidual island government. See Pub. 570 for 
more information.
Dependents
If you are a dependent (one who meets the de-
pendency tests in chapter 3 ), see T able 1-2 to 
find out whether you must file a return. Y ou must 
also file if your situation is described in T a-
ble 1-3.
Responsibility of parent. Generally, a child is 
responsible for filing their own tax return and for 
paying any tax on the return. If a dependent 
child must file an income tax return but can’t file 
due to age or any other reason, then a parent, 
guardian, or other legally responsible person 
must file it for the child. If the child can’t sign the 
return, the parent or guardian must sign the 
child's name followed by the words “By (your 
signature), parent for minor child.”
Child's earnings. Amounts a child earns by 
performing services are included in the child’s 
gross income and not the gross income of the 
parent. This is true even if under local law the 
child's parent has the right to the earnings and 
may actually have received them. But if the child 
doesn't pay the tax due on this income, the pa-
rent is liable for the tax.
Certain Children Under 
Age 19 or Full-Time 
Students
If a child's only income is interest and dividends 
(including capital gain distributions and Alaska 
Permanent Fund dividends), the child was un-
der age 19 at the end of 2023 or was a full -time 
student under age 24 at the end of 2023, and 
certain other conditions are met, a parent can 
elect to include the child's income on the pa-
rent's return. If this election is made, the child 
doesn't have to file a return. See Instructions for 
Form 8814, Parents’ Election T o Report Child’s 
Interest and Dividends.
Self-Employed Persons
Y ou are self-employed if you:
• Carry on a trade or business as a sole pro-
prietor,
• Are an independent contractor,
• Are a member of a partnership, or
• Are in business for yourself in any other 
way.
Self-employment can include work in addi-
tion to your regular full -time business activities, 
such as certain part -time work you do at home 
or in addition to your regular job. 
Y ou must file a return if your gross income is 
at least as much as the filing requirement 
amount for your filing status and age (shown in 
T able 1-1). Also, you must file Form 1040 or 
1040-SR and Schedule SE (Form 1040), 
Self-Employment T ax, if:
1. Y our net earnings from self-employment 
(excluding church employee income) were 
$400 or more, or
2. Y ou had church employee income of 
$108.28 or more. (See T able 1-3.)
Use Schedule SE (Form 1040) to figure your 
self-employment tax. Self -employment tax is 
comparable to the social security and Medicare 
tax withheld from an employee's wages. For 
more information about this tax, see Pub. 334.
Employees of foreign governments or in-
ternational organizations.  If you are a U.S. 
citizen who works in the United States for an in-
ternational organization, a foreign government, 
or a wholly owned instrumentality of a foreign 
government, and your employer isn't required to 
withhold social security and Medicare taxes 
from your wages, you must include your earn-
ings from services performed in the United 
States when figuring your net earnings from 
self-employment.
Ministers. Y ou must include income from 
services you performed as a minister when fig-
uring your net earnings from self -employment, 
unless you have an exemption from self -em-
ployment tax. This also applies to Christian Sci-
ence practitioners and members of a religious 
order who have not taken a vow of poverty. For 
more information, see Pub. 517.
Aliens
Y our status as an alien (resident, nonresident, 
or dual -status) determines whether and how 
you must file an income tax return.
The rules used to determine your alien sta-
tus are discussed in Pub. 519.
Resident alien.  If you are a resident alien for 
the entire year, you must file a tax return follow-
ing the same rules that apply to U.S. citizens. 
Use the forms discussed in this publication.
Nonresident alien.  If you are a nonresident 
alien, the rules and tax forms that apply to you 
are different from those that apply to U.S. citi-
zens and resident aliens. See Pub. 519 to find 
out if U.S. income tax laws apply to you and 
which forms you should file.
Dual-status taxpayer.  If you are a resident 
alien for part of the tax year and a nonresident 
alien for the rest of the year, you are a dual -sta-
tus taxpayer. Different rules apply for each part 
of the year. For information on dual -status tax-
payers, see Pub. 519. 
Who Should File
Even if you don't have to file, you should file a 
federal income tax return to get money back if 
any of the following conditions apply.
1. Y ou had federal income tax withheld or 
made estimated tax payments. 
2. Y ou qualify for the earned income credit. 
See Pub. 596 for more information. 
3. Y ou qualify for the additional child tax 
credit. See chapter 14 for more informa-
tion.
4. Y ou qualify for the premium tax credit. See 
Pub. 974 for more information.
5. Y ou qualify for the American opportunity 
credit. See Pub. 970 for more information.
6. Y ou qualify for the credit for federal tax on 
fuels. See chapter 13 for more information.
Form 1040 or 1040-SR
Use Form 1040 or 1040 -SR to file your return. 
(But also see Why Should I File Electronically , 
later.)
Y ou can use Form 1040 or 1040 -SR to re-
port all types of income, deductions, and cred-
its.
Why Should I File 
Electronically?
Electronic Filing
If your adjusted gross income (AGI) is less than 
a certain amount, you are eligible for Free File, 
a free tax software service offered by IRS part-
ners, to prepare and e-file your return for free. If 
your income is over the amount, you are still eli-
gible for Free File Fillable Forms, an electronic 
version of IRS paper forms. T able 1-4 lists the 
free ways to electronically file your return.
Page 10 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
8 Chapter 1 Filing Information Publication 17 (2023)

IRS e-file uses automa-
tion to replace most of the 
manual steps needed to process paper returns. 
As a result, the processing of e-file returns is 
faster and more accurate than the processing of 
paper returns. However, as with a paper return, 
you are responsible for making sure your return 
contains accurate information and is filed on 
time.
If your return is filed with IRS e-file, you will re-
ceive an acknowledgment that your return was 
received and accepted. If you owe tax, you can 
e-file and pay electronically. The IRS has pro-
cessed more than one billion e-filed returns 
safely and securely. Using e-file doesn't affect 
your chances of an IRS examination of your re-
turn.
Requirements for an electronic return.  T o 
file your return electronically, you must sign the 
return electronically using a personal identifica-
tion number (PIN). If you are filing online, you 
must use a Self -Select PIN. For 2023, if we is-
sued you an identity protection personal identifi-
cation number (IP PIN) (as described in more 
detail below), all six digits of your IP PIN must 
appear in the IP PIN spaces provided next to 
the space for your occupation for your elec-
tronic signature to be complete. Failure to in-
clude an issued IP PIN on the electronic return 
will result in an invalid signature and a rejected 
return. If you are filing a joint return and both 
taxpayers were issued an IP PIN, enter both IP 
PINs in the spaces provided. If you are filing 
electronically using a tax practitioner, you can 
use a Self-Select PIN or a Practitioner PIN.
Self-Select PIN.  The Self -Select PIN method 
allows you to create your own PIN. If you are 
married filing jointly, you and your spouse will 
each need to create a PIN and enter these PINs 
as your electronic signatures.
A PIN is any combination of five digits you 
choose except five zeros. If you use a PIN, there 
is nothing to sign and nothing to mail —not even 
your Forms W-2.
Y our electronic return is considered a valid 
signed return only when it includes your PIN; 
last name; date of birth; IP PIN, if applicable; 
and AGI from your originally filed 2022 federal 
income tax return, if applicable. If you're filing 
jointly, your electronic return must also include 
your spouse's PIN; last name; date of birth; IP 
PIN, if applicable; and AGI, if applicable, in or-
der to be considered validly signed. Don't use 
AGI from an amended return (Form 1040 -X) or 
a math error correction made by the IRS. AGI is 
the amount shown on your 2022 Form 1040 or 
Form 1040 -SR, line 11. If you don't have your 
2022 income tax return, you can request a tran-
script by using our automated self -service tool. 
Go to IRS.gov/T ranscript. (If you filed electroni-
cally last year, you, and your spouse if filing 
jointly, may use your prior year PIN to verify your 
identity instead of your prior year AGI. The prior 
year PIN is the five -digit PIN you used to elec-
tronically sign your 2022 return.) Y ou will also be 
prompted to enter your date of birth.
Y ou can’t use the Self -Select PIN 
method if you are a first-time filer under 
age 16 at the end of 2023.
Practitioner PIN. The Practitioner PIN method 
allows you to authorize your tax practitioner to 
enter or generate your PIN. Y our electronic re-
turn is considered a validly signed return only 
when it includes your PIN; last name; date of 
birth; and IP PIN, if applicable. If you’re filing 
jointly, your electronic return must also include 
your spouse’s PIN; last name; date of birth; and 
IP PIN, if applicable, in order to be considered a 
validly signed return. The practitioner can pro-
vide you with details.
Form 8453.  Y ou must send in a paper Form 
8453 if you have to attach certain forms or other 
documents that can’t be electronically filed. For 
details, see Form 8453. For more details, visit 
IRS.gov/efile.
Identity Protection PIN.  If the IRS gave you 
an identity protection personal identification 
number (IP PIN), enter it in the spaces provided 
on your tax form. If the IRS hasn’t given you this 
type of number, leave these spaces blank. For 
more information, see the Instructions for Form 
1040.
All taxpayers are now eligible for an IP 
PIN. For more information, see Pub. 
5477. T o apply for an IP PIN, go to 
IRS.gov/IPPIN and use the Get an IP PIN tool.
Power of attorney. If an agent is signing your 
return for you, a power of attorney (POA) must 
be filed. Attach the POA to Form 8453 and file it 
using that form's instructions. See Signatures, 
later, for more information on POAs.
State returns. In most states, you can file an 
electronic state return simultaneously with your 
federal return. For more information, check with 
your local IRS office, state tax agency, tax pro-
fessional, or the IRS website at IRS.gov/efile.
CAUTION
!
TIP
2023 Filing Requirements for Dependents
See chapter 3 to find out if someone can claim you as a dependent.
If your parents (or someone else) can claim you as a dependent, use this table to see if you 
must file a return. (See T able 1-3 for other situations when you must file.)
In this table, unearned income includes taxable interest, ordinary dividends, and capital gain 
distributions. It also includes unemployment compensation, taxable social security benefits, 
pensions, annuities, and distributions of unearned income from a trust. Earned income includes 
salaries, wages, tips, professional fees, and taxable scholarship and fellowship grants. (See 
Scholarships and fellowships in chapter 8.) Gross income is the total of your earned and 
unearned income.
Single dependents—Were you either age 65 or older or blind?
No. Y ou must file a return if any of the following apply.
• Y our unearned income was more than $1,250.
• Y our earned income was more than $13,850.
• Y our gross income was more than the larger of:
• $1,250 or
• Y our earned income (up to $13,450) plus $400.
Yes. Y ou must file a return if any of the following apply.
• Y our unearned income was more than $3,100 ($4,950 if 65 or older and blind).
• Y our earned income was more than $15,700 ($17,550 if 65 or older and blind).
• Y our gross income was more than the larger of: 
• $3,100 ($4,950 if 65 or older and blind), or
• Y our earned income (up to $13,450) plus $2,250 ($4,100 if 65 or older and 
blind).
Married dependents—Were you either age 65 or older or blind?
No. Y ou must file a return if any of the following apply.
• Y our unearned income was more than $1,250.
• Y our earned income was more than $13,850.
• Y our gross income was at least $5 and your spouse files a separate return and 
itemizes deductions.
• Y our gross income was more than the larger of:
• $1,250, or
• Y our earned income (up to $13,450) plus $400.
Yes. Y ou must file a return if any of the following apply.
• Y our unearned income was more than $2,750 ($4,250 if 65 or older and blind).
• Y our earned income was more than $15,350 ($16,850 if 65 or older and blind).
• Y our gross income was at least $5 and your spouse files a separate return and 
itemizes deductions.
• Y our gross income was more than the larger of:
• $2,750 ($4,250 if 65 or older and blind), or
• Y our earned income (up to $13,450) plus $1,900 ($3,400 if 65 or older and 
blind).
T able 1-2.
Page 11 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17 (2023) Chapter 1 Filing Information 9

Refunds. Y ou can have a refund check mailed 
to you, or you can have your refund deposited 
directly to your checking or savings account or 
split among two or three accounts. With e-file, 
your refund will be issued faster than if you filed 
on paper.
Y ou may not get all of your refund if you owe 
certain past -due amounts, such as federal tax, 
state income tax, state unemployment compen-
sation debts, child support, spousal support, or 
certain other federal nontax debts, such as stu-
dent loans. See Offset against debts  under Re-
funds, later.
Refund inquiries.  Information about your re-
turn will generally be available within 24 hours 
after the IRS receives your e -filed return. See 
Refund Information, later.
Amount you owe. T o avoid late-payment pen-
alties and interest, pay your taxes in full by April 
15, 2024 (for most people). See How T o Pay, 
later, for information on how to pay the amount 
you owe.
Using Your Personal Computer
Y ou can file your tax return in a fast, 
easy, and convenient way using your 
personal computer. A computer with In-
ternet access and tax preparation software are 
all you need. Best of all, you can e-file from the 
comfort of your home 24 hours a day, 7 days a 
week.
IRS-approved tax preparation software is 
available online and in retail stores. For informa-
tion, visit IRS.gov/efile.
Through Employers and Financial 
Institutions
Some businesses offer free e-file to their em-
ployees, members, or customers. Others offer it 
for a fee. Ask your employer or financial institu-
tion if they offer IRS e-file as an employee, 
member, or customer benefit.
Free Help With Your Return
The Volunteer Income T ax Assistance (VITA) 
program offers free tax help to people who gen-
erally make $64,000 or less, persons with disa-
bilities, and limited -English-speaking taxpayers 
who need help preparing their own tax returns. 
The T ax Counseling for the Elderly (TCE) pro-
gram offers free tax help for all taxpayers, par-
ticularly those who are 60 years of age and 
older. TCE volunteers specialize in answering 
questions about pensions and retirement -rela-
ted issues unique to seniors.
Y ou can go to IRS.gov to see your options 
for preparing and filing your return, which in-
clude the following.
• Free File. Go to IRS.gov/FreeFile. See if 
you qualify to use brand-name software to 
prepare and e-file your federal tax return 
for free.
• VITA. Go to IRS.gov/VITA, download the 
free IRS2Go app, or call 800-906-9887 to 
find the nearest VITA location for free tax 
return preparation.
• TCE. Go to IRS.gov/TCE, download the 
free IRS2Go app, or call 888-227-7669 to 
find the nearest TCE location for free tax 
return preparation.
Using a Tax Professional
Many tax professionals electronically file tax re-
turns for their clients. Y ou may personally enter 
your PIN or complete Form 8879, IRS e-file Sig-
nature Authorization, to authorize the tax profes-
sional to enter your PIN on your return.
Note. T ax professionals may charge a fee 
for IRS e-file. Fees can vary depending on the 
professional and the specific services rendered.
T able 1-4.Free Ways To e-file
Use Free File for free tax software and free e-file.
• IRS partners offer name-brand products for free.
• Many taxpayers are eligible for Free File software.
• Everyone is eligible for Free File Fillable Forms, an electronic version of IRS paper forms.
• Free File software and Free File Fillable Forms are available only at IRS.gov/FreeFile.
Use VITA/TCE for free tax help from volunteers and free e-file.
• Volunteers prepare your return and e-file it for free.
• Some sites also offer do-it-yourself software. 
• Y ou are eligible based either on your income or age.
• Sites are located nationwide. Find one near you by visiting IRS.gov/VITA.
T able 1-3.Other Situations When You Must File a 2023 Return
Y ou must file a return if any of the following apply for 2023.
1. Y ou owe any special taxes, including any of the following (see the instructions for Schedule 2 (Form 1040)).
a. Alternative minimum tax.
b. Additional tax on a qualified plan, including an individual retirement arrangement (IRA), or other tax-favored account. 
c. Household employment taxes. 
d. Social security and Medicare tax on tips you didn't report to your employer or on wages you received from an employer who 
didn't withhold these taxes.
e. Uncollected social security and Medicare or RRTA tax on tips you reported to your employer or on group-term life insurance 
and additional taxes on health savings accounts.
f. Recapture taxes.
2. Y ou (or your spouse, if filing jointly) received health savings account, Archer MSA, or Medicare Advantage MSA distributions.
3. Y ou had net earnings from self-employment of at least $400.
4. Y ou had wages of $108.28 or more from a church or qualified church-controlled organization that is exempt from employer 
social security and Medicare taxes.
5. Advance payments of the premium tax credit were made for you, your spouse, or a dependent who enrolled in coverage 
through the Marketplace. Y ou or whoever enrolled you should have received Form(s) 1095-A showing the amount of the 
advance payments.
6. Y ou are required to include amounts in income under section 965 or you have a net tax liability under section 965 that you are 
paying in installments under section 965(h) or deferred by making an election under section 965(i).
Page 12 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
10 Chapter 1 Filing Information Publication 17 (2023)

When Do I
Have To File?
April 15, 2024, is the due date for filing your 
2023 income tax return if you use the calendar 
year. If you live in Maine or Massachusetts, you 
have until April 17, 2024, because of the Patri-
ots’ Day and Emancipation Day holidays. For a 
quick view of due dates for filing a return with or 
without an extension of time to file (discussed 
later), see T able 1-5.
If you use a fiscal year (a year ending on the 
last day of any month except December, or a 
52-53-week year), your income tax return is due 
by the 15th day of the 4th month after the close 
of your fiscal year.
When the due date for doing any act for tax 
purposes—filing a return, paying taxes, 
etc.—falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holi-
day, the due date is delayed until the next busi-
ness day.
Filing paper returns on time.  Y our paper re-
turn is filed on time if it is mailed in an envelope 
that is properly addressed, has enough post-
age, and is postmarked by the due date. If you 
send your return by registered mail, the date of 
the registration is the postmark date. The regis-
tration is evidence that the return was delivered. 
If you send a return by certified mail and have 
your receipt postmarked by a postal employee, 
the date on the receipt is the postmark date. 
The postmarked certified mail receipt is evi-
dence that the return was delivered.
Private delivery services.  If you choose to 
mail your return, you can use certain private de-
livery services designated by the IRS to meet 
the “timely mailing treated as timely filing/
paying” rule for tax returns and payments. 
These private delivery services include only the 
following.
• UPS Next Day Air Early A.M., UPS Next 
Day Air, UPS Next Day Air Saver, UPS 2nd 
Day Air, UPS 2nd Day Air A.M., UPS 
Worldwide Express Plus, and UPS World-
wide Express.
• FedEx First Overnight, FedEx Priority 
Overnight, FedEx Standard Overnight, Fe-
dEx 2 Day, FedEx International Next Flight 
Out, FedEx International Priority, FedEx In-
ternational First, and FedEx International 
Economy.
• DHL Express 9:00, DHL Express 10:30, 
DHL Express 12:00, DHL Express World-
wide, DHL Express Envelope, DHL Import 
Express 10:30, DHL Import Express 12:00, 
and DHL Import Express Worldwide.
T o check for any updates to the list of desig-
nated private delivery services, go to IRS.gov/
PDS. For the IRS mailing addresses to use if 
you’re using a private delivery service, go to 
IRS.gov/PDSStreetAddresses.
The private delivery service can tell you how 
to get written proof of the mailing date.
Filing electronic returns on time.  If you use 
IRS e-file, your return is considered filed on time 
if the authorized electronic return transmitter 
postmarks the transmission by the due date. An 
authorized electronic return transmitter is a par-
ticipant in the IRS e-file program that transmits 
electronic tax return information directly to the 
IRS.
The electronic postmark is a record of when 
the authorized electronic return transmitter re-
ceived the transmission of your electronically 
filed return on its host system. The date and 
time in your time zone controls whether your 
electronically filed return is timely.
Filing late.  If you don't file your return by the 
due date, you may have to pay a failure -to-file 
penalty and interest. For more information, see 
Penalties, later. Also see Interest under Amount 
Y ou Owe, later.
If you were due a refund but you didn't file a 
return, you must generally file within 3 years 
from the date the return was due (including ex-
tensions) to get that refund.
Nonresident alien.  If you are a nonresident 
alien and earn wages subject to U.S. income 
tax withholding, your 2023 U.S. income tax re-
turn (Form 1040-NR) is due by:
• April 15, 2024, if you use a calendar year; 
or
• The 15th day of the 4th month after the end 
of your fiscal year, if you use a fiscal year.
If you don't earn wages subject to U.S. in-
come tax withholding, your return is due by:
• June 17, 2024, if you use a calendar year; 
or
• The 15th day of the 6th month after the end 
of your fiscal year, if you use a fiscal year.
See Pub. 519 for more filing information.
Filing for a decedent.  If you must file a final 
income tax return for a taxpayer who died dur-
ing the year (a decedent), the return is due by 
the 15th day of the 4th month after the end of 
the decedent's normal tax year. See Pub. 559.
Extensions of Time To File
Y ou may be able to get an extension of time to 
file your return. There are three types of situa-
tions where you may qualify for an extension.
• Automatic extensions.
• Y ou are outside the United States.
• Y ou are serving in a combat zone.
Automatic Extension
If you can’t file your 2023 return by the due date, 
you may be able to get an automatic 6 -month 
extension of time to file.
Example. If your return is due on April 15, 
2024, you will have until October 15, 2024, to 
file.
If you don't pay the tax due by the regu-
lar due date (April 15 for most taxpay-
ers), you will owe interest. Y ou may 
also be charged penalties, discussed later.
How to get the automatic extension.  Y ou 
can get the automatic extension by:
1. Using IRS e-file (electronic filing), or
2. Filing a paper form.
E-file options. There are two ways you can 
use e-file to get an extension of time to file. 
Complete Form 4868 to use as a worksheet. If 
you think you may owe tax when you file your 
return, use Part II  of the form to estimate your 
balance due. If you e-file Form 4868 to the IRS, 
don't send a paper Form 4868.
E-file using your personal computer or a 
tax professional. Y ou can use a tax software 
package with your personal computer or a tax 
professional to file Form 4868 electronically. 
Free File and Free File Fillable Forms, both 
available at IRS.gov, allow you to prepare and 
e-file Form 4868 for free. Y ou will need to pro-
vide certain information from your 2022 tax re-
turn. If you wish to make a payment by direct 
transfer from your bank account, see Pay online 
under How T o Pay, later, in this chapter.
E-file and pay by credit or debit card or 
by direct transfer from your bank account. 
Y ou can get an extension by paying part or all of 
your estimate of tax due by using a credit or 
debit card or by direct transfer from your bank 
account. Y ou can do this by phone or over the 
Internet. Y ou don't file Form 4868. See Pay on-
line under How T o Pay, later, in this chapter.
Filing a paper Form 4868. Y ou can get an ex-
tension of time to file by filing a paper Form 
4868. If you are a fiscal year taxpayer, you must 
file a paper Form 4868. Mail it to the address 
shown in the form instructions.
If you want to make a payment with the form, 
make your check or money order payable to 
“United States T reasury.” Write your SSN, day-
time phone number, and “2023 Form 4868” on 
your check or money order.
When to file.  Y ou must request the automatic 
extension by the due date for your return. Y ou 
can file your return any time before the 6 -month 
extension period ends.
When you file your return.  Enter any pay-
ment you made related to the extension of time 
to file on Schedule 3 (Form 1040), line 10.
Individuals Outside the
United States
Y ou are allowed an automatic 2 -month exten-
sion, without filing Form 4868 (until June 17, 
CAUTION
!
When To File Your 2023 Return
For U.S. citizens and residents who file returns on a calendar year 
basis.
For Most Taxpayers
For Certain Taxpayers 
Outside
 the United States
No extension requested April 15, 2024 June 17, 2024
Automatic extension October 15, 2024 October 15, 2024
T able 1-5.
Page 13 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17 (2023) Chapter 1 Filing Information 11

2024, if you use the calendar year), to file your 
2023 return and pay any federal income tax due 
if:
1. Y ou are a U.S. citizen or resident; and
2. On the due date of your return:
a. Y ou are living outside the United 
States and Puerto Rico, and your 
main place of business or post of duty 
is outside the United States and Pu-
erto Rico; or
b. Y ou are in military or naval service on 
duty outside the United States and
Puerto Rico.
However, if you pay the tax due after the reg-
ular due date (April 15 for most taxpayers), in-
terest will be charged from that date until the 
date the tax is paid.
If you served in a combat zone or qualified 
hazardous duty area, you may be eligible for a 
longer extension of time to file. See Individuals 
Serving in Combat Zone , later, for special rules 
that apply to you.
Married taxpayers.  If you file a joint return, 
only one spouse has to qualify for this automatic 
extension. If you and your spouse file separate 
returns, the automatic extension applies only to 
the spouse who qualifies.
How to get the extension.  T o use this auto-
matic extension, you must attach a statement to 
your return explaining what situation qualified 
you for the extension. (See the situations listed 
under (2), earlier.)
Extensions beyond 2 months. If you can’t file 
your return within the automatic 2 -month exten-
sion period, you may be able to get an addi-
tional 4 -month extension, for a total of 6 
months. File Form 4868 and check the box on 
line 8.
No further extension.  An extension of more 
than 6 months will generally not be granted. 
However, if you are outside the United States 
and meet certain tests, you may be granted a 
longer extension. For more information, see 
When T o File and Pay in Pub. 54.
Individuals Serving in
Combat Zone
The deadline for filing your tax return, paying 
any tax you may owe, and filing a claim for re-
fund is automatically extended if you serve in a 
combat zone. This applies to members of the 
Armed Forces, as well as merchant marines 
serving aboard vessels under the operational 
control of the Department of Defense, Red 
Cross personnel, accredited correspondents, 
and civilians under the direction of the Armed 
Forces in support of the Armed Forces.
Combat zone. A combat zone is any area the 
President of the United States designates by 
executive order as an area in which the U.S. 
Armed Forces are engaging or have engaged in 
combat. An area usually becomes a combat 
zone and ceases to be a combat zone on the 
dates the President designates by executive or-
der. For purposes of the automatic extension, 
the term “combat zone” includes the following 
areas.
1. The Arabian peninsula area, effective Jan-
uary 17, 1991.
2. The Kosovo area, effective March 24, 
1999.
3. The Afghanistan area, effective Septem-
ber 19, 2001.
See Pub. 3 for more detailed information on 
the locations comprising each combat zone. 
Pub. 3 also has information about other tax ben-
efits available to military personnel serving in a 
combat zone.
Extension period. The deadline for filing your 
return, paying any tax due, filing a claim for re-
fund, and taking other actions with the IRS is 
extended in two steps. First, your deadline is 
extended for 180 days after the later of:
1. The last day you are in a combat zone or 
the last day the area qualifies as a combat 
zone, or
2. The last day of any continuous qualified 
hospitalization (defined later) for injury 
from service in the combat zone.
Second, in addition to the 180 days, your 
deadline is also extended by the number of 
days you had left to take action with the IRS 
when you entered the combat zone. For exam-
ple, you have 3 1/2 months (January 1–April 15) 
to file your tax return. Any days left in this period 
when you entered the combat zone (or the en-
tire 31/2 months if you entered it before the be-
ginning of the year) are added to the 180 days. 
See Extension of Deadlines  in Pub. 3 for more 
information.
The rules on the extension for filing your re-
turn also apply when you are deployed outside 
the United States (away from your permanent 
duty station) while participating in a designated 
contingency operation.
Qualified hospitalization.  The hospitalization 
must be the result of an injury received while 
serving in a combat zone or a contingency op-
eration. Qualified hospitalization means:
• Any hospitalization outside the United 
States, and
• Up to 5 years of hospitalization in the Uni-
ted States.
See Pub. 3 for more information on qualified 
hospitalizations.
How Do I Prepare
My Return?
This section explains how to get ready to fill in 
your tax return and when to report your income 
and expenses. It also explains how to complete 
certain sections of the form. Y ou may find T a-
ble 1-6 helpful when you prepare your paper re-
turn.
Six Steps for Preparing 
Your Paper Return
1 — Get your records together for income 
and expenses.
2 — Get the forms, schedules, and 
publications you need.
3 — Fill in your return.
4 — Check your return to make sure it is 
correct.
5 — Sign and date your return.
6 — Attach all required forms and 
schedules.
Electronic returns.  For information you may 
find useful in preparing an electronic return, see 
Why Should I File Electronically, earlier.
Substitute tax forms. Y ou can’t use your own 
version of a tax form unless it meets the require-
ments explained in Pub. 1167.
Form W -2. If you were an employee, you 
should receive Form W -2 from your employer. 
Y ou will need the information from this form to 
prepare your return. See Form W-2 under Credit 
for Withholding and Estimated T ax for 2023  in 
chapter 4.
Y our employer is required to provide or send 
Form W -2 to you no later than January 31, 
2024. If it is mailed, you should allow adequate 
time to receive it before contacting your em-
ployer. If you still don't get the form by early 
February, the IRS can help you by requesting 
the form from your employer. When you request 
IRS help, be prepared to provide the following 
information.
• Y our name, address (including ZIP code), 
and phone number.
• Y our SSN.
• Y our dates of employment.
• Y our employer's name, address (including 
ZIP code), and phone number.
Form 1099. If you received certain types of in-
come, you may receive a Form 1099. For exam-
ple, if you received taxable interest of $10 or 
more, the payer is required to provide or send 
Form 1099 to you no later than January 31, 
2024 (or by February 15, 2024, if furnished by a 
broker). If it is mailed, you should allow ade-
quate time to receive it before contacting the 
payer. If you still don't get the form by February 
15 (or by March 1, 2024, if furnished by a 
broker), call the IRS for help.
When Do I Report My
Income and Expenses?
Y ou must figure your taxable income on the ba-
sis of a tax year. A “tax year” is an annual ac-
counting period used for keeping records and 
reporting income and expenses. Y ou must ac-
count for your income and expenses in a way 
that clearly shows your taxable income. The 
way you do this is called an accounting method. 
This section explains which accounting periods 
and methods you can use.
T able 1-6.
Page 14 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
12 Chapter 1 Filing Information Publication 17 (2023)

Accounting Periods
Most individual tax returns cover a calendar 
year—the 12 months from January 1 through 
December 31. If you don't use a calendar year, 
your accounting period is a fiscal year. A regular 
fiscal year is a 12-month period that ends on the 
last day of any month except December. A 
52-53-week fiscal year varies from 52 to 53 
weeks and always ends on the same day of the 
week.
Y ou choose your accounting period (tax 
year) when you file your first income tax return. 
It can’t be longer than 12 months.
More information.  For more information on 
accounting periods, including how to change 
your accounting period, see Pub. 538.
Accounting Methods
Y our accounting method is the way you account 
for your income and expenses. Most taxpayers 
use either the cash method or an accrual 
method. Y ou choose a method when you file 
your first income tax return. If you want to 
change your accounting method after that, you 
must generally get IRS approval. Use Form 
3115 to request an accounting method change.
Cash method.  If you use this method, report 
all items of income in the year in which you ac-
tually or constructively receive them. Generally, 
you deduct all expenses in the year you actually 
pay them. This is the method most individual 
taxpayers use.
Constructive receipt.  Generally, you con-
structively receive income when it is credited to 
your account or set apart in any way that makes 
it available to you. Y ou don't need to have physi-
cal possession of it. For example, interest credi-
ted to your bank account on December 31, 
2023, is taxable income to you in 2023 if you 
could have withdrawn it in 2023 (even if the 
amount isn't entered in your records or with-
drawn until 2024).
Garnished wages.  If your employer uses 
your wages to pay your debts, or if your wages 
are attached or garnished, the full amount is 
constructively received by you. Y ou must in-
clude these wages in income for the year you 
would have received them.
Debts paid for you.  If another person can-
cels or pays your debts (but not as a gift or 
loan), you have constructively received the 
amount and must generally include it in your 
gross income for the year. See Canceled Debts 
in chapter 8 for more information.
Payment to third party.  If a third party is 
paid income from property you own, you have 
constructively received the income. It is the 
same as if you had actually received the income 
and paid it to the third party.
Payment to an agent.  Income an agent re-
ceives for you is income you constructively re-
ceived in the year the agent receives it. If you in-
dicate in a contract that your income is to be 
paid to another person, you must include the 
amount in your gross income when the other 
person receives it.
Check received or available. A valid check 
that was made available to you before the end 
of the tax year is constructively received by you 
in that year. A check that was “made available 
to you” includes a check you have already re-
ceived, but not cashed or deposited. It also in-
cludes, for example, your last paycheck of the 
year that your employer made available for you 
to pick up at the office before the end of the 
year. It is constructively received by you in that 
year whether or not you pick it up before the end 
of the year or wait to receive it by mail after the 
end of the year.
No constructive receipt.  There may be 
facts to show that you didn't constructively re-
ceive income.
Example. Lennon, a teacher, agreed to the 
school board's condition that, in Lennon’s ab-
sence, Lennon would receive only the differ-
ence between Lennon’s regular salary and the 
salary of a substitute teacher hired by the 
school board. Therefore, Lennon didn't con-
structively receive the amount by which Len-
non’s salary was reduced to pay the substitute 
teacher.
Accrual method.  If you use an accrual 
method, you generally report income when you 
earn it, rather than when you receive it. Y ou 
generally deduct your expenses when you incur 
them, rather than when you pay them.
Income paid in advance.  An advance pay-
ment of income is generally included in gross 
income in the year you receive it. Y our method 
of accounting doesn't matter as long as the in-
come is available to you. An advance payment 
may include rent or interest you receive in ad-
vance and pay for services you will perform 
later.
A limited deferral until the next tax year may 
be allowed for certain advance payments. See 
Pub. 538 for specific information.
Additional information. For more information 
on accounting methods, including how to 
change your accounting method, see Pub. 538.
Social Security Number 
(SSN)
Y ou must enter your SSN on your return. If you 
are married, enter the SSNs for both you and 
your spouse, whether you file jointly or sepa-
rately.
If you are filing a joint return, include the 
SSNs in the same order as the names. Use this 
same order in submitting other forms and docu-
ments to the IRS.
If you, or your spouse if filing jointly, 
don't have an SSN (or ITIN) issued on 
or before the due date of your 2023 re-
turn (including extensions), you can't claim cer-
tain tax benefits on your original or an amended 
2023 return.
Once you are issued an SSN, use it to file 
your tax return. Use your SSN to file your tax re-
turn even if your SSN does not authorize em-
ployment or if you have been issued an SSN 
that authorizes employment and you lose your 
employment authorization. An ITIN will not be 
issued to you once you have been issued an 
SSN. If you received your SSN after previously 
CAUTION
!
using an ITIN, stop using your ITIN. Use your 
SSN instead.
Check that both the name and SSN on your 
Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, W -2, and 1099 agree 
with your social security card. If they don't, cer-
tain deductions and credits on your Form 1040 
or 1040-SR may be reduced or disallowed and 
you may not receive credit for your social secur-
ity earnings. If your Form W -2 shows an incor-
rect SSN or name, notify your employer or the 
form-issuing agent as soon as possible to make 
sure your earnings are credited to your social 
security record. If the name or SSN on your so-
cial security card is incorrect, call the Social Se-
curity Administration (SSA) at 800-772-1213.
Name change. If you changed your name be-
cause of marriage, divorce, etc., be sure to re-
port the change to your local SSA office before 
filing your return. This prevents delays in pro-
cessing your return and issuing refunds. It also 
safeguards your future social security benefits.
Dependent's SSN. Y ou must provide the SSN 
of each dependent you claim, regardless of the 
dependent's age. This requirement applies to all 
dependents (not just your children) claimed on 
your tax return.
Y our child must have an SSN valid for 
employment issued before the due 
date of your 2023 return (including ex-
tensions) to be considered a qualifying child for 
certain tax benefits on your original or amended 
2023 return. See chapter 14.
Exception. If your child was born and died 
in 2023 and didn't have an SSN, enter “DIED” in 
column (2) of the Dependents section of Form 
1040 or 1040 -SR and include a copy of the 
child's birth certificate, death certificate, or hos-
pital records. The document must show that the 
child was born alive.
No SSN. File Form SS -5, Application for a So-
cial Security Card, with your local SSA office to 
get an SSN for yourself or your dependent. It 
usually takes about 2 weeks to get an SSN. If 
you or your dependent isn't eligible for an SSN, 
see Individual taxpayer identification number 
(ITIN), later.
If you are a U.S. citizen or resident alien, you 
must show proof of age, identity, and citizenship 
or alien status with your Form SS -5. If you are 
12 or older and have never been assigned an 
SSN, you must appear in person with this proof 
at an SSA office.
Form SS-5 is available at any SSA office, on 
the Internet at SSA.gov/forms/ss-5.pdf, or by 
calling 800-772-1213. If you have any questions 
about which documents you can use as proof of 
age, identity, or citizenship, contact your SSA 
office.
If your dependent doesn't have an SSN by 
the time your return is due, you may want to ask 
for an extension of time to file, as explained ear-
lier under When Do I Have T o File.
If you don't provide a required SSN or if you 
provide an incorrect SSN, your tax may be in-
creased and any refund may be reduced.
Adoption taxpayer identification number 
(ATIN). If you are in the process of adopting a 
child who is a U.S. citizen or resident and can’t 
CAUTION
!
Page 15 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17 (2023) Chapter 1 Filing Information 13

get an SSN for the child until the adoption is fi-
nal, you can apply for an ATIN to use instead of 
an SSN.
File Form W -7A, Application for T axpayer 
Identification Number for Pending U.S. Adop-
tions, with the IRS to get an ATIN if all of the fol-
lowing are true.
• Y ou have a child living with you who was 
placed in your home for legal adoption.
• Y ou can’t get the child's existing SSN even 
though you have made a reasonable at-
tempt to get it from the birth parents, the 
placement agency, and other persons.
• Y ou can’t get an SSN for the child from the 
SSA because, for example, the adoption 
isn't final.
• Y ou are eligible to claim the child as a de-
pendent on your tax return.
After the adoption is final, you must apply for an 
SSN for the child. Y ou can’t continue using the 
ATIN.
See Form W-7A for more information.
Nonresident alien spouse. If your spouse is a 
nonresident alien, your spouse must have either 
an SSN or an ITIN if:
• Y ou file a joint return, or
• Y our spouse is filing a separate return.
If your spouse isn't eligible for an SSN, see the 
following discussion on ITINs.
Individual taxpayer identification number 
(ITIN). The IRS will issue you an ITIN if you are 
a nonresident or resident alien and you don't 
have and aren’t eligible to get an SSN. This also 
applies to an alien spouse or dependent. T o ap-
ply for an ITIN, file Form W -7 with the IRS. It 
usually takes about 7 weeks to get an ITIN. En-
ter the ITIN on your tax return wherever an SSN 
is requested.
Make sure your ITIN hasn’t expired. See In-
dividual taxpayer identification number (ITIN) 
renewal, earlier, for more information on expira-
tion and renewal of ITINs. Y ou can also find 
more information at IRS.gov/ITIN.
If you are applying for an ITIN for your-
self, your spouse, or a dependent in or-
der to file your tax return, attach your 
completed tax return to your Form W-7. See the 
Form W-7 instructions for how and where to file.
Y ou can’t e-file a return using an ITIN in 
the calendar year the ITIN is issued; 
however, you can  e-file returns in the 
following years.
ITIN for tax use only.  An ITIN is for federal 
tax use only. It doesn't entitle you to social se-
curity benefits or change your employment or 
immigration status under U.S. law.
Penalty for not providing social security 
number. If you don't include your SSN or the 
SSN of your spouse or dependent as required, 
you may have to pay a penalty. See the discus-
sion on Penalties, later, for more information.
SSN on correspondence.  If you write to the 
IRS about your tax account, be sure to include 
your SSN (and the name and SSN of your 
spouse, if you filed a joint return) in your corre-
spondence. Because your SSN is used to iden-
TIP
CAUTION
!
tify your account, this helps the IRS respond to 
your correspondence promptly.
Presidential Election
Campaign Fund
This fund helps pay for Presidential election 
campaigns. The fund also helps pay for pedia-
tric medical research. If you want $3 to go to 
this fund, check the box. If you are filing a joint 
return, your spouse can also have $3 go to the 
fund. If you check the box, your tax or refund 
won't change.
Computations
The following information may be useful in mak-
ing the return easier to complete.
Rounding off dollars. Y ou can round off cents 
to whole dollars on your return and schedules. If 
you do round to whole dollars, you must round 
all amounts. T o round, drop amounts under 50 
cents and increase amounts from 50 to 99 
cents to the next dollar. For example, $1.39 be-
comes $1 and $2.50 becomes $3.
If you have to add two or more amounts to 
figure the amount to enter on a line, include 
cents when adding the amounts and round off 
only the total.
If you are entering amounts that include 
cents, make sure to include the decimal point. 
There is no cents column on Form 1040 or 
1040-SR.
Equal amounts. If you are asked to enter the 
smaller or larger of two equal amounts, enter 
that amount.
Negative amounts.  If you file a paper return 
and you need to enter a negative amount, put 
the amount in parentheses rather than using a 
minus sign. T o combine positive and negative 
amounts, add all the positive amounts together 
and then subtract the negative amounts.
Attachments
Depending on the form you file and the items re-
ported on your return, you may have to com-
plete additional schedules and forms and attach 
them to your paper return.
Y ou may be able to file a paperless re-
turn using IRS e-file. There's nothing to 
attach or mail, not even your Forms 
W-2. See Why Should I File Electronically , ear-
lier.
Form W-2. Form W-2 is a statement from your 
employer of wages and other compensation 
paid to you and taxes withheld from your pay. 
Y ou should have a Form W -2 from each em-
ployer. If you file a paper return, be sure to at-
tach a copy of Form W -2 in the place indicated 
on your return. For more information, see Form 
W-2 in chapter 4.
Form 1099-R. If you received a Form 1099 -R 
showing federal income tax withheld, and you 
file a paper return, attach a copy of that form in 
the place indicated on your return.
TIP
Form 1040 or 1040 -SR. If you file a paper re-
turn, attach any forms and schedules behind 
Form 1040 or 1040 -SR in order of the “Attach-
ment Sequence No.” shown in the upper right 
corner of the form or schedule. Then, arrange 
all other statements or attachments in the same 
order as the forms and schedules they relate to 
and attach them last. Don't attach items unless 
required to do so.
Third Party Designee
If you want to allow your preparer, a friend, a 
family member, or any other person you choose 
to discuss your 2023 tax return with the IRS, 
check the “Y es” box in the “Third Party Desig-
nee” area of your return. Also, enter the design-
ee's name, phone number, and any five digits 
the designee chooses as their personal identifi-
cation number (PIN).
If you check the “Y es” box, you, and your 
spouse if filing a joint return, are authorizing the 
IRS to call the designee to answer any ques-
tions that arise during the processing of your re-
turn. Y ou are also authorizing the designee to:
• Give information that is missing from your 
return to the IRS;
• Call the IRS for information about the pro-
cessing of your return or the status of your 
refund or payments;
• Receive copies of notices or transcripts re-
lated to your return, upon request; and
• Respond to certain IRS notices about math 
errors, offsets (see Refunds, later), and re-
turn preparation.
Y ou aren't authorizing the designee to re-
ceive any refund check, bind you to anything 
(including any additional tax liability), or other-
wise represent you before the IRS. If you want 
to expand the designee's authorization, see 
Pub. 947.
The authorization will automatically end no 
later than the due date (without any extensions) 
for filing your 2024 tax return. This is April 15, 
2025, for most people.
See your form instructions for more informa-
tion.
Signatures
Y ou must sign and date your return. If you file a 
joint return, both you and your spouse must sign 
the return, even if only one of you had income.
If you file a joint return, both spouses 
are generally liable for the tax, and the 
entire tax liability may be assessed 
against either spouse. See chapter 2.
Y our return isn't considered a valid return un-
less you sign it in accordance with the require-
ments in the instructions for your return.
Y ou must handwrite your signature on your 
return if you file it on paper. Digital, electronic, or 
typed-font signatures are not valid signatures 
for Forms 1040 or 1040-SR filed on paper.
If you electronically file your return, you can 
use an electronic signature to sign your return in 
accordance with the requirements contained in 
the instructions for your return.
CAUTION
!
Page 16 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
14 Chapter 1 Filing Information Publication 17 (2023)

Failure to sign your return in accordance 
with these requirements may prevent you from 
obtaining a refund.
Enter your occupation. If you file a joint re-
turn, enter both your occupation and your spou-
se's occupation.
When someone can sign for you.  Y ou can 
appoint an agent to sign your return if you are:
1. Unable to sign the return because of dis-
ease or injury,
2. Absent from the United States for a contin-
uous period of at least 60 days before the 
due date for filing your return, or
3. Given permission to do so by the IRS of-
fice in your area.
Power of attorney.  A return signed by an 
agent in any of these cases must have a power 
of attorney (POA) attached that authorizes the 
agent to sign for you. Y ou can use a POA that 
states that the agent is granted authority to sign 
the return, or you can use Form 2848. Part I of 
Form 2848 must state that the agent is granted 
authority to sign the return.
Court-appointed conservator, guardian, or 
other fiduciary.  If you are a court -appointed 
conservator, guardian, or other fiduciary for a 
mentally or physically incompetent individual 
who has to file a tax return, sign your name for 
the individual. File Form 56.
Unable to sign.  If the taxpayer is mentally 
competent but physically unable to sign the re-
turn or POA, a valid “signature” is defined under 
state law. It can be anything that clearly indi-
cates the taxpayer's intent to sign. For example, 
the taxpayer's “X” with the signatures of two wit-
nesses might be considered a valid signature 
under a state's law.
Spouse unable to sign.  If your spouse is un-
able to sign for any reason, see Signing a joint 
return in chapter 2.
Child's return. If a child has to file a tax return 
but can’t sign the return, the child's parent, 
guardian, or another legally responsible person 
must sign the child's name, followed by the 
words “By (your signature), parent for minor 
child.”
Paid Preparer
Generally, anyone you pay to prepare, assist in 
preparing, or review your tax return must sign it 
and fill in the other blanks, including their Pre-
parer T ax Identification Number (PTIN), in the 
paid preparer's area of your return.
Many preparers are required to e-file the tax 
returns they prepare. They sign these e-filed re-
turns using their tax preparation software. How-
ever, you can choose to have your return com-
pleted on paper if you prefer. In that case, the 
paid preparer can sign the paper return man-
ually or use a rubber stamp or mechanical de-
vice. The preparer is personally responsible for 
affixing their signature to the return.
If the preparer is self -employed (that is, not 
employed by any person or business to prepare 
the return), the preparer should check the 
self-employed box in the “Paid Preparer Use 
Only” space on the return.
The preparer must give you a copy of your 
return in addition to the copy filed with the IRS.
If you prepare your own return, leave this 
area blank. If another person prepares your re-
turn and doesn't charge you, that person 
shouldn't sign your return.
If you have questions about whether a pre-
parer must sign your return, contact any IRS of-
fice.
Refunds
When you complete your return, you will deter-
mine if you paid more income tax than you 
owed. If so, you can get a refund of the amount 
you overpaid or you can choose to apply all or 
part of the overpayment to your next year's 
(2024) estimated tax.
If you choose to have a 2023 overpay-
ment applied to your 2024 estimated 
tax, you can’t change your mind and 
have any of it refunded to you after the due date 
(without extensions) of your 2023 return.
Follow the Instructions for Form 1040 to 
complete the entries to claim your refund and/or 
to apply your overpayment to your 2024 estima-
ted tax.
If your refund for 2023 is large, you may 
want to decrease the amount of in-
come tax withheld from your pay in 
2024. See chapter 4 for more information.
Instead of getting a pa-
per check, you may be 
able to have your refund deposited directly into 
your checking, savings, health savings, broker-
age, or other similar account, including an indi-
vidual retirement arrangement (IRA). Follow the 
Instructions for Form 1040 to request direct de-
posit. If the direct deposit can’t be done, the IRS 
will send a check instead.
Don't request a deposit of any part of your 
refund to an account that isn't in your name. 
Don't allow your tax preparer to deposit any part 
of your refund into the preparer’s account. The 
number of direct deposits to a single account or 
prepaid debit card is limited to three refunds a 
year. After this limit is exceeded, paper checks 
will be sent instead. Learn more at IRS.gov/
DepositLimit.
IRA.  Y ou can have your refund (or part of it) di-
rectly deposited to a traditional IRA, Roth IRA, 
or SEP -IRA, but not a SIMPLE IRA. Y ou must 
establish the IRA at a bank or financial institu-
tion before you request direct deposit.
TreasuryDirect®. Y ou can request a deposit 
of your refund to a T reasuryDirect® online ac-
count to buy U.S. T reasury marketable securi-
ties (if available) and savings bonds. For more 
information, go to https://T reasuryDirect.gov.
Split refunds.  If you choose direct deposit, 
you may be able to split the refund and have it 
deposited into more than one account or use it 
to buy up to $5,000 in paper or electronic series 
I savings bonds. Complete Form 8888 and at-
tach it to your return.
Overpayment less than one dollar.  If your 
overpayment is less than $1, you won't get a re-
fund unless you ask for it in writing.
CAUTION
!
TIP
Simple. Safe. Secure.
DIRECT DEPOSIT
Cashing your refund check.  Cash your tax 
refund check soon after you receive it. Checks 
expire the last business day of the 12th month 
of issue.
If your check has expired, you can apply to 
the IRS to have it reissued.
Refund more or less than expected.  If you 
receive a check for a refund you aren’t entitled 
to, or for an overpayment that should have been 
credited to estimated tax, don't cash the check. 
Call the IRS.
If you receive a check for more than the re-
fund you claimed, don't cash the check until you 
receive a notice explaining the difference.
If your refund check is for less than you 
claimed, it should be accompanied by a notice 
explaining the difference. Cashing the check 
doesn't stop you from claiming an additional 
amount of refund.
If you didn't receive a notice and you have 
any questions about the amount of your refund, 
you should wait 2 weeks. If you still haven’t re-
ceived a notice, call the IRS.
Offset against debts.  If you are due a refund 
but haven’t paid certain amounts you owe, all or 
part of your refund may be used to pay all or 
part of the past -due amount. This includes 
past-due federal income tax, other federal debts 
(such as student loans), state income tax, child 
and spousal support payments, and state un-
employment compensation debt. Y ou will be no-
tified if the refund you claimed has been offset 
against your debts.
Joint return and injured spouse.  When a 
joint return is filed and only one spouse owes a 
past-due amount, the other spouse can be con-
sidered an injured spouse. An injured spouse 
should file Form 8379, Injured Spouse Alloca-
tion, if both of the following apply and the 
spouse wants a refund of their share of the 
overpayment shown on the joint return.
1. Y ou aren’t legally obligated to pay the 
past-due amount.
2. Y ou made and reported tax payments 
(such as federal income tax withheld from 
your wages or estimated tax payments), or 
claimed a refundable tax credit (see the 
credits listed under Who Should File, ear-
lier).
Note. If the injured spouse's residence was 
in a community property state at any time during 
the tax year, special rules may apply. See the 
Instructions for Form 8379.
If you haven’t filed your joint return and you 
know that your joint refund will be offset, file 
Form 8379 with your return. Y ou should receive 
your refund within 14 weeks from the date the 
paper return is filed or within 11 weeks from the 
date the return is filed electronically.
If you filed your joint return and your joint re-
fund was offset, file Form 8379 by itself. When 
filed after offset, it can take up to 8 weeks to re-
ceive your refund. Don't attach the previously 
filed tax return, but do include copies of all 
Forms W-2 and W-2G for both spouses and any 
Forms 1099 that show income tax withheld. The 
processing of Form 8379 may be delayed if 
these forms aren’t attached, or if the form is in-
complete when filed.
Page 17 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17 (2023) Chapter 1 Filing Information 15

A separate Form 8379 must be filed for each 
tax year to be considered.
An injured spouse claim is different 
from an innocent spouse relief request. 
An injured spouse uses Form 8379 to 
request the division of the tax overpayment at-
tributed to each spouse. An innocent spouse 
uses Form 8857, Request for Innocent Spouse 
Relief, to request relief from joint liability for tax, 
interest, and penalties on a joint return for items 
of the other spouse (or former spouse) that 
were incorrectly reported on the joint return. For 
information on innocent spouses, see Relief 
from joint responsibility  under Filing a Joint Re-
turn in chapter 2.
Amount You Owe
When you complete your return, you will deter-
mine if you have paid the full amount of tax that 
you owe. If you owe additional tax, you should 
pay it with your return.
Y ou don't have to pay if the amount you 
owe is under $1.
If the IRS figures your tax for you, you will re-
ceive a bill for any tax that is due. Y ou should 
pay this bill within 30 days (or by the due date of 
your return, if later). See T ax Figured by IRS in 
chapter 13.
If you don't pay your tax when due, you 
may have to pay a failure -to-pay pen-
alty. See Penalties, later. For more in-
formation about your balance due, see Pub. 
594.
If the amount you owe for 2023 is large, 
you may want to increase the amount 
of income tax withheld from your pay or 
make estimated tax payments for 2024. See 
chapter 4 for more information.
How To Pay
Y ou can pay online, by phone, by mobile device, 
in cash, or by check or money order. Don't in-
clude any estimated tax payment for 2024 in 
this payment. Instead, make the estimated tax 
payment separately.
Bad check or payment.  The penalty for writ-
ing a bad check to the IRS is $25 or 2% of the 
check, whichever is more. This penalty also ap-
plies to other forms of payment if the IRS 
doesn't receive the funds.
Pay online.  Paying online is convenient and 
secure and helps make sure we get your pay-
ments on time.
Y ou can pay online with a direct transfer 
from your bank account using IRS Direct Pay or 
the Electronic Federal T ax Payment System 
(EFTPS), or by debit or credit card.
T o pay your taxes online or for more informa-
tion, go to IRS.gov/Payments.
Pay by phone.  Paying by phone is another 
safe and secure method of paying online. Use 
one of the following methods.
• EFTPS.
• Debit or credit card.
CAUTION
!
TIP
CAUTION
!
TIP
T o get more information about EFTPS or to 
enroll in EFTPS, visit EFTPS.gov or call 
800-555-4477. T o contact EFTPS using T ele-
communications Relay Services (TRS) for peo-
ple who are deaf, hard of hearing, or have a 
speech disability, dial 711 and then provide the 
TRS assistant the 800 -555-4477 number or 
800-733-4829. Additional information about 
EFTPS is also available in Pub. 966.
T o pay using a debit or credit card, you can 
call one of the following service providers. 
There is a convenience fee charged by these 
providers that varies by provider, card type, and 
payment amount.
WorldPay US, Inc.
844-PAY-TAX-8TM (844-729-8298)
www.payUSAtax.com
ACI Payments, Inc.
888-UPAY-TAXTM (888-872-9829)
fed.acipayonline.com
Link2Gov Corporation
888-PAY-1040TM (888-729-1040)
www.PAY1040.com
For the latest details on how to pay by 
phone, go to IRS.gov/Payments.
Pay by cash.  Cash is an in -person payment 
option for individuals provided through retail 
partners with a maximum of $1,000 per day per 
transaction. T o make a cash payment, choose a 
payment processor online at 
fed.acipayonline.com or www.PAY1040.com. 
Don’t send cash payments through the mail.
Pay by check or money order.  Make your 
check or money order payable to “United States 
T reasury” for the full amount due. Don't send 
cash. Don't attach the payment to your return. 
Show your correct name, address, SSN, day-
time phone number, and the tax year and form 
number on the front of your check or money or-
der. If you are filing a joint return, enter the SSN 
shown first on your tax return.
Notice to taxpayers presenting checks. 
When you provide a check as payment, you au-
thorize us either to use information from your 
check to make a one-time electronic fund trans-
fer from your account or to process the payment 
as a check transaction. When we use informa-
tion from your check to make an electronic fund 
transfer, funds may be withdrawn from your ac-
count as soon as the same day we receive your 
payment, and you will not receive your check 
back from your financial institution.
No checks of $100 million or more accep-
ted. The IRS can’t accept a single check (in-
cluding a cashier’s check) for amounts of 
$100,000,000 ($100 million) or more. If you are 
sending $100 million or more by check, you’ll 
need to spread the payment over two or more 
checks with each check made out for an 
amount less than $100 million. This limit doesn’t 
apply to other methods of payment (such as 
electronic payments). Please consider a 
method of payment other than check if the 
amount of the payment is over $100 million.
Estimated tax payments.  Don't include any 
2024 estimated tax payment in the payment for 
your 2023 income tax return. See chapter 4 for 
information on how to pay estimated tax.
Interest
Interest is charged on tax you don't pay by the 
due date of your return. Interest is charged even 
if you get an extension of time for filing.
If the IRS figures your tax for you, to 
avoid interest for late payment, you 
must pay the bill by the date specified 
on the bill or by the due date of your return, 
whichever is later. For information, see T ax Fig-
ured by IRS in chapter 13.
Interest on penalties.  Interest is charged on 
the failure -to-file penalty, the accuracy -related 
penalty, and the fraud penalty from the due date 
of the return (including extensions) to the date 
of payment. Interest on other penalties starts on 
the date of notice and demand, but isn't 
charged on penalties paid within 21 calendar 
days from the date of the notice (or within 10 
business days if the notice is for $100,000 or 
more).
Interest due to IRS error or delay.  All or part 
of any interest you were charged can be for-
given if the interest is due to an unreasonable 
error or delay by an officer or employee of the 
IRS in performing a ministerial or managerial 
act.
A ministerial act is a procedural or mechani-
cal act that occurs during the processing of your 
case. A managerial act includes personnel 
transfers and extended personnel training. A 
decision concerning the proper application of 
federal tax law isn't a ministerial or managerial 
act.
The interest can be forgiven only if you 
aren’t responsible in any important way for the 
error or delay and the IRS has notified you in 
writing of the deficiency or payment. For more 
information, see Pub. 556.
Interest and certain penalties may also be 
suspended for a limited period if you filed your 
return by the due date (including extensions) 
and the IRS doesn't provide you with a notice 
specifically stating your liability and the basis for 
it before the close of the 36-month period begin-
ning on the later of:
• The date the return is filed, or
• The due date of the return without regard 
to extensions.
For more information, see Pub. 556.
Installment Agreement
If you can’t pay the full amount due with your re-
turn, you can ask to make monthly installment 
payments for the full or a partial amount. How-
ever, you will be charged interest and may be 
charged a late payment penalty on the tax not 
paid by the date your return is due, even if your 
request to pay in installments is granted. If your 
request is granted, you must also pay a fee. T o 
limit the interest and penalty charges, pay as 
much of the tax as possible with your return. But 
before requesting an installment agreement, 
you should consider other less costly alterna-
tives, such as a bank loan or credit card pay-
ment. 
TIP
Page 18 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
16 Chapter 1 Filing Information Publication 17 (2023)

T o apply for an installment agreement on-
line, go to IRS.gov/OPA. Y ou can also use Form 
9465.
In addition to paying by check or money or-
der, you can use a credit or debit card or direct 
payment from your bank account to make in-
stallment agreement payments. See How T o 
Pay, earlier.
Gift To Reduce Debt
Held by the Public
Y ou can make a contribution (gift) to re-
duce debt held by the public. If you 
wish to do so, make a separate check 
payable to “Bureau of the Fiscal Service.”
Send your check to:
Bureau of the Fiscal Service
ATTN: Department G
P .O. Box 2188
Parkersburg, WV 26106-2188
Or enclose your separate check in the envelope 
with your income tax return. Don't add this gift to 
any tax you owe. 
For information on making this type of gift 
online, go to T reasururyDirect.gov/Help-Center/
Public-Debt-FAQs/#DebtFinance and see the 
information under “How do you make a contri-
bution to reduce the debt?”
Y ou may be able to deduct this gift as a 
charitable contribution on next year's tax return 
if you itemize your deductions on Schedule A 
(Form 1040).
Name and Address
After you have completed your return, fill in your 
name and address in the appropriate area of 
Form 1040 or 1040-SR.
Y ou must include your SSN in the cor-
rect place on your tax return.
P .O. box. If your post office doesn't deliver mail 
to your street address and you have a P .O. box, 
enter your P .O. box number on the line for your 
present home address instead of your street ad-
dress.
Foreign address.  If your address is outside 
the United States or its territories, enter the city 
name on the appropriate line of your Form 1040 
or 1040 -SR. Don't enter any other information 
on that line, but also complete the spaces below 
that line.
1. Foreign country name.
2. Foreign province/state/county.
3. Foreign postal code.
Don’t abbreviate the country name. Follow the 
country's practice for entering the postal code 
and the name of the province, county, or state.
Where Do I File?
After you complete your return, you must send it 
to the IRS. Y ou can mail it or you may be able to 
CAUTION
!
file it electronically. See Why Should I File Elec-
tronically, earlier.
Mailing your paper return.  Mail your paper 
return to the address shown in the Instructions 
for Form 1040.
What Happens After
I File?
After you send your return to the IRS, you may 
have some questions. This section discusses 
concerns you may have about recordkeeping, 
your refund, and what to do if you move.
What Records Should
I Keep?
This part discusses why you should keep re-
cords, what kinds of records you should keep, 
and how long you should keep them.
Y ou must keep records so that you can 
prepare a complete and accurate in-
come tax return. The law doesn't re-
quire any special form of records. However, you 
should keep all receipts, canceled checks or 
other proof of payment, and any other records 
to support any deductions or credits you claim.
If you file a claim for refund, you must be 
able to prove by your records that you have 
overpaid your tax.
This part doesn't discuss the records you 
should keep when operating a business. For in-
formation on business records, see Pub. 583.
Why Keep Records?
Good records help you:
• Identify sources of income. Y our records 
can identify the sources of your income to 
help you separate business from nonbusi-
ness income and taxable from nontaxable 
income.
• Keep track of expenses. Y ou can use 
your records to identify expenses for which 
you can claim a deduction. This helps you 
determine if you can itemize deductions on 
your tax return.
• Keep track of the basis of property. Y ou 
need to keep records that show the basis 
of your property. This includes the original 
cost or other basis of the property and any 
improvements you made.
• Prepare tax returns. Y ou need records to 
prepare your tax return.
• Support items reported on tax returns. 
The IRS may question an item on your re-
turn. Y our records will help you explain any 
item and arrive at the correct tax. If you 
can’t produce the correct documents, you 
may have to pay additional tax and be sub-
ject to penalties.
Kinds of Records To Keep
The IRS doesn't require you to keep your re-
cords in a particular way. Keep them in a man-
ner that allows you and the IRS to determine 
your correct tax.
RECORDS
Y ou can use your checkbook to keep a re-
cord of your income and expenses. Y ou also 
need to keep documents, such as receipts and 
sales slips, that can help prove a deduction.
In this section, you will find guidance about 
basic records that everyone should keep. The 
section also provides guidance about specific 
records you should keep for certain items.
Electronic records. All requirements that ap-
ply to hard copy books and records also apply 
to electronic storage systems that maintain tax 
books and records. When you replace hard 
copy books and records, you must maintain the 
electronic storage systems for as long as they 
are material to the administration of tax law.
For details on electronic storage system re-
quirements, see Revenue Procedure 97 -22, 
which is on page 9 of Internal Revenue Bulletin 
1997-13 at IRS.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb97-13.pdf.
Copies of tax returns.  Y ou should keep cop-
ies of your tax returns as part of your tax re-
cords. They can help you prepare future tax re-
turns, and you will need them if you file an 
amended return or are audited. Copies of your 
returns and other records can be helpful to your 
survivor or the executor or administrator of your 
estate.
If necessary, you can request a copy of a re-
turn and all attachments (including Form W -2) 
from the IRS by using Form 4506. There is a 
charge for a copy of a return. For information on 
the cost and where to file, see the Instructions 
for Form 4506.
If you just need information from your return, 
you can order a transcript in one of the following 
ways.
• Go to IRS.gov/T ranscript.
• Call 800-908-9946.
• Use Form 4506-T or Form 4506T-EZ.
There is no fee for a transcript. For more infor-
mation, see Form 4506-T .
Basic Records
Basic records are documents that everybody 
should keep. These are the records that prove 
your income and expenses. If you own a home 
or investments, your basic records should con-
tain documents related to those items.
Income. Y our basic records prove the amounts 
you report as income on your tax return. Y our in-
come may include wages, dividends, interest, 
and partnership or S corporation distributions. 
Y our records can also prove that certain 
amounts aren’t taxable, such as tax -exempt in-
terest.
Note. If you receive a Form W-2, keep Copy 
C until you begin receiving social security bene-
fits. This will help protect your benefits in case 
there is a question about your work record or 
earnings in a particular year.
Expenses. Y our basic records prove the ex-
penses for which you claim a deduction (or 
credit) on your tax return. Y our deductions may 
include alimony, charitable contributions, mort-
gage interest, and real estate taxes. Y ou may 
also have childcare expenses for which you can 
claim a credit.
Page 19 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17 (2023) Chapter 1 Filing Information 17

Home. Y our basic records should enable you 
to determine the basis or adjusted basis of your 
home. Y ou need this information to determine if 
you have a gain or loss when you sell your 
home or to figure depreciation if you use part of 
your home for business purposes or for rent. 
Y our records should show the purchase price, 
settlement or closing costs, and the cost of any 
improvements. They may also show any casu-
alty losses deducted and insurance reimburse-
ments for casualty losses.
For detailed information on basis, including 
which settlement or closing costs are included 
in the basis of your home, see Pub. 551.
When you sell your home, your records 
should show the sales price and any selling ex-
penses, such as commissions. For information 
on selling your home, see Pub. 523.
Investments. Y our basic records should ena-
ble you to determine your basis in an invest-
ment and whether you have a gain or loss when 
you sell it. Investments include stocks, bonds, 
and mutual funds. Y our records should show the 
purchase price, sales price, and commissions. 
They may also show any reinvested dividends, 
stock splits and dividends, load charges, and 
original issue discount (OID).
For information on stocks, bonds, and mu-
tual funds, see Pub. 550 and Pub. 551.
Proof of Payment
One of your basic records is proof of payment. 
Y ou should keep these records to support cer-
tain amounts shown on your tax return. Proof of 
payment alone isn't proof that the item claimed 
on your return is allowable. Y ou should also 
keep other documents that will help prove that 
the item is allowable.
Generally, you prove payment with a cash 
receipt, financial account statement, credit card 
statement, canceled check, or substitute check. 
If you make payments in cash, you should get a 
dated and signed receipt showing the amount 
and the reason for the payment.
If you make payments using your bank ac-
count, you may be able to prove payment with 
an account statement.
Account statements.  Y ou may be able to 
prove payment with a legible financial account 
statement prepared by your bank or other finan-
cial institution.
Pay statements. Y ou may have deductible ex-
penses withheld from your paycheck, such as 
medical insurance premiums. Y ou should keep 
your year-end or final pay statements as proof 
of payment of these expenses.
How Long To Keep 
Records
Y ou must keep your records as long as they 
may be needed for the administration of any 
provision of the Internal Revenue Code. Gener-
ally, this means you must keep records that sup-
port items shown on your return until the period 
of limitations for that return runs out.
The period of limitations is the period of time 
in which you can amend your return to claim a 
credit or refund or the IRS can assess additional 
tax. T able 1-7 contains the periods of limitations 
that apply to income tax returns. Unless other-
wise stated, the years refer to the period begin-
ning after the return was filed. Returns filed be-
fore the due date are treated as being filed on 
the due date.
Period of LimitationsT able 1-7.
IF you... THEN the
period is...
1 File a return and (2), 
(3), and (4) don't apply 
to you,
3 years.
2 Don't report income 
that you should and it is 
more than 25% of the 
gross income shown on 
your return,
6 years.
3 File a fraudulent return, No limit.
4 Don't file a return, No limit.
5 File a claim for credit or 
refund after you filed 
your return,
The later of 3 
years or 2 
years after tax 
was paid.
6 File a claim for a loss 
from worthless 
securities or bad debt 
deduction,
7 years.
Property. Keep records relating to property un-
til the period of limitations expires for the year in 
which you dispose of the property in a taxable 
disposition. Y ou must keep these records to fig-
ure your basis for computing gain or loss when 
you sell or otherwise dispose of the property.
Generally, if you received property in a non-
taxable exchange, your basis in that property is 
the same as the basis of the property you gave 
up. Y ou must keep the records on the old prop-
erty, as well as the new property, until the period 
of limitations expires for the year in which you 
dispose of the new property in a taxable dispo-
sition.
Refund Information
Y ou can go online to check the status of your 
2023 refund 24 hours after the IRS receives 
your e-filed return, or 4 weeks after you mail a 
paper return. If you filed Form 8379 with your re-
turn, allow 14 weeks (11 weeks if you filed elec-
tronically) before checking your refund status. 
Be sure to have a copy of your 2023 tax return 
available because you will need to know the fil-
ing status, the first SSN shown on the return, 
and the exact whole -dollar amount of the re-
fund. T o check on your refund, do one of the fol-
lowing.
• Go to IRS.gov/Refunds.
• Download the free IRS2Go app to your 
smart phone and use it to check your re-
fund status.
• Call the automated refund hotline at 
800-829-1954.
Interest on Refunds
If you are due a refund, you may get interest on 
it. The interest rates are adjusted quarterly.
If the refund is made within 45 days after the 
due date of your return, no interest will be paid. 
If you file your return after the due date (includ-
ing extensions), no interest will be paid if the re-
fund is made within 45 days after the date you 
filed. If the refund isn't made within this 45 -day 
period, interest will be paid from the due date of 
the return or from the date you filed, whichever 
is later. 
Accepting a refund check doesn't change 
your right to claim an additional refund and in-
terest. File your claim within the period of time 
that applies. See Amended Returns and Claims 
for Refund , later. If you don't accept a refund 
check, no more interest will be paid on the over-
payment included in the check.
Interest on erroneous refund.  All or part of 
any interest you were charged on an erroneous 
refund will generally be forgiven. Any interest 
charged for the period before demand for repay-
ment was made will be forgiven unless:
1. Y ou, or a person related to you, caused 
the erroneous refund in any way; or
2. The refund is more than $50,000.
For example, if you claimed a refund of $100 
on your return, but the IRS made an error and 
sent you $1,000, you wouldn't be charged inter-
est for the time you held the $900 difference. 
Y ou must, however, repay the $900 when the 
IRS asks.
Change of Address
If you have moved, file your return using your 
new address.
If you move after you filed your return, you 
should give the IRS clear and concise notifica-
tion of your change of address. The notification 
may be written, electronic, or oral. Send written 
notification to the Internal Revenue Service 
Center serving your old address. Y ou can use 
Form 8822, Change of Address. If you are ex-
pecting a refund, also notify the post office serv-
ing your old address. This will help in forwarding 
your check to your new address (unless you 
chose direct deposit of your refund). For more 
information, see Revenue Procedure 2010 -16, 
2010-19 I.R.B. 664, available at IRS.gov/irb/
2010-19_IRB/ar07.html.
Be sure to include your SSN (and the name 
and SSN of your spouse if you filed a joint re-
turn) in any correspondence with the IRS.
What if I Made
a Mistake?
Errors may delay your refund or result in notices 
being sent to you. If you discover an error, you 
can file an amended return or claim for refund.
Amended Returns and
Claims for Refund
Y ou should correct your return if, after you have 
filed it, you find that:
Page 20 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
18 Chapter 1 Filing Information Publication 17 (2023)

1. Y ou didn't report some income,
2. Y ou claimed deductions or credits you 
shouldn't have claimed,
3. Y ou didn't claim deductions or credits you 
could have claimed, or
4. Y ou should have claimed a different filing 
status. (Once you file a joint return, you 
can’t choose to file separate returns for 
that year after the due date of the return. 
However, an executor may be able to 
make this change for a deceased spouse.)
If you need a copy of your return, see Copies of 
tax returns  under Kinds of Records T o Keep , 
earlier, in this chapter.
Form 1040 -X. Use Form 1040 -X to correct a 
return you have already filed.
Completing Form 1040 -X. On Form 
1040-X, enter your income, deductions, and 
credits as you originally reported them on your 
return; the changes you are making; and the 
corrected amounts. Then, figure the tax on the 
corrected amount of taxable income and the 
amount you owe or your refund.
If you owe tax, the IRS offers several pay-
ment options. See How T o Pay, earlier. The tax 
owed won't be subtracted from any amount you 
had credited to your estimated tax.
If you can’t pay the full amount due with your 
return, you can ask to make monthly installment 
payments. See Installment Agreement, earlier.
If you overpaid tax, you can have all or part 
of the overpayment refunded to you, or you can 
apply all or part of it to your estimated tax. If you 
choose to get a refund, it will be sent separately 
from any refund shown on your original return.
Filing Form 1040 -X. When completing 
Form 1040 -X, don't forget to show the year of 
your original return and explain all changes you 
made. Be sure to attach any forms or schedules 
needed to explain your changes. Mail your 
Form 1040 -X to the Internal Revenue Service 
Center serving the area where you now live (as 
shown in the Instructions for Form 1040 -X). 
However, if you are filing Form 1040 -X in re-
sponse to a notice you received from the IRS, 
mail it to the address shown on the notice.
File a separate form for each tax year in-
volved.
Y ou can file Form 1040 -X electronically to 
amend 2019 or later Forms 1040 and 1040 -SR. 
For more information, see Instructions for Form 
1040-X.
Time for filing a claim for refund.  Generally, 
you must file your claim for a credit or refund 
within 3 years after the date you filed your origi-
nal return or within 2 years after the date you 
paid the tax, whichever is later. Returns filed be-
fore the due date (without regard to extensions) 
are considered filed on the due date (even if the 
due date was a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holi-
day). These time periods are suspended while 
you are financially disabled, discussed later.
If the last day for claiming a credit or refund 
is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, you can 
file the claim on the next business day.
If you don't file a claim within this period, you 
may not be entitled to a credit or a refund.
Federally declared disaster.  If you were 
affected by a federally declared disaster, you 
may have additional time to file your amended 
return. See Pub. 556 for details.
Protective claim for refund. Generally, a pro-
tective claim is a formal claim or amended re-
turn for credit or refund normally based on cur-
rent litigation or expected changes in tax law or 
other legislation. Y ou file a protective claim 
when your right to a refund is contingent on fu-
ture events and may not be determinable until 
after the statute of limitations expires. A valid 
protective claim doesn't have to list a particular 
dollar amount or demand an immediate refund. 
However, a valid protective claim must:
• Be in writing and signed;
• Include your name, address, SSN or ITIN, 
and other contact information;
• Identify and describe the contingencies af-
fecting the claim;
• Clearly alert the IRS to the essential nature 
of the claim; and
• Identify the specific year(s) for which a re-
fund is sought.
Mail your protective claim for refund to the ad-
dress listed in the Instructions for Form 1040 -X 
under Where T o File.
Generally, the IRS will delay action on the 
protective claim until the contingency is re-
solved.
Limit on amount of refund.  If you file your 
claim within 3 years after the date you filed your 
return, the credit or refund can’t be more than 
the part of the tax paid within the 3 -year period 
(plus any extension of time for filing your return) 
immediately before you filed the claim. This 
time period is suspended while you are finan-
cially disabled, discussed later.
Tax paid. Payments, including estimated tax 
payments, made before the due date (without 
regard to extensions) of the original return are 
considered paid on the due date. For example, 
income tax withheld during the year is consid-
ered paid on the due date of the return, which is 
April 15 for most taxpayers.
Example 1.  Y ou made estimated tax pay-
ments of $500 and got an automatic extension 
of time to October 15, 2020, to file your 2019 in-
come tax return. When you filed your return on 
that date, you paid an additional $200 tax. On 
October 16, 2023, you filed an amended return 
and claimed a refund of $700. October 15, 2023 
was a Sunday so you had until the next busi-
ness day, October 16, to file your amended re-
turn. Because you filed your claim within 3 years 
after you filed your original return, you can get a 
refund of up to $700, the tax paid within the 3 
years plus the 6 -month extension period imme-
diately before you filed the claim.
Example 2. The situation is the same as in 
Example 1, except you filed your return on Oc-
tober 30, 2020, 2 weeks after the extension pe-
riod ended. Y ou paid an additional $200 on that 
date. On October 30, 2023, you filed an amen-
ded return and claimed a refund of $700. Al-
though you filed your claim within 3 years from 
the date you filed your original return, the refund 
was limited to $200, the tax paid within the 3 
years plus the 6 -month extension period imme-
diately before you filed the claim. The estimated 
tax of $500 paid before that period can’t be re-
funded or credited.
If you file a claim more than 3 years after you 
file your return, the credit or refund can’t be 
more than the tax you paid within the 2 years 
immediately before you file the claim.
Example. Y ou filed your 2019 tax return on 
April 15, 2020. Y ou paid taxes of $500. On No-
vember 5, 2021, after an examination of your 
2019 return, you had to pay an additional tax of 
$200. On May 12, 2023, you file a claim for a re-
fund of $300. However, because you filed your 
claim more than 3 years after you filed your re-
turn, your refund will be limited to the $200 you 
paid during the 2 years immediately before you 
filed your claim.
Financially disabled.  The time periods for 
claiming a refund are suspended for the period 
in which you are financially disabled. For a joint 
income tax return, only one spouse has to be fi-
nancially disabled for the time period to be sus-
pended. Y ou are financially disabled if you are 
unable to manage your financial affairs because 
of a medically determinable physical or mental 
impairment that can be expected to result in 
death or that has lasted or can be expected to 
last for a continuous period of not less than 12 
months. However, you aren’t treated as finan-
cially disabled during any period your spouse or 
any other person is authorized to act on your 
behalf in financial matters.
T o claim that you are financially disabled, 
you must send in the following written state-
ments with your claim for refund.
1. A statement from your qualified physician 
that includes:
a. The name and a description of your 
physical or mental impairment;
b. The physician's medical opinion that 
the impairment prevented you from 
managing your financial affairs;
c. The physician's medical opinion that 
the impairment was or can be expec-
ted to result in death, or that its dura-
tion has lasted, or can be expected to 
last, at least 12 months;
d. The specific time period (to the best of 
the physician's knowledge); and
e. The following certification signed by 
the physician: “I hereby certify that, to 
the best of my knowledge and belief, 
the above representations are true, 
correct, and complete.”
2. A statement made by the person signing 
the claim for credit or refund that no per-
son, including your spouse, was author-
ized to act on your behalf in financial mat-
ters during the period of disability (or the 
exact dates that a person was authorized 
to act for you).
Exceptions for special types of refunds.  If 
you file a claim for one of the items in the follow-
ing list, the dates and limits discussed earlier 
may not apply. These items, and where to get 
more information, are as follows.
• Bad debt. See Pub. 550. 
Page 21 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17 (2023) Chapter 1 Filing Information 19

• Worthless security. See Pub. 550. 
• Foreign tax paid or accrued. See Pub. 514. 
• Net operating loss carryback. See Pub. 
536.
• Carryback of certain business tax credits. 
See Form 3800. 
• Claim based on an agreement with the IRS 
extending the period for assessment of tax. 
Processing claims for refund.  Claims are 
usually processed 8–12 weeks after they are 
filed. Y our claim may be accepted as filed, disal-
lowed, or subject to examination. If a claim is 
examined, the procedures are the same as in 
the examination of a tax return.
If your claim is disallowed, you will receive 
an explanation of why it was disallowed.
Taking your claim to court. Y ou can sue for a 
refund in court, but you must first file a timely 
claim with the IRS. If the IRS disallows your 
claim or doesn't act on your claim within 6 
months after you file it, you can then take your 
claim to court. For information on the burden of 
proof in a court proceeding, see Pub. 556.
The IRS provides a direct method to move 
your claim to court if:
• Y ou are filing a claim for a credit or refund 
based solely on contested income tax or 
on estate tax or gift tax issues considered 
in your previously examined returns, and
• Y ou want to take your case to court instead 
of appealing it within the IRS.
When you file your claim with the IRS, you 
get the direct method by requesting in writing 
that your claim be immediately rejected. A no-
tice of claim disallowance will be sent to you.
Y ou have 2 years from the date of mailing of 
the notice of claim disallowance to file a refund 
suit in the U.S. District Court having jurisdiction 
or in the U.S. Court of Federal Claims.
Interest on refund. If you receive a refund be-
cause of your amended return, interest will be 
paid on it from the due date of your original re-
turn or the date you filed your original return, 
whichever is later, to the date you filed the 
amended return. However, if the refund isn't 
made within 45 days after you file the amended 
return, interest will be paid up to the date the re-
fund is paid.
Reduced refund. Y our refund may be reduced 
by an additional tax liability that has been as-
sessed against you.
Also, your refund may be reduced by 
amounts you owe for past-due federal tax, state 
income tax, state unemployment compensation 
debts, child support, spousal support, or certain 
other federal nontax debts, such as student 
loans. If your spouse owes these debts, see 
Offset against debts  under Refunds, earlier, for 
the correct refund procedures to follow.
Effect on state tax liability.  If your return is 
changed for any reason, it may affect your state 
income tax liability. This includes changes 
made as a result of an examination of your re-
turn by the IRS. Contact your state tax agency 
for more information.
Penalties
The law provides penalties for failure to file re-
turns or pay taxes as required.
Civil Penalties
If you don't file your return and pay your tax by 
the due date, you may have to pay a penalty. 
Y ou may also have to pay a penalty if you sub-
stantially understate your tax, understate a re-
portable transaction, file an erroneous claim for 
refund or credit, file a frivolous tax submission, 
or fail to supply your SSN or ITIN. If you provide 
fraudulent information on your return, you may 
have to pay a civil fraud penalty.
Filing late.  If you don't file your return by the 
due date (including extensions), you may have 
to pay a failure -to-file penalty. The penalty is 
usually 5% for each month or part of a month 
that a return is late, but not more than 25%. The 
penalty is based on the tax not paid by the due 
date (without regard to extensions).
Fraud. If your failure to file is due to fraud, 
the penalty is 15% for each month or part of a 
month that your return is late, up to a maximum 
of 75%.
Return over 60 days late. If you file your re-
turn more than 60 days after the due date, or 
extended due date, the minimum penalty is the 
smaller of $485 or 100% of the unpaid tax.
Exception. Y ou won't have to pay the pen-
alty if you show that you failed to file on time be-
cause of reasonable cause and not because of 
willful neglect.
Paying tax late.  Y ou will have to pay a fail-
ure-to-pay penalty of 1/2 of 1% (0.50%) of your 
unpaid taxes for each month, or part of a month, 
after the due date that the tax isn't paid. This 
penalty doesn't apply during the automatic 
6-month extension of time to file period if you 
paid at least 90% of your actual tax liability on or 
before the due date of your return and pay the 
balance when you file the return.
The monthly rate of the failure -to-pay pen-
alty is half the usual rate (0.25% instead of 
0.50%) if an installment agreement is in effect 
for that month. Y ou must have filed your return 
by the due date (including extensions) to qualify 
for this reduced penalty.
If a notice of intent to levy is issued, the rate 
will increase to 1% at the start of the first month 
beginning at least 10 days after the day that the 
notice is issued. If a notice and demand for im-
mediate payment is issued, the rate will in-
crease to 1% at the start of the first month be-
ginning after the day that the notice and 
demand is issued.
This penalty can’t be more than 25% of your 
unpaid tax. Y ou won't have to pay the penalty if 
you can show that you had a good reason for 
not paying your tax on time.
Combined penalties.  If both the failure -to-file 
penalty and the failure -to-pay penalty (dis-
cussed earlier) apply in any month, the 5% (or 
15%) failure -to-file penalty is reduced by the 
failure-to-pay penalty. However, if you file your 
return more than 60 days after the due date or 
extended due date, the minimum penalty is the 
smaller of $485 or 100% of the unpaid tax.
Accuracy-related penalty.  Y ou may have to 
pay an accuracy-related penalty if you underpay 
your tax because:
1. Y ou show negligence or disregard of the 
rules or regulations,
2. Y ou substantially understate your income 
tax,
3. Y ou claim tax benefits for a transaction 
that lacks economic substance, or
4. Y ou fail to disclose a foreign financial as-
set.
The penalty is equal to 20% of the underpay-
ment. The penalty is 40% of any portion of the 
underpayment that is attributable to an undis-
closed noneconomic substance transaction or 
an undisclosed foreign financial asset transac-
tion. The penalty won't be figured on any part of 
an underpayment on which the fraud penalty 
(discussed later) is charged.
Negligence or disregard.  The term “negli-
gence” includes a failure to make a reasonable 
attempt to comply with the tax law or to exercise 
ordinary and reasonable care in preparing a re-
turn. Negligence also includes failure to keep 
adequate books and records. Y ou won't have to 
pay a negligence penalty if you have a reasona-
ble basis for a position you took.
The term “disregard” includes any careless, 
reckless, or intentional disregard.
Adequate disclosure.  Y ou can avoid the 
penalty for disregard of rules or regulations if 
you adequately disclose on your return a posi-
tion that has at least a reasonable basis. See 
Disclosure statement, later.
This exception won't apply to an item that is 
attributable to a tax shelter. In addition, it won't 
apply if you fail to keep adequate books and re-
cords, or substantiate items properly.
Substantial understatement of income 
tax. Y ou understate your tax if the tax shown on 
your return is less than the correct tax. The un-
derstatement is substantial if it is more than the 
larger of 10% of the correct tax or $5,000. How-
ever, the amount of the understatement may be 
reduced to the extent the understatement is due 
to:
1. Substantial authority, or
2. Adequate disclosure and a reasonable ba-
sis.
If an item on your return is attributable to a tax 
shelter, there is no reduction for an adequate 
disclosure. However, there is a reduction for a 
position with substantial authority, but only if you 
reasonably believed that your tax treatment was 
more likely than not the proper treatment.
Substantial authority. Whether there is or 
was substantial authority for the tax treatment of 
an item depends on the facts and circumstan-
ces. Some of the items that may be considered 
are court opinions, T reasury regulations, reve-
nue rulings, revenue procedures, and notices 
and announcements issued by the IRS and 
published in the Internal Revenue Bulletin that 
involve the same or similar circumstances as 
yours.
Disclosure statement.  T o adequately dis-
close the relevant facts about your tax treatment 
Page 22 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
20 Chapter 1 Filing Information Publication 17 (2023)

of an item, use Form 8275. Y ou must also have 
a reasonable basis for treating the item the way 
you did.
In cases of substantial understatement only, 
items that meet the requirements of Revenue 
Procedure 2022-41 (or later update) are consid-
ered adequately disclosed on your return with-
out filing Form 8275. 
Use Form 8275 -R to disclose items or posi-
tions contrary to regulations.
Transaction lacking economic substance. 
For more information on economic substance, 
see section 7701(o).
Foreign financial asset.  For more informa-
tion on undisclosed foreign financial assets, see 
section 6662(j).
Reasonable cause. Y ou won't have to pay a 
penalty if you show a good reason (reasonable 
cause) for the way you treated an item. Y ou 
must also show that you acted in good faith. 
This doesn't apply to a transaction that lacks 
economic substance.
Filing erroneous claim for refund or credit. 
Y ou may have to pay a penalty if you file an erro-
neous claim for refund or credit. The penalty is 
equal to 20% of the disallowed amount of the 
claim, unless you can show a reasonable basis 
for the way you treated an item. However, any 
disallowed amount due to a transaction that 
lacks economic substance won't be treated as 
having a reasonable basis. The penalty won't 
be figured on any part of the disallowed amount 
of the claim that relates to the earned income 
credit or on which the accuracy -related or fraud 
penalties are charged.
Frivolous tax submission.  Y ou may have to 
pay a penalty of $5,000 if you file a frivolous tax 
return or other frivolous submissions. A frivolous 
tax return is one that doesn't include enough in-
formation to figure the correct tax or that con-
tains information clearly showing that the tax 
you reported is substantially incorrect. For more 
information on frivolous returns, frivolous sub-
missions, and a list of positions that are identi-
fied as frivolous, see Notice 2010 -33, 2010 -17 
I.R.B. 609, available at IRS.gov/irb/
2010-17_IRB/ar13.html.
Y ou will have to pay the penalty if you filed 
this kind of return or submission based on a friv-
olous position or a desire to delay or interfere 
with the administration of federal tax laws. This 
includes altering or striking out the preprinted 
language above the space provided for your 
signature.
This penalty is added to any other penalty 
provided by law.
Fraud. If there is any underpayment of tax on 
your return due to fraud, a penalty of 75% of the 
underpayment due to fraud will be added to 
your tax.
Joint return. The fraud penalty on a joint re-
turn doesn't apply to a spouse unless some part 
of the underpayment is due to the fraud of that 
spouse.
Failure to supply SSN.  If you don't include 
your SSN or the SSN of another person where 
required on a return, statement, or other docu-
ment, you will be subject to a penalty of $50 for 
each failure. Y ou will also be subject to a pen-
alty of $50 if you don't give your SSN to another 
person when it is required on a return, state-
ment, or other document.
For example, if you have a bank account that 
earns interest, you must give your SSN to the 
bank. The number must be shown on the Form 
1099-INT or other statement the bank sends 
you. If you don't give the bank your SSN, you 
will be subject to the $50 penalty. (Y ou may also 
be subject to “backup” withholding of income 
tax. See chapter 4.)
Y ou won't have to pay the penalty if you are 
able to show that the failure was due to reason-
able cause and not willful neglect.
Criminal Penalties
Y ou may be subject to criminal prosecution 
(brought to trial) for actions such as:
1. T ax evasion;
2. Willful failure to file a return, supply infor-
mation, or pay any tax due;
3. Fraud and false statements;
4. Preparing and filing a fraudulent return; or
5. Identity theft.
Identity Theft
Identity theft occurs when someone uses your 
personal information such as your name, SSN, 
or other identifying information, without your 
permission, to commit fraud or other crimes. An 
identity thief may use your SSN to get a job or 
may file a tax return using your SSN to receive a 
refund.
T o reduce your risk:
• Protect your SSN,
• Ensure your employer is protecting your 
SSN, and
• Be careful when choosing a tax preparer.
If your tax records are affected by identity 
theft and you receive a notice from the IRS, re-
spond right away to the name and phone num-
ber printed on the IRS notice or letter.
If your SSN has been lost or stolen or you 
suspect you are a victim of tax -related identity 
theft, visit IRS.gov/IdentityTheft to learn what 
steps you should take.
For more information, see Pub. 5027.
All taxpayers are now eligible for an 
Identity Protection Personal Identifica-
tion Number (IP PIN). For more infor-
mation, see Pub. 5477. T o apply for an IP PIN, 
go to IRS.gov/IPPIN and use the Get an IP PIN 
tool.
Victims of identity theft who are experienc-
ing economic harm or a systemic problem, or 
are seeking help in resolving tax problems that 
have not been resolved through normal chan-
nels, may be eligible for T axpayer Advocate 
Service (TAS) assistance. Y ou can reach TAS 
by calling the National T axpayer Advocate help-
line at 877 -777-4778 or 800 -829-4059 (TTY/
TDD). Deaf or hard -of-hearing individuals can 
also contact the IRS through the T elecommuni-
cations Relay Services (TRS) at FCC.gov/TRS.
Protect yourself from suspicious emails 
or phishing schemes. Phishing is the creation 
and use of email and websites designed to 
TIP
mimic legitimate business emails and websites. 
The most common form is the act of sending an 
email to a user falsely claiming to be an estab-
lished legitimate enterprise in an attempt to 
scam the user into surrendering private informa-
tion that will be used for identity theft.
The IRS doesn't initiate contacts with tax-
payers via emails. Also, the IRS doesn't request 
detailed personal information through email or 
ask taxpayers for the PIN numbers, passwords, 
or similar secret access information for their 
credit card, bank, or other financial accounts.
If you receive an unsolicited email claiming 
to be from the IRS, forward the message to 
phishing@irs.gov. Y ou may also report misuse 
of the IRS name, logo, forms, or other IRS prop-
erty to the T reasury Inspector General for T ax 
Administration toll free at 800 -366-4484. Y ou 
can forward suspicious emails to the Federal 
T rade Commission (FTC) at spam@uce.gov or 
report them at ftc.gov/complaint. Y ou can con-
tact them at ftc.gov/idtheft or 877 -IDTHEFT 
(877-438-4338). If you have been a victim of 
identity theft, see IdentityTheft.gov or Pub. 
5027. People who are deaf, hard of hearing, or 
have a speech disability and who have access 
to TTY/TDD equipment can call 866-653-4261.
Go to IRS.gov/IDProtection to learn more 
about identity theft and how to reduce your risk.
2.
Filing Status
Introduction
This chapter helps you determine which filing 
status to use. There are five filing statuses.
• Single.
• Married filing jointly.
• Married filing separately.
• Head of household.
• Qualifying surviving spouse.
If more than one filing status applies to 
you, choose the one that will give you 
the lowest tax.
Y ou must determine your filing status before 
you can determine whether you must file a tax 
return ( chapter 1 ), your standard deduction 
(chapter 10 ), and your tax ( chapter 11 ). Y ou 
also use your filing status to determine whether 
you are eligible to claim certain deductions and 
credits.
Useful Items
Y ou may want to see:
Publication
3 Armed Forces’ T ax Guide
501 Dependents, Standard Deduction, 
and Filing Information
TIP
  3
  501
Page 23 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17 (2023) Chapter 2 Filing Status 21

503 Child and Dependent Care Expenses
519 U.S. T ax Guide for Aliens
555 Community Property
559 Survivors, Executors, and 
Administrators
596 Earned Income Credit (EIC)
925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
971 Innocent Spouse Relief
For these and other useful items, go to IRS.gov/
Forms.
Marital Status
In general, your filing status depends on 
whether you are considered unmarried or mar-
ried.
Unmarried persons.  Y ou are considered un-
married for the whole year if, on the last day of 
your tax year, you are either:
• Unmarried, or
• Legally separated from your spouse under 
a divorce or separate maintenance decree.
State law governs whether you are married 
or legally separated under a divorce or separate 
maintenance decree.
Divorced persons.  If you are divorced un-
der a final decree by the last day of the year, 
you are considered unmarried for the whole 
year.
Divorce and remarriage. If you obtain a di-
vorce for the sole purpose of filing tax returns as 
unmarried individuals, and at the time of divorce 
you intend to and do, in fact, remarry each other 
in the next tax year, you and your spouse must 
file as married individuals in both years.
Annulled marriages.  If you obtain a court 
decree of annulment, which holds that no valid 
marriage ever existed, you are considered un-
married even if you filed joint returns for earlier 
years. File Form 1040-X, Amended U.S. Individ-
ual Income T ax Return, claiming single or head 
of household status for all tax years that are af-
fected by the annulment and not closed by the 
statute of limitations for filing a tax return. Gen-
erally, for a credit or refund, you must file Form 
1040-X within 3 years (including extensions) af-
ter the date you filed your original return or 
within 2 years after the date you paid the tax, 
whichever is later. If you filed your original return 
early (for example, March 1), your return is con-
sidered filed on the due date (generally April 
15). However, if you had an extension to file (for 
example, until October 15) but you filed earlier 
and we received it on July 1, your return is con-
sidered filed on July 1.
Head of household or qualifying surviv-
ing spouse.  If you are considered unmarried, 
you may be able to file as head of household or 
as qualifying surviving spouse. See Head of 
Household and Qualifying Surviving Spouse , 
later, to see if you qualify.
Married persons.  If you are considered mar-
ried, you and your spouse can file a joint return 
or separate returns.
Considered married.  Y ou are considered 
married for the whole year if, on the last day of 
  503
  519
  555
  559
  596
  925
  971
your tax year, you and your spouse meet any 
one of the following tests.
1. Y ou are married and living together.
2. Y ou are living together in a common law 
marriage recognized in the state where 
you now live or in the state where the com-
mon law marriage began.
3. Y ou are married and living apart, but not 
legally separated under a decree of di-
vorce or separate maintenance.
4. Y ou are separated under an interlocutory 
(not final) decree of divorce.
Spouse died during the year.  If your 
spouse died during the year, you are consid-
ered married for the whole year for filing status 
purposes.
If you didn't remarry before the end of the 
tax year, you can file a joint return for yourself 
and your deceased spouse. For the next 2 
years, you may be entitled to the special bene-
fits described later under Qualifying Surviving 
Spouse.
If you remarried before the end of the tax 
year, you can file a joint return with your new 
spouse. Y our deceased spouse's filing status is 
married filing separately for that year.
Married persons living apart.  If you live 
apart from your spouse and meet certain tests, 
you may be able to file as head of household 
even if you aren't divorced or legally separated. 
If you qualify to file as head of household in-
stead of married filing separately, your standard 
deduction will be higher. Also, your tax may be 
lower, and you may be able to claim the earned 
income credit (EIC). See Head of Household , 
later.
Single
Y our filing status is single if you are considered 
unmarried and you don’t qualify for another fil-
ing status. T o determine your marital status, see 
Marital Status, earlier.
Spouse died before January 1, 2023.  Y our 
filing status may be single if your spouse died 
before January 1, 2023, and you didn't remarry 
before the end of 2023. Y ou may, however, be 
able to use another filing status that will give 
you a lower tax. See Head of Household  and 
Qualifying Surviving Spouse , later, to see if you 
qualify. 
How to file.  On Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, show 
your filing status as single by checking the “Sin-
gle” box on the Filing Status line near the top of 
the form. Use the Single column of the T ax T a-
ble, or Section A of the T ax Computation Work-
sheet, to figure your tax.
Married Filing Jointly
Y ou can choose married filing jointly as your fil-
ing status if you are considered married and 
both you and your spouse agree to file a joint re-
turn. On a joint return, you and your spouse re-
port your combined income and deduct your 
combined allowable expenses. Y ou can file a 
joint return even if one of you had no income or 
deductions.
If you and your spouse decide to file a joint 
return, your tax may be lower than your com-
bined tax for the other filing statuses. Also, your 
standard deduction (if you don’t itemize deduc-
tions) may be higher, and you may qualify for 
tax benefits that don’t apply to other filing sta-
tuses.
How to file.  On Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, show 
your filing status as married filing jointly by 
checking the “Married filing jointly” box on the 
Filing Status line near the top of the form. Use 
the Married filing jointly column of the T ax T able, 
or Section B of the T ax Computation Work-
sheet, to figure your tax.
If you and your spouse each have in-
come, you may want to figure your tax 
both on a joint return and on separate 
returns (using the filing status of married filing 
separately). Y ou can choose the method that 
gives the two of you the lower combined tax un-
less you are required to file separately.
Spouse died.  If your spouse died during the 
year, you are considered married for the whole 
year and can choose married filing jointly as 
your filing status. See Spouse died during the 
year under Married persons, earlier, for more in-
formation.
If your spouse died in 2024 before filing a 
2023 return, you can choose married filing 
jointly as your filing status on your 2023 return.
Divorced persons. If you are divorced under a 
final decree by the last day of the year, you are 
considered unmarried for the whole year and 
you can’t choose married filing jointly as your fil-
ing status.
Filing a Joint Return
Both you and your spouse must include all of 
your income and deductions on your joint re-
turn.
Accounting period. Both of you must use the 
same accounting period, but you can use differ-
ent accounting methods. See Accounting Peri-
ods and Accounting Methods in chapter 1.
Joint responsibility. Both of you may be held 
responsible, jointly and individually, for the tax 
and any interest or penalty due on your joint re-
turn. This means that if one spouse doesn't pay 
the tax due, the other may have to. Or, if one 
spouse doesn't report the correct tax, both 
spouses may be responsible for any additional 
taxes assessed by the IRS. One spouse may be 
held responsible for all the tax due even if all the 
income was earned by the other spouse.
Y ou may want to file separately if:
• Y ou believe your spouse isn't reporting all 
of their income, or
• Y ou don’t want to be responsible for any 
taxes due if your spouse doesn't have 
enough tax withheld or doesn't pay enough 
estimated tax.
Divorced taxpayer. Y ou may be held jointly 
and individually responsible for any tax, interest, 
and penalties due on a joint return filed before 
your divorce. This responsibility may apply even 
if your divorce decree states that your former 
TIP
Page 24 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
22 Chapter 2 Filing Status Publication 17 (2023)

spouse will be responsible for any amounts due 
on previously filed joint returns.
Relief from joint responsibility.  In some 
cases, one spouse may be relieved of joint re-
sponsibility for tax, interest, and penalties on a 
joint return for items of the other spouse that 
were incorrectly reported on the joint return. Y ou 
can ask for relief no matter how small the liabil-
ity.
There are three types of relief available.
1. Innocent spouse relief.
2. Separation of liability (available only to 
joint filers whose spouse has died, or who 
are divorced, legally separated, or haven't 
lived together for the 12 months ending on 
the date the election for this relief is filed).
3. Equitable relief.
Y ou must file Form 8857, Request for Inno-
cent Spouse Relief, to request relief from joint 
responsibility. Pub. 971 explains these kinds of 
relief and who may qualify for them.
Signing a joint return.  For a return to be con-
sidered a joint return, both spouses must gener-
ally sign the return.
Spouse died before signing.  If your 
spouse died before signing the return, the exec-
utor or administrator must sign the return for 
your spouse. If neither you nor anyone else has 
yet been appointed as executor or administra-
tor, you can sign the return for your spouse and 
enter “Filing as surviving spouse” in the area 
where you sign the return.
Spouse away from home. If your spouse is 
away from home, you should prepare the return, 
sign it, and send it to your spouse to sign so that 
it can be filed on time.
Injury or disease prevents signing. If your 
spouse can’t sign because of disease or injury 
and tells you to sign for them, you can sign your 
spouse’s name in the proper space on the re-
turn followed by the words “By (your name), 
Spouse.” Be sure to sign in the space provided 
for your signature. Attach a dated statement, 
signed by you, to the return. The statement 
should include the form number of the return 
you are filing, the tax year, and the reason your 
spouse can’t sign; it should also state that your 
spouse has agreed to your signing for them.
Signing as guardian of spouse.  If you are 
the guardian of your spouse who is mentally in-
competent, you can sign the return for your 
spouse as guardian.
Spouse in combat zone.  Y ou can sign a 
joint return for your spouse if your spouse can’t 
sign because they are serving in a combat zone 
(such as the Persian Gulf Area, Serbia, Monte-
negro, Albania, or Afghanistan), even if you 
don’t have a power of attorney or other state-
ment. Attach a signed statement to your return 
explaining that your spouse is serving in a com-
bat zone. For more information on special tax 
rules for persons who are serving in a combat 
zone, or who are in missing status as a result of 
serving in a combat zone, see Pub. 3.
Power of attorney. In order for you to sign a 
return for your spouse in any of these cases, 
you must attach to the return a power of attor-
ney (POA) that authorizes you to sign for your 
spouse. Y ou can use a POA that states that you 
have been granted authority to sign the return, 
or you can use Form 2848. Part I of Form 2848 
must state that you are granted authority to sign 
the return.
Nonresident alien or dual-status alien. Gen-
erally, a married couple can’t file a joint return if 
either one is a nonresident alien at any time dur-
ing the tax year. However, if one spouse was a 
nonresident alien or dual -status alien who was 
married to a U.S. citizen or resident alien at the 
end of the year, the spouses can choose to file 
a joint return. If you do file a joint return, you and 
your spouse are both treated as U.S. residents 
for the entire tax year. See chapter 1 of Pub. 
519.
Married Filing 
Separately
Y ou can choose married filing separately as 
your filing status if you are married. This filing 
status may benefit you if you want to be respon-
sible only for your own tax or if it results in less 
tax than filing a joint return.
If you and your spouse don’t agree to file a 
joint return, you must use this filing status un-
less you qualify for head of household status, 
discussed later.
Y ou may be able to choose head of house-
hold filing status if you are considered unmar-
ried because you live apart from your spouse 
and meet certain tests (explained under Head 
of Household, later). This can apply to you even 
if you aren't divorced or legally separated. If you 
qualify to file as head of household, instead of 
as married filing separately, your tax may be 
lower, you may be able to claim the EIC and 
certain other benefits, and your standard de-
duction will be higher. The head of household 
filing status allows you to choose the standard 
deduction even if your spouse chooses to item-
ize deductions. See Head of Household , later, 
for more information.
Y ou will generally pay more combined 
tax on separate returns than you would 
on a joint return for the reasons listed 
under Special Rules, later. However, unless you 
are required to file separately, you should figure 
your tax both ways (on a joint return and on sep-
arate returns). This way, you can make sure you 
are using the filing status that results in the low-
est combined tax. When figuring the combined 
tax of a married couple, you may want to con-
sider state taxes as well as federal taxes.
How to file.  If you file a separate return, you 
generally report only your own income, credits, 
and deductions.
Select this filing status by checking the 
“Married filing separately” box on the Filing Sta-
tus line near the top of Form 1040 or 1040 -SR. 
Enter your spouse's full name and SSN or ITIN 
in the entry space at the bottom of the Filing 
Status section. If your spouse doesn't have and 
isn't required to have an SSN or ITIN, enter 
“NRA” in the space for your spouse's SSN. Use 
the Married filing separately  column of the T ax 
T able, or Section C of the T ax Computation 
Worksheet, to figure your tax.
TIP
Special Rules
If you choose married filing separately as your 
filing status, the following special rules apply. 
Because of these special rules, you usually pay 
more tax on a separate return than if you use 
another filing status you qualify for.
1. Y our tax rate is generally higher than on a 
joint return.
2. Y our exemption amount for figuring the al-
ternative minimum tax is half that allowed 
on a joint return.
3. Y ou can’t take the credit for child and de-
pendent care expenses in most cases, 
and the amount you can exclude from in-
come under an employer's dependent 
care assistance program is limited to 
$2,500 (instead of $5,000 on a joint re-
turn). However, if you are legally separated 
or living apart from your spouse, you may 
be able to file a separate return and still 
take the credit. For more information about 
these expenses, the credit, and the exclu-
sion, see What’s Y our Filing Status? in 
Pub. 503.
4. Y ou can’t take the EIC, unless you have a 
qualifying child and meet certain other re-
quirements. See Pub. 596.
5. Y ou can’t take the exclusion or credit for 
adoption expenses in most cases.
6. Y ou can’t take the education credits (the 
American opportunity credit and lifetime 
learning credit), or the deduction for stu-
dent loan interest.
7. Y ou can’t exclude any interest income from 
qualified U.S. savings bonds you used for 
higher education expenses.
8. If you lived with your spouse at any time 
during the tax year:
a. Y ou can’t claim the credit for the eld-
erly or the disabled, and
b. Y ou must include in income a greater 
percentage (up to 85%) of any social 
security or equivalent railroad retire-
ment benefits you received.
9. The following credits and deductions are 
reduced at income levels half of those for 
a joint return.
a. The child tax credit and the credit for 
other dependents.
b. The retirement savings contributions 
credit.
10. Y our capital loss deduction limit is $1,500 
(instead of $3,000 on a joint return). 
11. If your spouse itemizes deductions, you 
can’t claim the standard deduction. If you 
can claim the standard deduction, your ba-
sic standard deduction is half of the 
amount allowed on a joint return.
Adjusted gross income (AGI) limits.  If your 
AGI on a separate return is lower than it would 
have been on a joint return, you may be able to 
deduct a larger amount for certain deductions 
that are limited by AGI, such as medical expen-
ses.
Page 25 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17 (2023) Chapter 2 Filing Status 23

Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs). 
Y ou may not be able to deduct all or part of your 
contributions to a traditional IRA if you or your 
spouse was covered by an employee retirement 
plan at work during the year. Y our deduction is 
reduced or eliminated if your income is more 
than a certain amount. This amount is much 
lower for married individuals who file separately 
and lived together at any time during the year. 
For more information, see How Much Can Y ou 
Deduct in chapter 9.
Rental activity losses.  If you actively partici-
pated in a passive rental real estate activity that 
produced a loss, you can generally deduct the 
loss from your nonpassive income, up to 
$25,000. This is called a special allowance. 
However, married persons filing separate re-
turns who lived together at any time during the 
year can’t claim this special allowance. Married 
persons filing separate returns who lived apart 
at all times during the year are each allowed a 
$12,500 maximum special allowance for losses 
from passive real estate activities. See Rental 
Activities in Pub. 925 for more information.
Community property states.  If you live in a 
community property state and file separately, 
your income may be considered separate in-
come or community income for income tax pur-
poses. Community property states include Ari-
zona, California, Idaho, Louisiana, Nevada, New 
Mexico, T exas, Washington, and Wisconsin. 
See Pub. 555 for more information.
Joint Return After
Separate Returns
Y ou can change your filing status from a sepa-
rate return to a joint return by filing an amended 
return using Form 1040-X.
Y ou can generally change to a joint return 
any time within 3 years from the due date of the 
separate return or returns. This doesn't include 
any extensions. A separate return includes a re-
turn filed by you or your spouse claiming mar-
ried filing separately, single, or head of house-
hold filing status.
Separate Returns After
Joint Return
Once you file a joint return, you can’t choose to 
file separate returns for that year after the due 
date of the return.
Exception. A personal representative for a de-
cedent can change from a joint return elected 
by the surviving spouse to a separate return for 
the decedent. The personal representative has 
1 year from the due date (including extensions) 
of the return to make the change. See Pub. 559 
for more information on filing a return for a dece-
dent.
Head of Household
Y ou may be able to file as head of household if 
you meet all of the following requirements.
1. Y ou are unmarried or considered unmar-
ried on the last day of the year. See Marital 
Status, earlier, and Considered Unmar-
ried, later.
2. Y ou paid more than half of the cost of 
keeping up a home for the year.
3. A qualifying person lived with you in the 
home for more than half the year (except 
for temporary absences, such as school). 
However, if the qualifying person is your 
dependent parent, your dependent parent 
doesn't have to live with you. See Special 
rule for parent, later, under Qualifying Per-
son.
If you qualify to file as head of house-
hold, your tax rate will usually be lower 
than the rates for single or married fil-
ing separately. Y ou will also receive a higher 
standard deduction than if you file as single or 
married filing separately.
How to file.  Indicate your choice of this filing 
status by checking the “Head of household” box 
on the Filing Status  line near the top of Form 
1040 or 1040 -SR. If the child who qualifies you 
for this filing status isn't claimed as your de-
pendent in the Dependents section of Form 
1040 or 1040 -SR, enter the child's name in the 
entry space at the bottom of the Filing Status 
section. Use the Head of a household  column 
of the T ax T able, or Section D of the Worksheet, 
to figure your tax.
Considered Unmarried
T o qualify for head of household status, you 
must be either unmarried or considered unmar-
ried on the last day of the year. Y ou are consid-
ered unmarried on the last day of the tax year if 
you meet all of the following tests.
1. Y ou file a separate return. A separate re-
turn includes a return claiming married fil-
ing separately, single, or head of house-
hold filing status.
2. Y ou paid more than half of the cost of 
keeping up your home for the tax year.
3. Y our spouse didn't live in your home during 
the last 6 months of the tax year. Y our 
spouse is considered to live in your home 
even if your spouse is temporarily absent 
due to special circumstances. See T empo-
rary absences under Qualifying Person, 
later.
4. Y our home was the main home of your 
child, stepchild, or foster child for more 
than half the year. (See Home of qualifying 
person under Qualifying Person, later, for 
rules applying to a child's birth, death, or 
temporary absence during the year.)
5. Y ou must be able to claim the child as a 
dependent. However, you meet this test if 
you can’t claim the child as a dependent 
only because the noncustodial parent can 
claim the child using the rules described in 
Children of divorced or separated parents 
(or parents who live apart) under Qualify-
ing Child in chapter 3, or referred to in 
Support T est for Children of Divorced or 
Separated Parents (or Parents Who Live 
Apart) under Qualifying Relative in chap-
ter 3. The general rules for claiming a child 
as a dependent are explained in chapter 3.
Y ou may be considered unmarried for the 
purpose of using head of household status but 
TIP
not for other purposes, such as claiming the 
EIC. Different tests apply depending on the tax 
benefit you claim.
If you were considered married for part 
of the year and lived in a community 
property state (listed earlier under Mar-
ried Filing Separately ), special rules may apply 
in determining your income and expenses. See 
Pub. 555 for more information.
Nonresident alien spouse.  Y ou are consid-
ered unmarried for head of household purposes 
if your spouse was a nonresident alien at any 
time during the year and you don’t choose to 
treat your nonresident spouse as a resident 
alien. However, your spouse isn't a qualifying 
person for head of household purposes. Y ou 
must have another qualifying person and meet 
the other tests to be eligible to file as head of 
household. 
Choice to treat spouse as resident.  Y ou 
are considered married if you choose to treat 
your spouse as a resident alien. See chapter 1 
of Pub. 519.
Keeping Up a Home
T o qualify for head of household status, you 
must pay more than half of the cost of keeping 
up a home for the year. Y ou can determine 
whether you paid more than half of the cost of 
keeping up a home by using Worksheet 2-1.
Costs you include.  Include in the cost of 
keeping up a home expenses, such as rent, 
mortgage interest, real estate taxes, insurance 
on the home, repairs, utilities, and food eaten in 
the home.
Costs you don’t include.  Don’t include the 
costs of clothing, education, medical treatment, 
vacations, life insurance, or transportation. Also 
don’t include the value of your services or those 
of a member of your household.
Qualifying Person
See T able 2-1 to see who is a qualifying person. 
Any person not described in T able 2-1 isn't a 
qualifying person.
Example 1 —Child. Y our unmarried child 
lived with you all year and was 18 years old at 
the end of the year. Y our child didn't provide 
more than half of their own support and doesn't 
meet the tests to be a qualifying child of anyone 
else. As a result, this child is your qualifying 
child (see Qualifying Child  in chapter 3) and, 
because this child is single, this is your qualify-
ing person for head of household purposes.
Example 2 —Child who isn't qualifying 
person. The facts are the same as in Exam-
ple 1, except your child was 25 years old at the 
end of the year and your child’s gross income 
was $5,000. Because your child doesn't meet 
the age test (explained under Qualifying Child in 
chapter 3), your child isn't your qualifying child. 
Because the child doesn't meet the gross in-
come test (explained under Qualifying Relative 
in chapter 3), the child isn't your qualifying rela-
tive. As a result, this child isn't your qualifying 
person for head of household purposes.
CAUTION
!
Page 26 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
24 Chapter 2 Filing Status Publication 17 (2023)

Example 3 —Friend. Y our friend lived with 
you all year. Even though your friend may be 
your qualifying relative if the gross income and 
support tests (explained in chapter 3) are met, 
your friend isn't your qualifying person for head 
of household purposes because your friend isn't 
related to you in one of the ways listed under 
Relatives who don’t have to live with you  in 
chapter 3. See T able 2-1.
Example 4—Friend's child. The facts are 
the same as in Example 3, except your friend's 
10-year-old child also lived with you all year. 
Y our friend’s child isn't your qualifying child and, 
because the child is your friend's qualifying 
child, your friend’s child isn't your qualifying rel-
ative (see Not a Qualifying Child T est in chap-
ter 3). As a result, your friend’s child isn't your 
qualifying person for head of household purpo-
ses.
Home of qualifying person.  Generally, the 
qualifying person must live with you for more 
than half the year.
Special rule for parent.  If your qualifying 
person is your parent, you may be eligible to file 
as head of household even if your parent 
doesn't live with you. However, you must be 
able to claim your parent as a dependent. Also, 
you must pay more than half of the cost of keep-
ing up a home that was the main home for the 
entire year for your parent.
If you pay more than half of the cost of keep-
ing your parent in a rest home or home for the 
elderly, that counts as paying more than half of 
the cost of keeping up your parent's main home.
Death or birth. Y ou may be eligible to file as 
head of household even if the individual who 
qualifies you for this filing status is born or dies 
during the year. If the individual is your qualify-
ing child, the child must have lived with you for 
more than half the part of the year the child was 
alive. If the individual is anyone else, see Pub. 
501 for more information.
Temporary absences. Y ou and your quali-
fying person are considered to live together 
even if one or both of you are temporarily ab-
sent from your home due to special circumstan-
ces, such as illness, education, business, vaca-
tion, military service, or detention in a juvenile 
facility. It must be reasonable to assume the ab-
sent person will return to the home after the 
temporary absence. Y ou must continue to keep 
up the home during the absence.
Adopted child or foster child.  Y ou may be 
eligible to file as head of household if the per-
son who qualifies you for this filing status was 
an adopted child or foster child. For more infor-
mation, see Pub. 501.
Kidnapped child. Y ou may be eligible to file 
as head of household even if the child who is 
your qualifying person has been kidnapped. For 
more information, see Pub. 501.
Qualifying Surviving 
Spouse
If your spouse died in 2023, you can use mar-
ried filing jointly as your filing status for 2023 if 
you otherwise qualify to use that status. The 
year of death is the last year for which you can 
file jointly with your deceased spouse. See Mar-
ried Filing Jointly, earlier.
Y ou may be eligible to use qualifying surviv-
ing spouse as your filing status for 2 years fol-
lowing the year your spouse died. For example, 
if your spouse died in 2022, and you haven't re-
married, you may be able to use this filing status 
for 2023 and 2024.
This filing status entitles you to use joint re-
turn tax rates and the highest standard deduc-
tion amount (if you don’t itemize deductions). It 
doesn't entitle you to file a joint return.
How to file.  Indicate your choice of this filing 
status by checking the “Qualifying surviving 
spouse” box on the Filing Status  line near the 
top of Form 1040 or 1040 -SR. If the child who 
qualifies you for this filing status isn’t claimed as 
your dependent in the Dependents section of 
Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, enter the child’s name 
in the entry space at the bottom of the Filing 
Status section. Use the Married filing jointly col-
umn of the T ax T able, or Section B of the T ax 
Computation Worksheet, to figure your tax.
Eligibility rules.  Y ou are eligible to file your 
2023 return as a qualifying surviving spouse if 
you meet all of the following tests.
• Y ou were entitled to file a joint return with 
your spouse for the year your spouse died. 
It doesn't matter whether you actually filed 
a joint return.
• Y our spouse died in 2021 or 2022 and you 
didn't remarry before the end of 2023.
• Y ou have a child or stepchild (not a foster 
child) whom you can claim as a dependent 
or could claim as a dependent except that, 
for 2023:
 a. The child had gross income of 
$4,700 or more,
 b. The child filed a joint return, or
 c. Y ou could be claimed as a depend-
ent on someone else’s return.
If the child isn't claimed as your de-
pendent in the Dependents section on 
Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, enter the child's 
name in the entry space at the bottom of 
the Filing Status  section. If you don’t enter 
the name, it will take us longer to process 
your return.
• This child lived in your home all year, ex-
cept for temporary absences. See T empo-
rary absences, earlier, under Head of 
Household. There are also exceptions, de-
scribed later, for a child who was born or 
died during the year and for a kidnapped 
child.
• Y ou paid more than half of the cost of 
keeping up a home for the year. See Keep-
ing Up a Home, earlier, under Head of 
Household.
Example. Y our spouse died in 2021 and 
you haven’t remarried. During 2022 and 2023 
you continued to keep up a home for you and 
your child who lives with you and whom you can 
claim as a dependent. For 2021, you were enti-
tled to file a joint return for you and your de-
ceased spouse. For 2022 and 2023, you can file 
as qualifying surviving spouse. After 2023, you 
can file as head of household if you qualify.
Death or birth. Y ou may be eligible to file as a 
qualifying surviving spouse if the child who 
qualifies you for this filing status is born or dies 
during the year. Y ou must have provided more 
than half of the cost of keeping up a home that 
was the child's main home during the entire part 
of the year the child was alive.
Adopted child. Y ou may be eligible to file as a 
qualifying surviving spouse if the child who 
qualifies you for this filing status you adopted in 
2023 or was lawfully placed with you for legal 
adoption by you in 2023. The child is consid-
ered to have lived with you for all of 2023 if your 
main home was this child’s main home for the 
entire time since this child was adopted or 
placed with you in 2023.
Kidnapped child. Y ou may be eligible to file as 
a qualifying surviving spouse even if the child 
Worksheet 2-1. Cost of Keeping 
Up a Home Keep for Y our Records
Amount
You Paid Total Cost
Property taxes $ $ 
Mortgage interest expense 
Rent 
Utility charges 
Repairs/Maintenance 
Property insurance 
Food eaten in the home
Other household expenses 
Totals $ $ 
Minus total amount you paid ( ) 
Amount others paid $ 
If the total amount you paid is more than the amount others paid, you meet the 
requirement of paying more than half of the cost of keeping up the home.
Page 27 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17 (2023) Chapter 2 Filing Status 25

who qualifies you for this filing status has been 
kidnapped. See Pub. 501 for more information.
As mentioned earlier, the filing status 
qualifying surviving spouse is available 
for only 2 years following the year your 
spouse died.
CAUTION
!
3.
Dependents
Introduction
This chapter discusses the following topics.
• Dependents—Y ou can generally claim 
your qualifying child or qualifying relative 
as a dependent.
• Social security number (SSN) requirement 
for dependents—Y ou must list the SSN of 
any person you claim as a dependent.
How to claim dependents. On page 1 of your 
Form 1040 or 1040-SR, enter the names of your 
dependents in the Dependents section.
Useful Items
Y ou may want to see:
Publication
501 Dependents, Standard Deduction, 
and Filing Information
503 Child and Dependent Care Expenses
526 Charitable Contributions
Form (and Instructions)
2120 Multiple Support Declaration
8332 Release/Revocation of Release of 
Claim to Exemption for Child by 
Custodial Parent
Dependents
The term “dependent” means:
• A qualifying child, or
  501
  503
  526
  2120
  8332
Who Is a Qualifying Person Qualifying You To File as Head of Household?1
Caution. See the text of this chapter for the other requirements you must meet to claim head of household 
filing status.
IF the person is your . . . AND . . . THEN that person is . . .
qualifying child (such as a son, 
daughter, or grandchild who lived with 
you more than half the year and meets 
certain other tests)2
the child is single a qualifying person, whether or 
not the child meets the Citizen or 
Resident T est in chapter 3.
the child is married and you can claim the 
child as a dependent
a qualifying person.
the child is married and you can’t claim the 
child as a dependent
not a qualifying person.3
qualifying relative4 who is your father or 
mother
you can claim your parent as a dependent5 a qualifying person.6
you can’t claim your parent as a dependent not a qualifying person.
qualifying relative4 other than your father 
or mother (such as a grandparent, 
brother, or sister who meets certain 
tests)
your relative lived with you more than half 
the year, and your relative is related to you in 
one of the ways listed under Relatives who 
don’t have to live with you in chapter 3 and 
you can claim your relative as a dependent5
a qualifying person.
your relative didn't live with you more than 
half the year
not a qualifying person.
your relative isn't related to you in one of the 
ways listed under Relatives who don’t have 
to live with you in chapter 3 and is your 
qualifying relative only because your relative 
lived with you all year as a member of your 
household
not a qualifying person.
you can’t claim your relative as a dependent not a qualifying person.
1 A person can’t qualify more than one taxpayer to use the head of household filing status for the year.
2 The term “qualifying child” is defined in chapter 3. Note. If you are a noncustodial parent, the term “qualifying child” for head of household filing status doesn't include a child who is your 
qualifying child only because of the rules described under Children of divorced or separated parents (or parents who live apart) under Qualifying Child in chapter 3. If you are the 
custodial parent and those rules apply, the child is generally your qualifying child for head of household filing status even though the child isn't a qualifying child you can claim as a 
dependent.
3 This person is a qualifying person if the only reason you can’t claim the person as a dependent is that you, or your spouse if filing jointly, can be claimed as a dependent on another 
taxpayer’s return.
4 The term “qualifying relative” is defined in chapter 3.
5 If you can claim a person as a dependent only because of a multiple support agreement, that person isn't a qualifying person. See Multiple Support Agreement in chapter 3.
6 See Special rule for parent under Qualifying Person, earlier.
T able 2-1.
Page 28 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
26 Chapter 3 Dependents Publication 17 (2023)

• A qualifying relative.
The terms “ qualifying child ” and “ qualifying 
relative” are defined later.
All the requirements for claiming a depend-
ent are summarized in T able 3-1.
Housekeepers, maids, or servants.  If these 
people work for you, you can’t claim them as 
dependents.
Child tax credit. Y ou may be entitled to a child 
tax credit for each qualifying child who was un-
der age 17 at the end of the year if you claimed 
that child as a dependent. For more information, 
see chapter 14.
Credit for other dependents. Y ou may be en-
titled to a credit for other dependents for each 
qualifying child who does not qualify you for the 
child tax credit and for each qualifying relative. 
For more information, see chapter 14.
Exceptions
Even if you have a qualifying child or qualifying 
relative, you can claim that person as a depend-
ent only if these three tests are met.
1. Dependent taxpayer test.
2. Joint return test.
3. Citizen or resident test.
These three tests are explained in detail 
here.
Dependent Taxpayer Test
If you can be claimed as a dependent by an-
other taxpayer, you can’t claim anyone else as a 
dependent. Even if you have a qualifying child 
Overview of the Rules for Claiming a Dependent
Caution. This table is only an overview of the rules. For details, see the rest of this chapter.
• Y ou can’t claim any dependents if you (or your spouse if filing jointly) could be claimed as a dependent by another taxpayer, 
unless that taxpayer files a return only to claim a refund of withheld income tax or estimated tax paid.
• Y ou can’t claim a married person who files a joint return as a dependent unless that joint return is filed only to claim a refund of 
withheld income tax or estimated tax paid.
• Y ou can’t claim a person as a dependent unless that person is a U.S. citizen, U.S. resident alien, U.S. national, or a resident of 
Canada or Mexico.1
• Y ou can’t claim a person as a dependent unless that person is your qualifying child or qualifying relative.
Tests To Be a Qualifying Child Tests To Be a Qualifying Relative
1. The child must be your son, daughter, stepchild, foster child, 
brother, sister, half brother, half sister, stepbrother, stepsister, 
or a descendant of any of them.
2. The child must be (a) under age 19 at the end of the year and 
younger than you (or your spouse if filing jointly); (b) under age 
24 at the end of the year, a student, and younger than you (or 
your spouse if filing jointly); or (c) any age if permanently and 
totally disabled. 
3. The child must have lived with you for more than half of the 
year.2
4. The child must not have provided more than half of the child’s 
own support for the year.
5. The child must not be filing a joint return for the year (unless 
that joint return is filed only to get a refund of income tax 
withheld or estimated tax paid).
If the child meets the rules to be a qualifying child of more than one 
person, generally only one person can actually treat the child as a 
qualifying child. See Qualifying Child of More Than One Person, 
later, to find out which person is the person entitled to claim the 
child as a qualifying child.
1. The person can’t be your qualifying child or the 
qualifying child of any other taxpayer.
2. The person either (a) must be related to you in one of 
the ways listed under Relatives who don’t have to live 
with you, or (b) must live with you all year as a member 
of your household2 (and your relationship must not 
violate local law).
3. The person's gross income for the year must be less 
than $4,700.3
4. Y ou must provide more than half of the person's total 
support for the year.4
1 There is an exception for certain adopted children.
2 There are exceptions for temporary absences, children who were born or died during the year, children who were adopted or lawfully placed for 
adoption during the year, children who are eligible foster children placed during the year, children of divorced or separated parents (or parents who 
live apart), and kidnapped children.
3 There is an exception if the person is disabled and has income from a sheltered workshop.
4 There are exceptions for multiple support agreements, children of divorced or separated parents (or parents who live apart), and kidnapped 
children.
T able 3-1.
Page 29 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17 (2023) Chapter 3 Dependents 27

or qualifying relative, you can’t claim that person 
as a dependent.
If you are filing a joint return and your 
spouse can be claimed as a dependent by an-
other taxpayer, you and your spouse can’t claim 
any dependents on your joint return.
Exception. If you can be claimed as a depend-
ent by another taxpayer, you can claim some-
one else as a dependent if the person who can 
claim you (or your spouse if filing a joint return) 
as a dependent files a return only to claim a re-
fund of income tax withheld or estimated.
Joint Return Test
Y ou generally can’t claim a married person as a 
dependent if that person files a joint return.
Exception. Y ou can claim a person as a de-
pendent who files a joint return if that person 
and that person’s spouse file the joint return 
only to claim a refund of income tax withheld or 
estimated tax paid.
Example 1 —Child files joint return.  Y ou 
supported your 18 -year-old child who lived with 
you all year while your child’s spouse was in the 
Armed Forces. Y our child’s spouse earned 
$35,000 for the year. The couple files a joint re-
turn. Y ou can’t claim your child as a dependent.
Example 2 —Child files joint return only 
as claim for refund of withheld tax.  Y our 
18-year-old child and your child’s 17 -year-old 
spouse had $800 of wages from part -time jobs 
and no other income. They lived with you all 
year. Neither is required to file a tax return. They 
don’t have a child. T axes were taken out of their 
pay, so they filed a joint return only to get a re-
fund of the withheld taxes. The exception to the 
joint return test applies, so you aren't disquali-
fied from claiming each of them as a dependent 
just because they file a joint return. Y ou can 
claim each of them as a dependent if all the 
other tests to do so are met.
Example 3 —Child files joint return to 
claim American opportunity credit.  The 
facts are the same as in Example 2, except no 
taxes were taken out of your child’s pay or your 
child’s spouse’s pay. However, they file a joint 
return to claim an American opportunity credit 
of $124 and get a refund of that amount. Be-
cause they filed a joint return claiming the 
American opportunity credit, they aren't filing it 
only to get a refund of income tax withheld or 
estimated tax paid. The exception to the joint re-
turn test doesn't apply, so you can’t claim either 
of them as a dependent.
Citizen or Resident Test
Y ou generally can’t claim a person as a depend-
ent unless that person is a U.S. citizen, U.S. res-
ident alien, U.S. national, or a resident of Can-
ada or Mexico. However, there is an exception 
for certain adopted children, as explained next.
Exception for adopted child. If you are a U.S. 
citizen or U.S. national who has legally adopted 
a child who isn't a U.S. citizen, U.S. resident 
alien, or U.S. national, this test is met if the child 
lived with you as a member of your household 
all year. This exception also applies if the child 
was lawfully placed with you for legal adoption 
and the child lived with you for the rest of the 
year after placement.
Child's place of residence.  Children are usu-
ally citizens or residents of the country of their 
parents.
If you were a U.S. citizen when your child 
was born, the child may be a U.S. citizen and 
meet this test even if the other parent was a 
nonresident alien and the child was born in a 
foreign country.
Foreign students' place of residence.  For-
eign students brought to this country under a 
qualified international education exchange pro-
gram and placed in American homes for a tem-
porary period generally aren't U.S. residents 
and don’t meet this test. Y ou can’t claim them 
as dependents. However, if you provided a 
home for a foreign student, you may be able to 
take a charitable contribution deduction. See 
Expenses Paid for Student Living With Y ou  in 
Pub. 526.
U.S. national. A U.S. national is an individual 
who, although not a U.S. citizen, owes their alle-
giance to the United States. U.S. nationals in-
clude American Samoans and Northern Ma-
riana Islanders who chose to become U.S. 
nationals instead of U.S. citizens.
Qualifying Child
Five tests must be met for a child to be your 
qualifying child. The five tests are:
1. Relationship,
2. Age,
3. Residency,
4. Support, and
5. Joint return.
These tests are explained next.
If a child meets the five tests to be the 
qualifying child of more than one per-
son, there are rules you must use to 
determine which person can actually treat the 
child as a qualifying child. See Qualifying Child 
of More Than One Person, later.
Relationship Test
T o meet this test, a child must be:
• Y our son, daughter, stepchild, or foster 
child, or a descendant (for example, your 
grandchild) of any of them; or
• Y our brother, sister, half brother, half sister, 
stepbrother, or stepsister, or a descendant 
(for example, your niece or nephew) of any 
of them.
Adopted child.  An adopted child is always 
treated as your own child. The term “adopted 
child” includes a child who was lawfully placed 
with you for legal adoption.
Foster child. A foster child is an individual who 
is placed with you by an authorized placement 
agency or by judgment, decree, or other order 
of any court of competent jurisdiction.
CAUTION
!
Age Test
T o meet this test, a child must be:
• Under age 19 at the end of the year and 
younger than you (or your spouse if filing 
jointly);
• A student under age 24 at the end of the 
year and younger than you (or your spouse 
if filing jointly); or
• Permanently and totally disabled at any 
time during the year, regardless of age.
Example. Y our child turned 19 on Decem-
ber 10. Unless this child was permanently and 
totally disabled or a student, this child doesn't 
meet the age test because, at the end of the 
year, this child wasn't under age 19.
Child must be younger than you or spouse. 
T o be your qualifying child, a child who isn't per-
manently and totally disabled must be younger 
than you. However, if you are married filing 
jointly, the child must be younger than you or 
your spouse but doesn't have to be younger 
than both of you.
Example 1—Child not younger than you 
or spouse.  Y our 23-year-old sibling, who is a 
student and unmarried, lives with you and your 
spouse, who provide more than half of your sib-
ling’s support. Y our sibling isn't disabled. Both 
you and your spouse are 21 years old, and you 
file a joint return. Y our sibling isn't your qualify-
ing child because your sibling isn't younger than 
you or your spouse.
Example 2 —Child younger than your 
spouse but not younger than you.  The facts 
are the same as in Example 1 , except your 
spouse is 25 years old. Because your sibling is 
younger than your spouse, and you and your 
spouse are filing a joint return, your sibling is 
your qualifying child, even though your sibling 
isn't younger than you.
Student defined. T o qualify as a student, your 
child must be, during some part of each of any 5 
calendar months of the year:
1. A full-time student at a school that has a 
regular teaching staff and course of study, 
and a regularly enrolled student body at 
the school; or
2. A student taking a full-time, on-farm train-
ing course given by a school described in 
(1), or by a state, county, or local govern-
ment agency.
The 5 calendar months don’t have to be con-
secutive.
Full-time student.  A full -time student is a 
student who is enrolled for the number of hours 
or courses the school considers to be full -time 
attendance.
School defined.  A school can be an ele-
mentary school; a junior or senior high school; a 
college; a university; or a technical, trade, or 
mechanical school. However, an on -the-job 
training course, correspondence school, or 
school offering courses only through the Inter-
net doesn’t count as a school.
Vocational high school students.  Stu-
dents who work on “co -op” jobs in private 
Page 30 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
28 Chapter 3 Dependents Publication 17 (2023)

industry as a part of a school's regular course of 
classroom and practical training are considered 
full-time students.
Permanently and totally disabled.  Y our child 
is permanently and totally disabled if both of the 
following apply.
• Y our child can’t engage in any substantial 
gainful activity because of a physical or 
mental condition.
• A doctor determines the condition has las-
ted or can be expected to last continuously 
for at least a year or can lead to death.
Residency Test
T o meet this test, your child must have lived with 
you for more than half the year. There are ex-
ceptions for temporary absences, children who 
were born or died during the year, adopted or 
foster children, kidnapped children, and chil-
dren of divorced or separated parents.
Temporary absences.  Y our child is consid-
ered to have lived with you during periods of 
time when one of you, or both, is temporarily 
absent due to special circumstances such as:
• Illness,
• Education,
• Business,
• Vacation,
• Military service, or
• Detention in a juvenile facility.
Death or birth of child.  A child who was born 
or died during the year is treated as having lived 
with you more than half of the year if your home 
was the child's home more than half of the time 
the child was alive during the year. The same is 
true if the child lived with you more than half the 
year except for any required hospital stay follow-
ing birth.
Child born alive.  Y ou may be able to claim 
as a dependent a child born alive during the 
year, even if the child lived only for a moment. 
State or local law must treat the child as having 
been born alive. There must be proof of a live 
birth shown by an official document, such as a 
birth certificate. The child must be your qualify-
ing child or qualifying relative, and all the other 
tests to claim the child as a dependent must be 
met.
Stillborn child.  Y ou can’t claim a stillborn 
child as a dependent.
Adopted or foster child.  Y ou can treat your 
adopted child or foster child as meeting the res-
idency test as follows if you adopted the child in 
2023, the child was lawfully placed with you for 
legal adoption by you in 2023, or the child was 
an eligible foster child placed with you during 
2023. This child is considered to have lived with 
you for more than half of 2023 if your main 
home was this child’s main home for more than 
half the time since this child was adopted or 
placed with you in 2023.
Kidnapped child.  Y ou may be able to treat 
your child as meeting the residency test even if 
the child has been kidnapped. See Pub. 501 for 
details.
Children of divorced or separated parents 
(or parents who live apart).  In most cases, 
because of the residency test, a child of di-
vorced or separated parents is the qualifying 
child of the custodial parent. However, the child 
will be treated as the qualifying child of the non-
custodial parent if all four of the following state-
ments are true.
1. The parents:
a. Are divorced or legally separated un-
der a decree of divorce or separate 
maintenance;
b. Are separated under a written separa-
tion agreement; or
c. Lived apart at all times during the last 
6 months of the year, whether or not 
they are or were married.
2. The child received over half of the child’s 
support for the year from the parents.
3. The child is in the custody of one or both 
parents for more than half of the year.
4. Either of the following statements is true.
a. The custodial parent signs a written 
declaration, discussed later, that they 
won't claim the child as a dependent 
for the year, and the noncustodial pa-
rent attaches this written declaration 
to their return. (If the decree or agree-
ment went into effect after 1984 and 
before 2009, see Post-1984 and 
pre-2009 divorce decree or separa-
tion agreement, later. If the decree or 
agreement went into effect after 2008, 
see Post-2008 divorce decree or sep-
aration agreement, later.)
b. A pre-1985 decree of divorce or sepa-
rate maintenance or written separa-
tion agreement that applies to 2023 
states that the noncustodial parent 
can claim the child as a dependent, 
the decree or agreement wasn't 
changed after 1984 to say the non-
custodial parent can’t claim the child 
as a dependent, and the noncustodial 
parent provides at least $600 for the 
child's support during the year.
If statements (1) through (4) are all true, only 
the noncustodial parent can:
• Claim the child as a dependent; and
• Claim the child as a qualifying child for the 
child tax credit, the credit for other depend-
ents, or the additional child tax credit.
However, this doesn’t allow the noncustodial 
parent to claim head of household filing status, 
the credit for child and dependent care expen-
ses, the exclusion for dependent care benefits, 
or the earned income credit. See Applying the 
tiebreaker rules to divorced or separated pa-
rents (or parents who live apart), later.
Example—Earned income credit.  Even if 
statements (1) through (4) are all true and the 
custodial parent signs Form 8332 or a substan-
tially similar statement that the custodial parent 
won’t claim the child as a dependent for 2023, 
this doesn’t allow the noncustodial parent to 
claim the child as a qualifying child for the 
earned income credit. The custodial parent or 
another taxpayer, if eligible, can claim the child 
for the earned income credit.
Custodial parent and noncustodial pa-
rent. The custodial parent is the parent with 
whom the child lived for the greater number of 
nights during the year. The other parent is the 
noncustodial parent.
If the parents divorced or separated during 
the year and the child lived with both parents 
before the separation, the custodial parent is 
the one with whom the child lived for the greater 
number of nights during the rest of the year.
A child is treated as living with a parent for a 
night if the child sleeps:
• At that parent's home, whether or not the 
parent is present; or
• In the company of the parent, when the 
child doesn't sleep at a parent's home (for 
example, the parent and child are on vaca-
tion together).
Equal number of nights.  If the child lived 
with each parent for an equal number of nights 
during the year, the custodial parent is the pa-
rent with the higher AGI.
December 31. The night of December 31 is 
treated as part of the year in which the night be-
gins. For example, the night of December 31, 
2023, is treated as part of 2023.
Emancipated child. If a child is emancipa-
ted under state law, the child is treated as not 
living with either parent. See Examples 5 and 6.
Absences. If a child wasn't with either pa-
rent on a particular night (because, for example, 
the child was staying at a friend's house), the 
child is treated as living with the parent with 
whom the child normally would have lived for 
that night, except for the absence. But if it can’t 
be determined with which parent the child nor-
mally would have lived or if the child wouldn’t 
have lived with either parent that night, the child 
is treated as not living with either parent that 
night.
Parent works at night.  If, due to a parent's 
nighttime work schedule, a child lives for a 
greater number of days, but not nights, with the 
parent who works at night, that parent is treated 
as the custodial parent. On a school day, the 
child is treated as living at the primary resi-
dence registered with the school.
Example 1 —Child lived with one parent 
for a greater number of nights. Y ou and your 
child’s other parent are divorced. In 2023, your 
child lived with you 210 nights and with the 
other parent 155 nights. Y ou are the custodial 
parent.
Example 2 —Child is away at camp.  In 
2023, your child lives with each parent for alter-
nate weeks. In the summer, your child spends 6 
weeks at summer camp. During those 6 weeks, 
your child is treated as living with you for 3 
weeks and with your child’s other parent, your 
ex-spouse, for 3 weeks because this is how 
long the child would have lived with each parent 
if the child had not attended summer camp.
Example 3—Child lived same number of 
nights with each parent.  Y our child lived with 
you 180 nights during the year and lived the 
Page 31 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17 (2023) Chapter 3 Dependents 29

same number of nights with the child’s other pa-
rent, your ex-spouse. Y our AGI is $40,000. Y our 
ex-spouse's AGI is $25,000. Y ou are treated as 
your child's custodial parent because you have 
the higher AGI.
Example 4 —Child is at parent’s home 
but with other parent.  Y our child normally 
lives with you during the week and with the 
child’s other parent, your ex-spouse, every other 
weekend. Y ou become ill and are hospitalized. 
The other parent lives in your home with your 
child for 10 consecutive days while you are in 
the hospital. Y our child is treated as living with 
you during this 10 -day period because your 
child was living in your home.
Example 5 —Child emancipated in May. 
Y our child turned 18 in May 2023 and became 
emancipated under the law of the state where 
your child lives. As a result, your child isn't con-
sidered in the custody of either parent for more 
than half of the year. The special rule for chil-
dren of divorced or separated parents doesn't 
apply.
Example 6 —Child emancipated in Au-
gust. Y our child lives with you from January 1, 
2023, until May 31, 2023, and lives with the 
child’s other parent, your ex -spouse, from June 
1, 2023, through the end of the year. Y our child 
turns 18 and is emancipated under state law on 
August 1, 2023. Because your child is treated 
as not living with either parent beginning on Au-
gust 1, your child is treated as living with you 
the greater number of nights in 2023. Y ou are 
the custodial parent.
Written declaration.  The custodial parent 
must use either Form 8332 or a similar state-
ment (containing the same information required 
by the form) to make the written declaration to 
release a claim to an exemption for a child to 
the noncustodial parent. Although the exemp-
tion amount is zero for tax year 2023, this re-
lease allows the noncustodial parent to claim 
the child tax credit, additional child tax credit, 
and credit for other dependents, if applicable, 
for the child. The noncustodial parent must at-
tach a copy of the form or statement to their tax 
return.
The release can be for 1 year, for a number 
of specified years (for example, alternate 
years), or for all future years, as specified in the 
declaration.
Post-1984 and pre -2009 divorce decree 
or separation agreement.  If the divorce de-
cree or separation agreement went into effect 
after 1984 and before 2009, the noncustodial 
parent may be able to attach certain pages from 
the decree or agreement instead of Form 8332. 
The decree or agreement must state all three of 
the following.
1. The noncustodial parent can claim the 
child as a dependent without regard to any 
condition, such as payment of support.
2. The custodial parent won't claim the child 
as a dependent for the year.
3. The years for which the noncustodial pa-
rent, rather than the custodial parent, can 
claim the child as a dependent.
The noncustodial parent must attach all of 
the following pages of the decree or agreement 
to their tax return.
• The cover page (write the other parent's 
SSN on this page).
• The pages that include all of the informa-
tion identified in items (1) through (3) 
above.
• The signature page with the other parent's 
signature and the date of the agreement.
Post-2008 divorce decree or separation 
agreement. The noncustodial parent can’t at-
tach pages from the decree or agreement in-
stead of Form 8332 if the decree or agreement 
went into effect after 2008. The custodial parent 
must sign either Form 8332 or a similar state-
ment whose only purpose is to release the cus-
todial parent's claim to an exemption for a child, 
and the noncustodial parent must attach a copy 
to their return. The form or statement must re-
lease the custodial parent's claim to the child 
without any conditions. For example, the re-
lease must not depend on the noncustodial pa-
rent paying support.
The noncustodial parent must attach 
the required information even if it was 
filed with a return in an earlier year.
Revocation of release of claim to an ex-
emption. The custodial parent can revoke a re-
lease of claim to an exemption. For the revoca-
tion to be effective for 2023, the custodial parent 
must have given (or made reasonable efforts to 
give) written notice of the revocation to the non-
custodial parent in 2022 or earlier. The custo-
dial parent can use Part III of Form 8332 for this 
purpose and must attach a copy of the revoca-
tion to their return for each tax year the custo-
dial parent claims the child as a dependent as a 
result of the revocation.
Remarried parent. If you remarry, the sup-
port provided by your new spouse is treated as 
provided by you.
Parents who never married.  This special 
rule for divorced or separated parents also ap-
plies to parents who never married and who 
lived apart at all times during the last 6 months 
of the year.
Support Test (To Be a Qualifying 
Child)
T o meet this test, the child can’t have provided 
more than half of the child’s own support for the 
year.
This test is different from the support test to 
be a qualifying relative, which is described later. 
However, to see what is or isn't support, see 
Support T est (T o Be a Qualifying Relative), later. 
If you aren't sure whether a child provided more 
than half of their own support, you may find 
Worksheet 3-1 helpful.
Example. Y ou provided $4,000 toward your 
16-year-old child's support for the year and the 
child provided $6,000. Y our child provided more 
than half their own support. The child isn't your 
qualifying child.
Foster care payments and expenses.  Pay-
ments you receive for the support of a foster 
CAUTION
!
child from a child placement agency are consid-
ered support provided by the agency. Similarly, 
payments you receive for the support of a foster 
child from a state or county are considered sup-
port provided by the state or county.
If you aren't in the trade or business of pro-
viding foster care and your unreimbursed 
out-of-pocket expenses in caring for a foster 
child were mainly to benefit an organization 
qualified to receive deductible charitable contri-
butions, the expenses are deductible as charita-
ble contributions but aren't considered support 
you provided. For more information about the 
deduction for charitable contributions, see Pub. 
526. If your unreimbursed expenses aren't de-
ductible as charitable contributions, they may 
qualify as support you provided.
If you are in the trade or business of provid-
ing foster care, your unreimbursed expenses 
aren't considered support provided by you.
Example 1. A foster child lived with a mar-
ried couple, the Smiths, for the last 3 months of 
the year. The Smiths cared for the foster child 
because they wanted to adopt the child (al-
though the child had not been placed with them 
for adoption). They didn't care for the foster 
child as a trade or business or to benefit the 
agency that placed the foster child in their 
home. The Smiths' unreimbursed expenses 
aren't deductible as charitable contributions but 
are considered support they provided for the 
foster child.
Example 2.  Y ou provided $3,000 toward 
your 10 -year-old foster child's support for the 
year. The state government provided $4,000, 
which is considered support provided by the 
state, not by the child. See Support provided by 
the state (welfare, food stamps, housing, etc.) , 
later. Y our foster child didn't provide more than 
half of their own support for the year.
Scholarships. A scholarship received by a 
child who is a student isn't taken into account in 
determining whether the child provided more 
than half of their own support.
Joint Return Test (To Be a 
Qualifying Child)
T o meet this test, the child can’t file a joint return 
for the year.
Exception. An exception to the joint return test 
applies if your child and the child’s spouse file a 
joint return only to claim a refund of income tax 
withheld or estimated tax paid.
Example 1 —Child files joint return.  Y ou 
supported your 18 -year-old child who lived with 
you all year while your child’s spouse was in the 
Armed Forces. Y our child’s spouse earned 
$35,000 for the year. The couple files a joint re-
turn so this child isn't your qualifying child.
Example 2 —Child files joint return only 
as a claim for refund of withheld tax.  Y our 
18-year-old child and your child’s 17 -year-old 
spouse had $800 of wages from part -time jobs 
and no other income. They lived with you all 
year. Neither is required to file a tax return. They 
don’t have a child. T axes were taken out of their 
pay so they filed a joint return only to get a re-
fund of the withheld taxes. The exception to the 
Page 32 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
30 Chapter 3 Dependents Publication 17 (2023)

Worksheet for Determining SupportWorksheet 3-1. Keep for Y our Records
Funds Belonging to the Person You Supported
1. Enter the total funds belonging to the person you supported, including income received (taxable 
and nontaxable) and amounts borrowed during the year, plus the amount in savings and other 
accounts at the beginning of the year. Don’t include funds provided by the state; include those 
amounts on line 23 instead ........................................................ 1.  
2. Enter the amount on line 1 that was used for the person's support ........................ 2.  
3. Enter the amount on line 1 that was used for other purposes ............................. 3.  
4. Enter the total amount in the person's savings and other accounts at the end of the year ...... 4.  
5. Add lines 2 through 4. (This amount should equal line 1.) ............................... 5.  
Expenses for Entire Household (where the person you supported lived)
6. Lodging (complete line 6a or 6b):
a. Enter the total rent paid ......................................................... 6a.  
b. Enter the fair rental value of the home. If the person you supported owned the home, 
also include this amount in line 21 ................................................ 6b.  
7. Enter the total food expenses ...................................................... 7.  
8. Enter the total amount of utilities (heat, light, water, etc., not included in line 6a or 6b) ........ 8.  
9. Enter the total amount of repairs (not included in line 6a or 6b) ........................... 9.  
10. Enter the total of other expenses. Don’t include expenses of maintaining the home, such as 
mortgage interest, real estate taxes, and insurance .................................... 10.  
11. Add lines 6a through 10. These are the total household expenses ........................ 11.  
12. Enter total number of persons who lived in the household ............................... 12.  
Expenses for the Person You Supported
13. Divide line 11 by line 12. This is the person's share of the household expenses ............. 13.  
14. Enter the person's total clothing expenses ............................................ 14.  
15. Enter the person's total education expenses .......................................... 15.  
16. Enter the person's total medical and dental expenses not paid for or reimbursed by 
insurance ...................................................................... 16.  
17. Enter the person's total travel and recreation expenses ................................. 17.  
18. Enter the total of the person's other expenses ......................................... 18.  
19. Add lines 13 through 18. This is the total cost of the person's support for the year ........... 19.  
Did the Person Provide More Than Half of the Person’s Own Support?
20. Multiply line 19 by 50% (0.50) ...................................................... 20.  
21. Enter the amount from line 2, plus the amount from line 6b if the person you supported owned 
the home. This is the amount the person provided for their own support .................... 21.  
22. Is line 21 more than line 20?
 
No. Y ou meet the support test for this person to be your qualifying child. If this person also meets the other tests to be a 
qualifying child, stop here; don’t complete lines 23–26. Otherwise, go to line 23 and fill out the rest of the worksheet to 
determine if this person is your qualifying relative. 
 
Yes. Y ou don’t meet the support test for this person to be either your qualifying child or your qualifying relative. Stop 
here.
 
Did You Provide More Than Half?
23. Enter the amount others provided for the person's support. Include amounts provided by state, 
local, and other welfare societies or agencies. Don’t include any amounts included on 
line 1 .......................................................................... 23.  
24. Add lines 21 and 23 .............................................................. 24.  
25. Subtract line 24 from line 19. This is the amount you provided for the person's support ....... 25.  
26. Is line 25 more than line 20?
 
Yes. Y ou meet the support test for this person to be your qualifying relative.
 
No. Y ou don’t meet the support test for this person to be your qualifying relative. Y ou can’t claim this person as a 
dependent unless you can do so under a multiple support agreement, the support test for children of divorced or 
separated parents (or parents who live apart), or the special rule for kidnapped children. See Multiple Support Agreement 
or Support T est for Children of Divorced or Separated Parents (or Parents Who Live Apart), or Kidnapped child under 
Qualifying Relative.
Page 33 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17 (2023) Chapter 3 Dependents 31

joint return test applies, so this child may be 
your qualifying child if all the other tests are met.
Example 3 —Child files joint return to 
claim American opportunity credit.  The 
facts are the same as in Example 2, except no 
taxes were taken out of either spouse’s pay. 
However, they file a joint return to claim an 
American opportunity credit of $124 and get a 
refund of that amount. Because they filed a joint 
return claiming the American opportunity credit, 
they aren’t filing it only to get a refund of income 
tax withheld or estimated tax paid. The excep-
tion to the joint return test doesn't apply, so this 
child isn't your qualifying child.
Qualifying Child of More Than One 
Person
If your qualifying child isn't a qualifying 
child of anyone else, this topic doesn't 
apply to you and you don’t need to 
read about it. This is also true if your qualifying 
child isn't a qualifying child of anyone else ex-
cept your spouse with whom you plan to file a 
joint return.
If a child is treated as the qualifying 
child of the noncustodial parent under 
the rules for children of divorced or 
separated parents (or parents who live apart) 
described earlier, see Applying the tiebreaker 
rules to divorced or separated parents (or pa-
rents who live apart), later.
Sometimes, a child meets the relationship, 
age, residency, support, and joint return tests to 
be a qualifying child of more than one person. 
Although the child is a qualifying child of each of 
these persons, generally only one person can 
actually treat the child as a qualifying child to 
take all of the following tax benefits (provided 
the person is eligible for each benefit).
1. The child tax credit, credit for other de-
pendents, or additional child tax credit.
2. Head of household filing status.
3. The credit for child and dependent care 
expenses.
4. The exclusion from income for dependent 
care benefits.
5. The earned income credit.
The other person can’t take any of these 
benefits based on this qualifying child. In other 
words, you and the other person can’t agree to 
divide these benefits between you.
Tiebreaker rules. T o determine which person 
can treat the child as a qualifying child to claim 
these five tax benefits, the following tiebreaker 
rules apply.
• If only one of the persons is the child's pa-
rent, the child is treated as the qualifying 
child of the parent.
• If the parents file a joint return together and 
can claim the child as a qualifying child, 
the child is treated as the qualifying child of 
the parents.
• If the parents don’t file a joint return to-
gether but both parents claim the child as a 
qualifying child, the IRS will treat the child 
as the qualifying child of the parent with 
TIP
CAUTION
!
whom the child lived for the longer period 
of time during the year. If the child lived 
with each parent for the same amount of 
time, the IRS will treat the child as the qual-
ifying child of the parent who had the 
higher AGI for the year.
• If no parent can claim the child as a qualify-
ing child, the child is treated as the qualify-
ing child of the person who had the highest 
AGI for the year.
• If a parent can claim the child as a qualify-
ing child but no parent does so claim the 
child, the child is treated as the qualifying 
child of the person who had the highest 
AGI for the year, but only if that person's 
AGI is higher than the highest AGI of any of 
the child's parents who can claim the child.
Subject to these tiebreaker rules, you and 
the other person may be able to choose which 
of you claims the child as a qualifying child.
Y ou may be able to qualify for the 
earned income credit under the rules 
for taxpayers without a qualifying child 
if you have a qualifying child for the earned in-
come credit who is claimed as a qualifying child 
by another taxpayer. For more information, see 
Pub. 596.
Example 1—Child lived with parent and 
grandparent. Y ou and your 3-year-old child J 
lived with your parent all year. Y ou are 25 years 
old and unmarried, and your AGI is $9,000. Y our 
parent's AGI is $15,000. Y our child’s other pa-
rent didn't live with you or your child. Y ou 
haven't signed Form 8332 (or a similar state-
ment).
J is a qualifying child of both you and your 
parent because J meets the relationship, age, 
residency, support, and joint return tests for 
both you and your parent. However, only one of 
you can claim J. J isn't a qualifying child of any-
one else, including J’s other parent. Y ou agree 
to let your parent claim J. This means your pa-
rent can claim J as a qualifying child for all of 
the five tax benefits listed earlier, if your parent 
qualifies for each of those benefits (and if you 
don’t claim J as a qualifying child for any of 
those tax benefits).
Example 2—Parent has higher AGI than 
grandparent. The facts are the same as in Ex-
ample 1, except your AGI is $18,000. Because 
your parent's AGI isn't higher than yours, your 
parent can’t claim J. Only you can claim J.
Example 3 —Two persons claim same 
child. The facts are the same as in Example 1, 
except you and your parent both claim J as a 
qualifying child. In this case, you, as the child's 
parent, will be the only one allowed to claim J 
as a qualifying child. The IRS will disallow your 
parent's claim to the five tax benefits listed ear-
lier based on J. However, your parent may qual-
ify for the earned income credit as a taxpayer 
without a qualifying child.
Example 4—Qualifying children split be-
tween two persons.  The facts are the same 
as in Example 1, except you also have two other 
young children who are qualifying children of 
both you and your parent. Only one of you can 
claim each child. However, if your parent's AGI 
TIP
is higher than yours, you can allow your parent 
to claim one or more of the children. For exam-
ple, if you claim one child, your parent can claim 
the other two.
Example 5 —Taxpayer who is a qualify-
ing child. The facts are the same as in Exam-
ple 1 , except you are only 18 years old and 
didn't provide more than half of your own sup-
port for the year. This means you are your pa-
rent's qualifying child. If your parent can claim 
you as a dependent, then you can’t claim your 
child as a dependent because of the Depend-
ent T axpayer T est, explained earlier, unless your 
parent files a return only to claim a refund of in-
come tax withheld or estimated tax paid.
Example 6 —Separated parents.  Y ou, 
your spouse, and your 10-year-old child all lived 
in the United States for all of 2023. On August 
1, 2023, your spouse moved out of the house-
hold. In August and September, your child lived 
with you. For the rest of the year, your child lived 
with your spouse, the child's other parent. Y our 
child is a qualifying child of both you and your 
spouse because your child lived with each of 
you for more than half the year and because 
your child met the relationship, age, support, 
and joint return tests for both of you. At the end 
of the year, you and your spouse still weren't di-
vorced, legally separated, or separated under a 
written separation agreement, so the rule for 
children of divorced or separated parents (or 
parents who live apart) doesn't apply.
Y ou and your spouse will file separate re-
turns. Y our spouse agrees to let you treat your 
child as a qualifying child. This means, if your 
spouse doesn't claim your child as a qualifying 
child, you can claim this child as a qualifying 
child for the child tax credit and exclusion for 
dependent care benefits (if you qualify for each 
of those tax benefits). However, you can’t claim 
head of household filing status because you 
and your spouse didn't live apart for the last 6 
months of the year. As a result, your filing status 
is married filing separately, so you can’t claim 
the earned income credit because you don’t 
meet the requirements for certain separated 
spouses to claim the earned income credit 
when they don’t file a joint return. Y ou and your 
spouse didn't live apart for the last 6 months of 
2023, and while you did live apart at the end of 
2023, you aren't legally separated under a writ-
ten separation agreement or decree of separate 
maintenance. Therefore, you don't meet the re-
quirements to take the earned income credit as 
a separated spouse who is not filing a joint re-
turn. Y ou also can't take the credit for child and 
dependent care expenses because your filing 
status is married filing separately and you and 
your spouse didn't live apart for the last 6 
months of 2023.
Example 7 —Separated parents claim 
same child.  The facts are the same as in Ex-
ample 6 , except you and your spouse both 
claim your child as a qualifying child. In this 
case, only your spouse will be allowed to treat 
your child as a qualifying child. This is because, 
during 2023, the child lived with your spouse 
longer than with you. If you claimed the child tax 
credit for your child, the IRS will disallow your 
claim to the child tax credit. If you don’t have an-
other qualifying child or dependent, the IRS will 
Page 34 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
32 Chapter 3 Dependents Publication 17 (2023)

also disallow your claim to the exclusion for de-
pendent care benefits. In addition, because you 
and your spouse didn't live apart for the last 6 
months of the year, your spouse can’t claim 
head of household filing status. As a result, your 
spouse’s filing status is married filing separately. 
Y our spouse can’t claim the earned income 
credit because your spouse doesn’t meet the 
requirements to claim the earned income credit-
for certain separated spouses. Y ou and your 
spouse didn't live apart for the last 6 months of 
2023, and, while you did live apart at the end of 
2023, you aren't legally separated under a writ-
ten separation agreement or decree of separate 
maintenance. Therefore, your spouse doesn't 
meet the requirements to take the earned in-
come credit as a separated spouse who isn’t fil-
ing a joint return. Y our spouse also can't take 
the credit for child and dependent care expen-
ses because your spouse’s filing status is mar-
ried filing separately and you and your spouse 
didn't live apart for the last 6 months of 2023.
Example 8 —Unmarried parents.  Y ou, 
your 5 -year-old child, L, and L ’s other parent 
lived together in the United States all year. Y ou 
and L ’s other parent aren't married. L is a quali-
fying child of both you and L ’s other parent be-
cause L meets the relationship, age, residency, 
support, and joint return tests for both you and 
L ’s other parent. Y our AGI is $12,000 and L ’s 
other parent’s AGI is $14,000. L ’s other parent 
agrees to let you claim the child as a qualifying 
child. This means you can claim L as a qualify-
ing child for the child tax credit, head of house-
hold filing status, the credit for child and de-
pendent care expenses, the exclusion for 
dependent care benefits, and the earned in-
come credit, if you qualify for each of those tax 
benefits (and if L ’s other parent doesn't claim L 
as a qualifying child for any of those tax bene-
fits).
Example 9 —Unmarried parents claim 
same child. The facts are the same as in Ex-
ample 8 , except you and L ’s other parent both 
claim L as a qualifying child. In this case, only 
L ’s other parent will be allowed to treat L as a 
qualifying child. This is because L ’s other pa-
rent’s AGI, $14,000, is more than your AGI, 
$12,000. If you claimed the child tax credit for L, 
the IRS will disallow your claim to this credit. If 
you don’t have another qualifying child or de-
pendent, the IRS will also disallow your claim to 
head of household filing status, the credit for 
child and dependent care expenses, and the 
exclusion for dependent care benefits. How-
ever, you may be able to claim the earned in-
come credit as a taxpayer without a qualifying 
child.
Example 10—Child didn't live with a pa-
rent. Y ou and your sibling’s child, M, lived with 
your parent all year. Y ou are 25 years old, and 
your AGI is $9,300. Y our parent’s AGI is 
$15,000. M’s parents file jointly, have an AGI of 
less than $9,000, and don’t live with you or M. 
M is a qualifying child of both you and your pa-
rent because M meets the relationship, age, 
residency, support, and joint return tests for 
both you and your parent. However, only your 
parent can treat M as a qualifying child. This is 
because your parent’s AGI, $15,000, is more 
than your AGI, $9,300.
Applying the tiebreaker rules to divorced or 
separated parents (or parents who live 
apart). If a child is treated as the qualifying 
child of the noncustodial parent under the rules 
described earlier for children of divorced or sep-
arated parents (or parents who live apart) , only 
the noncustodial parent can claim the child as a 
dependent and claim the child tax credit, addi-
tional child tax credit, or credit for other depend-
ents for the child. However, only the custodial 
parent can claim the credit for child and de-
pendent care expenses or the exclusion for de-
pendent care benefits for the child. Also, gener-
ally, the noncustodial parent can't claim the 
child as a qualifying child for head of household 
filing status or the earned income credit. In-
stead, generally, the custodial parent, if eligible, 
or other eligible person can claim the child as a 
qualifying child for those two benefits. If the 
child is the qualifying child of more than one 
person for these benefits, then the tiebreaker 
rules just explained determine whether the cus-
todial parent or another eligible person can treat 
the child as a qualifying child.
Example 1. Y ou and your 5-year-old child, 
E, lived all year with your parent in the United 
States. Y our parent paid the entire cost of keep-
ing up the home. Y our AGI is $10,000. Y our pa-
rent's AGI is $25,000. E’s other parent lived in 
the United States all year, but didn’t live with 
you or E.
Under the rules explained earlier for children 
of divorced or separated parents (or parents 
who live apart), E is treated as the qualifying 
child of E’s other parent, who can claim the 
child tax credit for E. Because of this, you can’t 
claim the child tax credit for E. However, those 
rules don't allow E’s other parent to claim E as a 
qualifying child for head of household filing sta-
tus, the credit for child and dependent care ex-
penses, the exclusion for dependent care bene-
fits, or the earned income credit.
Y ou and your parent didn't have any child 
care expenses or dependent care benefits, so 
neither of you can claim the credit for child and 
dependent care expenses or the exclusion for 
dependent care benefits. But E is a qualifying 
child of both you and your parent for head of 
household filing status and the earned income 
credit because E meets the relationship, age, 
residency, support, and joint return tests for 
both you and your parent. (The support test 
doesn't apply for the earned income credit.) 
However, you agree to let your parent claim E. 
This means your parent can claim E for head of 
household filing status and the earned income 
credit if your parent qualifies for each and if you 
don’t claim E as a qualifying child for the earned 
income credit. (Y ou can’t claim head of house-
hold filing status because your parent paid the 
entire cost of keeping up the home.) Y ou may 
be able to claim the earned income credit as a 
taxpayer without a qualifying child.
Example 2.  The facts are the same as in 
Example 1 , except your AGI is $25,000 and 
your parent's AGI is $21,000. Y our parent can’t 
claim E as a qualifying child for any purpose be-
cause your parent’s AGI isn't higher than yours.
Example 3.  The facts are the same as in 
Example 1 , except you and your parent both 
claim E as a qualifying child for the earned in-
come credit. Y our parent also claims E as a 
qualifying child for head of household filing sta-
tus. Y ou, as the child's parent, will be the only 
one allowed to claim E as a qualifying child for 
the earned income credit. The IRS will disallow 
your parent's claim to head of household filing 
status unless your parent has another qualifying 
child or dependent. Y our parent can't claim the 
earned income credit as a taxpayer without a 
qualifying child because your parent’s AGI is 
more than $17,640.
Qualifying Relative
Four tests must be met for a person to be your 
qualifying relative. The four tests are:
1. Not a qualifying child test,
2. Member of household or relationship test,
3. Gross income test, and
4. Support test.
Age. Unlike a qualifying child, a qualifying rela-
tive can be any age. There is no age test for a 
qualifying relative.
Kidnapped child.  Y ou may be able to treat a 
child as your qualifying relative even if the child 
has been kidnapped. See Pub. 501 for details.
Not a Qualifying Child Test
A child isn't your qualifying relative if the child is 
your qualifying child or the qualifying child of 
any other taxpayer.
Example 1. Y our 22-year-old child, who is a 
student, lives with you and meets all the tests to 
be your qualifying child. This child isn't your 
qualifying relative.
Example 2. Y our 2-year-old child lives with 
your parents and meets all the tests to be their 
qualifying child. This child isn't your qualifying 
relative.
Example 3. Y our 30-year old child lives with 
you. This child isn’t a qualifying child because 
the age test isn’t met. This child may be your 
qualifying relative if the gross income test and 
the support test are met.
Example 4.  Y our 13-year-old grandchild 
only lived with you for 5 months during the year. 
Y our grandchild isn’t your qualifying child be-
cause the residency test isn’t met. Y our grand-
child may be your qualifying relative if the gross 
income test and the support test are met.
Child of person not required to file a return. 
A child isn't the qualifying child of any other tax-
payer and so may qualify as your qualifying rela-
tive if the child's parent (or other person for 
whom the child is defined as a qualifying child) 
isn't required to file an income tax return and ei-
ther:
• Doesn't file an income tax return, or
• Files a return only to get a refund of in-
come tax withheld or estimated tax paid.
Example 1 —Return not required.  Y ou 
support an unrelated friend and your friend’s 
3-year-old child, who lived with you all year in 
Page 35 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17 (2023) Chapter 3 Dependents 33

your home. Y our friend has no gross income, 
isn't required to file a 2023 tax return, and 
doesn't file a 2023 tax return. Both your friend 
and your friend’s child are your qualifying rela-
tives if the support test is met.
Example 2—Return filed to claim refund. 
The facts are the same as in Example 1, except 
your friend had wages of $1,500 during the year 
and had income tax withheld from your friend’s 
wages. Y our friend files a return only to get a re-
fund of the income tax withheld and doesn't 
claim the earned income credit or any other tax 
credits or deductions. Both your friend and your 
friend’s child are your qualifying relatives if the 
support test is met.
Example 3 —Earned income credit 
claimed. The facts are the same as in Exam-
ple 2 , except your friend had wages of $8,000 
during the year and claimed the earned income 
credit. Y our friend's child is the qualifying child 
of another taxpayer (your friend), so you can’t 
claim your friend's child as your qualifying rela-
tive. Also, you can’t claim your friend as your 
qualifying relative because of the gross income 
test, explained later.
Child in Canada or Mexico.  Y ou may be able 
to claim your child as a dependent even if the 
child lives in Canada or Mexico. If the child 
doesn't live with you, the child doesn't meet the 
residency test to be your qualifying child. How-
ever, the child may still be your qualifying rela-
tive. If the persons the child does live with aren't 
U.S. citizens and have no U.S. gross income, 
those persons aren't “taxpayers,” so the child 
isn't the qualifying child of any other taxpayer. If 
the child isn't the qualifying child of any other 
taxpayer, the child is your qualifying relative as 
long as the gross income test and the support 
test are met.
Y ou can’t claim as a dependent a child who 
lives in a foreign country other than Canada or 
Mexico, unless the child is a U.S. citizen, U.S. 
resident alien, or U.S. national. There is an ex-
ception for certain adopted children who lived 
with you all year. See Citizen or Resident T est, 
earlier.
Example. Y ou provide all the support of 
your children, ages 6, 8, and 12, who live in 
Mexico with your parent and have no income. 
Y ou are single and live in the United States. 
Y our parent isn't a U.S. citizen and has no U.S. 
income, so your parent isn't a “taxpayer.” Y our 
children aren't your qualifying children because 
they don’t meet the residency test. But since 
they aren't the qualifying children of any other 
taxpayer, they may be your qualifying relatives 
and you may be permitted to claim them as de-
pendents. Y ou may also be able to claim your 
parent as a dependent if the gross income and 
support tests are met.
Member of Household or 
Relationship Test
T o meet this test, a person must either:
1. Live with you all year as a member of your 
household, or
2. Be related to you in one of the ways listed 
under Relatives who don’t have to live with 
you below.
If at any time during the year the person was 
your spouse, that person can’t be your qualify-
ing relative.
Relatives who don’t have to live with you. A 
person related to you in any of the following 
ways doesn't have to live with you all year as a 
member of your household to meet this test.
• Y our child, stepchild, or foster child, or a 
descendant of any of them (for example, 
your grandchild). (A legally adopted child is 
considered your child.)
• Y our brother, sister, half brother, half sister, 
stepbrother, or stepsister.
• Y our father, mother, grandparent, or other 
direct ancestor, but not foster parent.
• Y our stepfather or stepmother.
• A son or daughter of your brother or sister.
• A son or daughter of your half brother or 
half sister.
• A brother or sister of your father or mother.
• Y our son-in-law, daughter-in-law, fa-
ther-in-law, mother-in-law, brother-in-law, 
or sister-in-law.
Any of these relationships that were established 
by marriage aren't ended by death or divorce.
Example. In 2017, you and your spouse 
began supporting your spouse’s unmarried pa-
rent, G. Y our spouse died in 2022. Despite your 
spouse’s death, G continues to meet this test, 
even if G doesn’t live with you. Y ou can claim G 
as a dependent if all other tests are met, includ-
ing the gross income and support tests.
Foster child.  A foster child is an individual 
who is placed with you by an authorized place-
ment agency or by judgment, decree, or other 
order of any court of competent jurisdiction.
Joint return.  If you file a joint return, the per-
son can be related to either you or your spouse. 
Also, the person doesn't need to be related to 
the spouse who provides support.
For example, you provide more than half the 
support for your spouse’s stepparent. Y our 
spouse’s stepparent may be your qualifying rel-
ative even if the stepparent doesn't live with 
you. However, if you and your spouse file sepa-
rate returns, your spouse's stepparent can be 
your qualifying relative only if the stepparent 
lives with you all year as a member of your 
household.
Temporary absences. A person is considered 
to live with you as a member of your household 
during periods of time when one of you, or both, 
is temporarily absent due to special circumstan-
ces such as:
• Illness,
• Education,
• Business,
• Vacation,
• Military service, or
• Detention in a juvenile facility.
If the person is placed in a nursing home for 
an indefinite period of time to receive constant 
medical care, the absence may be considered 
temporary.
Death or birth.  A person who died during the 
year, but lived with you as a member of your 
household until death, will meet this test. The 
same is true for a child who was born during the 
year and lived with you as a member of your 
household for the rest of the year. The test is 
also met if a child lived with you as a member of 
your household except for any required hospital 
stay following birth.
If your dependent died during the year and 
you otherwise qualify to claim that person as a 
dependent, you can still claim that person as a 
dependent.
Example. Y our parent, who met the tests to 
be your qualifying relative, died on January 15. 
Y ou can claim your parent as a dependent on 
your return.
Local law violated.  A person doesn't meet 
this test if at any time during the year the rela-
tionship between you and that person violates 
local law.
Example. Y our significant other, T , lived 
with you as a member of your household all 
year. However, your relationship with T violated 
the laws of the state where you live because T 
was married to someone else. Therefore, T 
doesn't meet this test and you can’t claim T as a 
dependent.
Adopted child.  An adopted child is always 
treated as your own child. The term “adopted 
child” includes a child who was lawfully placed 
with you for legal adoption.
Cousin. Y our cousin must live with you all year 
as a member of your household to meet this 
test. A cousin is a descendant of a brother or 
sister of your father or mother.
Gross Income Test
T o meet this test, a person's gross income for 
the year must be less than $4,700.
Gross income defined. Gross income is all in-
come in the form of money, property, and serv-
ices that isn't exempt from tax.
In a manufacturing, merchandising, or min-
ing business, gross income is the total net sales 
minus the cost of goods sold, plus any miscella-
neous income from the business.
Gross receipts from rental property are 
gross income. Don’t deduct taxes, repairs, or 
other expenses to determine the gross income 
from rental property.
Gross income includes a partner's share of 
the gross (not a share of the net) partnership in-
come.
Gross income also includes all taxable un-
employment compensation, taxable social se-
curity benefits, and certain amounts received as 
scholarship and fellowship grants. Scholarships 
received by degree candidates and used for tui-
tion, fees, supplies, books, and equipment re-
quired for particular courses generally aren't in-
cluded in gross income. For more information 
about scholarships, see chapter 8.
Disabled dependent working at sheltered 
workshop. For purposes of the gross income 
test, the gross income of an individual who is 
permanently and totally disabled at any time 
during the year doesn't include income for 
Page 36 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
34 Chapter 3 Dependents Publication 17 (2023)

services the individual performs at a sheltered 
workshop. The availability of medical care at the 
workshop must be the main reason for the indi-
vidual's presence there. Also, the income must 
come solely from activities at the workshop that 
are incident to this medical care.
A “sheltered workshop” is a school that:
• Provides special instruction or training de-
signed to alleviate the disability of the indi-
vidual; and
• Is operated by certain tax-exempt organi-
zations, or by a state, a U.S. territory, a po-
litical subdivision of a state or territory, the 
United States, or the District of Columbia.
Permanently and totally disabled  has the 
same meaning here as under Qualifying Child, 
earlier.
Support Test (To Be a Qualifying 
Relative)
T o meet this test, you must generally provide 
more than half of a person's total support during 
the calendar year.
However, if two or more persons provide 
support, but no one person provides more than 
half of a person's total support, see Multiple 
Support Agreement, later.
How to determine if support test is met. 
Y ou figure whether you have provided more 
than half of a person's total support by compar-
ing the amount you contributed to that person's 
support with the entire amount of support that 
person received from all sources. This includes 
support the person provided from the person’s 
own funds.
Y ou may find Worksheet 3-1 helpful in figur-
ing whether you provided more than half of a 
person's support.
Person's own funds not used for support. A 
person's own funds aren't support unless they 
are actually spent for support.
Example. Y our parent received $2,400 in 
social security benefits and $300 in interest, 
paid $2,000 for lodging and $400 for recreation, 
and put $300 in a savings account.
Even though your parent received a total of 
$2,700 ($2,400 + $300), your parent spent only 
$2,400 ($2,000 + $400) for your parent’s own 
support. If you spent more than $2,400 for your 
parent’s support and no other support was re-
ceived, you have provided more than half of 
your parent’s support.
Child's wages used for own support.  Y ou 
can’t include in your contribution to your child's 
support any support paid for by the child with 
the child's own wages, even if you paid the wa-
ges.
Year support is provided.  The year you pro-
vide the support is the year you pay for it, even if 
you do so with borrowed money that you repay 
in a later year.
If you use a fiscal year to report your income, 
you must provide more than half of the depend-
ent's support for the calendar year in which your 
fiscal year begins.
Armed Forces dependency allotments.  The 
part of the allotment contributed by the govern-
ment and the part taken out of your military pay 
are both considered provided by you in figuring 
whether you provide more than half of the sup-
port. If your allotment is used to support per-
sons other than those you name, you can claim 
them as dependents if they otherwise qualify.
Example. Y ou are in the Armed Forces. Y ou 
authorize an allotment for your surviving parent 
that your surviving parent uses to support them-
selves and their sibling. If the allotment provides 
more than half of each person's support, you 
can claim each of them as a dependent, if they 
otherwise qualify, even though you authorize the 
allotment only for your surviving parent.
Tax-exempt military quarters allowances. 
These allowances are treated the same way as 
dependency allotments in figuring support. The 
allotment of pay and the tax -exempt basic al-
lowance for quarters are both considered as 
provided by you for support.
Tax-exempt income. In figuring a person's to-
tal support, include tax -exempt income, sav-
ings, and borrowed amounts used to support 
that person. T ax-exempt income includes cer-
tain social security benefits, welfare benefits, 
nontaxable life insurance proceeds, Armed 
Forces family allotments, nontaxable pensions, 
and tax-exempt interest.
Example 1.  Y ou provide $4,000 toward 
your parent’s support during the year. Y our pa-
rent has earned income of $600, nontaxable so-
cial security benefits of $4,800, and tax -exempt 
interest of $200, all of which your parent uses 
for self-support. Y ou can’t claim your parent as 
a dependent because the $4,000 you provide 
isn’t more than half of your parent’s total support 
of $9,600 ($4,000 + $600 +$4,800 + $200).
Example 2. K, your sibling’s child, takes out 
a student loan of $2,500 and uses it to pay col-
lege tuition. K is personally responsible for the 
loan. Y ou provide $2,000 toward K’s total sup-
port. Y ou can’t claim K as a dependent because 
you provide less than half of K’s support.
Social security benefits.  If a married cou-
ple receives benefits that are paid by one check 
made out to both of them, half of the total paid 
is considered to be for the support of each 
spouse, unless they can show otherwise.
If a child receives social security benefits 
and uses them toward their own support, the 
benefits are considered as provided by the 
child.
Support provided by the state (welfare, 
food stamps, housing, etc.).  Benefits provi-
ded by the state to a needy person are gener-
ally considered support provided by the state. 
However, payments based on the needs of the 
recipient won't be considered as used entirely 
for that person's support if it is shown that part 
of the payments weren't used for that purpose.
Foster care. Payments you receive for the sup-
port of a foster child from a child placement 
agency are considered support provided by the 
agency. See Foster care payments and expen-
ses, earlier.
Home for the aged.  If you make a lump -sum 
advance payment to a home for the aged to 
take care of your relative for life and the pay-
ment is based on that person's life expectancy, 
the amount of support you provide each year is 
the lump-sum payment divided by the relative's 
life expectancy. The amount of support you pro-
vide also includes any other amounts you provi-
ded during the year.
Total Support
T o figure if you provided more than half of a per-
son's support, you must first determine the total 
support provided for that person. T otal support 
includes amounts spent to provide food, lodg-
ing, clothing, education, medical and dental 
care, recreation, transportation, and similar ne-
cessities.
Generally, the amount of an item of support 
is the amount of the expense incurred in provid-
ing that item. For lodging, the amount of support 
is the fair rental value of the lodging.
Expenses not directly related to any one 
member of a household, such as the cost of 
food for the household, must be divided among 
the members of the household.
Example 1.  G Brown, parent of M Miller, 
lives with F and M Miller and their two children. 
G gets social security benefits of $2,400, which 
G spends for clothing, transportation, and recre-
ation. G has no other income. F and M's total 
food expense for the household is $5,200. They 
pay G's medical and drug expenses of $1,200. 
The fair rental value of the lodging provided for 
G is $1,800 a year, based on the cost of similar 
rooming facilities. Figure G's total support as 
follows.
Fair rental value of lodging ......... $ 1,800 
Clothing, transportation, and 
recreation ................. 2,400 
Medical expenses ............. 1,200 
Share of food (1/5 of $5,200) ....... 1,040 
Total support ............... $6,440 
The support F and M provide, $4,040 
($1,800 lodging + $1,200 medical expenses + 
$1,040 food), is more than half of G's $6,440 to-
tal support.
Example 2. Y our parents, A and B, live with 
you, your spouse, and your two children in a 
house you own. The fair rental value of your pa-
rents' share of the lodging is $2,000 a year 
($1,000 each), which includes furnishings and 
utilities. A receives a nontaxable pension of 
$4,200, which A spends equally between A and 
B for items of support such as clothing, trans-
portation, and recreation. Y our total food ex-
pense for the household is $6,000. Y our heat 
and utility bills amount to $1,200. B has hospital 
and medical expenses of $600, which you pay 
during the year. Figure your parents' total sup-
port as follows.
Page 37 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17 (2023) Chapter 3 Dependents 35

Support provided A B
Fair rental value of lodging ... $1,000 $1,000 
Pension spent for their 
support ............ 2,100 2,100 
Share of food (1/6 of 
$6,000) ............ 1,000 1,000 
Medical expenses for B ..... 600 
Parents' total support .... $4,100 $4,700 
Y ou must apply the support test separately 
to each parent. Y ou provide $2,000 ($1,000 
lodging + $1,000 food) of A’s total support of 
$4,100—less than half. Y ou provide $2,600 to B 
($1,000 lodging + $1,000 food + $600 medi-
cal)—more than half of B’s total support of 
$4,700. Y ou meet the support test for B, but not 
A. Heat and utility costs are included in the fair 
rental value of the lodging, so these aren't con-
sidered separately.
Lodging. If you provide a person with lodging, 
you are considered to provide support equal to 
the fair rental value of the room, apartment, 
house, or other shelter in which the person 
lives. Fair rental value includes a reasonable al-
lowance for the use of furniture and appliances, 
and for heat and other utilities that are provided.
Fair rental value defined.  Fair rental value 
is the amount you could reasonably expect to 
receive from a stranger for the same kind of 
lodging. It is used instead of actual expenses 
such as taxes, interest, depreciation, paint, in-
surance, utilities, and the cost of furniture and 
appliances. In some cases, fair rental value may 
be equal to the rent paid.
If you provide the total lodging, the amount 
of support you provide is the fair rental value of 
the room the person uses, or a share of the fair 
rental value of the entire dwelling if the person 
has use of your entire home. If you don’t provide 
the total lodging, the total fair rental value must 
be divided depending on how much of the total 
lodging you provide. If you provide only a part 
and the person supplies the rest, the fair rental 
value must be divided between both of you ac-
cording to the amount each provides.
Example. Y our parents live rent free in a 
house you own. It has a fair rental value of 
$5,400 a year furnished, which includes a fair 
rental value of $3,600 for the house and $1,800 
for the furniture. This doesn't include heat and 
utilities. The house is completely furnished with 
furniture belonging to your parents. Y ou pay 
$600 for their utility bills. Utilities usually aren't 
included in rent for houses in the area where 
your parents live. Therefore, you consider the 
total fair rental value of the lodging to be $6,000 
($3,600 fair rental value of the unfurnished 
house + $1,800 allowance for the furnishings 
provided by your parents + $600 cost of utilities) 
of which you are considered to provide $4,200 
($3,600 + $600).
Person living in their own home. The total 
fair rental value of a person's home that the per-
son owns is considered support contributed by 
that person.
Living with someone rent free.  If you live 
with a person rent free in that person’s home, 
you must reduce the amount you provide for 
support of that person by the fair rental value of 
lodging the person provides you.
Property. Property provided as support is 
measured by its fair market value. Fair market 
value is the price that property would sell for on 
the open market. It is the price that would be 
agreed upon between a willing buyer and a will-
ing seller, with neither being required to act, and 
both having reasonable knowledge of the rele-
vant facts.
Capital expenses.  Capital items, such as 
furniture, appliances, and cars, bought for a per-
son during the year can be included in total sup-
port under certain circumstances.
The following examples show when a capital 
item is or isn't support.
Example 1.  Y ou buy a $200 power lawn 
mower for your 13 -year-old child. The child is 
given the duty of keeping the lawn trimmed. Be-
cause the lawn mower benefits all members of 
the household, don’t include the cost of the 
lawn mower in the support of your child.
Example 2.  Y ou buy a $150 television set 
as a birthday present for your 12 -year-old child. 
The television set is placed in your child's bed-
room. Y ou can include the cost of the television 
set in the support of your child.
Example 3.  Y ou pay $5,000 for a car and 
register it in your name. Y ou and your 
17-year-old child use the car equally. Because 
you own the car and don’t give it to your child 
but merely let your child use it, don’t include the 
cost of the car in your child’s total support. How-
ever, you can include in your child's support 
your out -of-pocket expenses of operating the 
car for your child’s benefit.
Example 4.  Y our 17-year-old child, using 
personal funds, buys a car for $4,500. Y ou pro-
vide the rest of your child's support, $4,000. Be-
cause the car is bought and owned by your 
child, the car's fair market value ($4,500) must 
be included in your child’s support. Y our child 
has provided more than half of their own total 
support of $8,500 ($4,500 + $4,000), so this 
child isn't your qualifying child. Y ou didn't pro-
vide more than half of this child’s total support, 
so this child isn't your qualifying relative. Y ou 
can’t claim this child as a dependent.
Medical insurance premiums. Medical insur-
ance premiums you pay, including premiums for 
supplementary Medicare coverage, are inclu-
ded in the support you provide.
Medical insurance benefits. Medical insur-
ance benefits, including basic and supplemen-
tary Medicare benefits, aren't part of support.
Tuition payments and allowances under the 
GI Bill. Amounts veterans receive under the GI 
Bill for tuition payments and allowances while 
they attend school are included in total support.
Example. During the year, your child re-
ceives $2,200 from the government under the 
GI Bill. Y our child uses this amount for your 
child’s education. Y ou provide the rest of your 
child’s support, $2,000. Because GI benefits 
are included in total support, your child’s total 
support is $4,200 ($2,200 + $2,000). Y ou 
haven't provided more than half of your child’s 
support.
Childcare expenses.  If you pay someone to 
provide child or dependent care, you can in-
clude these payments in the amount you provi-
ded for the support of your child or disabled de-
pendent, even if you claim a credit for the 
payments. For information on the credit, see 
Pub. 503.
Other support items.  Other items may be 
considered as support depending on the facts 
in each case.
Don’t Include in Total Support
The following items aren't included in total sup-
port.
1. Federal, state, and local income taxes 
paid by persons from their own income. 
2. Social security and Medicare taxes paid 
by persons from their own income. 
3. Life insurance premiums. 
4. Funeral expenses. 
5. Scholarships received by your child if your 
child is a student.
6. Survivors' and Dependents' Educational 
Assistance payments used for the support 
of the child who receives them.
Multiple Support Agreement
Sometimes no one provides more than half of 
the support of a person. Instead, two or more 
persons, each of whom would be able to claim 
the person as a dependent but for the support 
test, together provide more than half of the per-
son's support.
When this happens, you can agree that any 
one of you who individually provides more than 
10% of the person's support, but only one, can 
claim the person as a dependent. Each of the 
others must sign a statement agreeing not to 
claim the person as a dependent for that year. 
The person who claims the person as a de-
pendent must keep these signed statements for 
their own records. A multiple support declara-
tion identifying each of the others who agreed 
not to claim the person as a dependent must be 
attached to the return of the person claiming the 
person as a dependent. Form 2120 can be 
used for this purpose.
Y ou can claim someone as a dependent un-
der a multiple support agreement for someone 
related to you or for someone who lived with 
you all year as a member of your household.
Example 1.  Y ou, and your siblings, S, B, 
and D, provide the entire support of your parent 
for the year. Y ou provide 45%, S provides 35%, 
and B and D each provide 10%. Either you or S 
can claim your parent as a dependent; the one 
who doesn’t must sign a statement agreeing not 
to claim your parent as a dependent. The one 
who claims your parent as a dependent must 
attach Form 2120, or a similar declaration, to 
their return and must keep the statement signed 
by the other for their records. Because neither B 
nor D provides more than 10% of the support, 
neither can claim your parent as a dependent 
and neither has to sign a statement.
Page 38 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
36 Chapter 3 Dependents Publication 17 (2023)

Example 2. Y ou and your sibling each pro-
vide 20% of your parent's support for the year. 
The remaining 60% of your parent’s support is 
provided equally by two persons who are unre-
lated. Y our parent doesn't live with them. Be-
cause more than half of your parent’s support is 
provided by persons who can’t claim your pa-
rent as a dependent, no one can claim your pa-
rent as a dependent.
Support Test for Children of 
Divorced or Separated Parents (or 
Parents Who Live Apart)
In most cases, a child of divorced or separated 
parents (or parents who live apart) will be a 
qualifying child of one of the parents. See Chil-
dren of divorced or separated parents (or pa-
rents who live apart)  under Qualifying Child , 
earlier. However, if the child doesn't meet the re-
quirements to be a qualifying child of either pa-
rent, the child may be a qualifying relative of 
one of the parents. If you think this might apply 
to you, see Pub. 501.
Social Security 
Numbers (SSNs)
for Dependents
Y ou must show the SSN of any dependent you 
list in the Dependents section of your Form 
1040 or 1040-SR.
If you don’t show the dependent's SSN 
when required, or if you show an incor-
rect SSN, certain tax benefits may be 
disallowed.
No SSN. If a person whom you expect to claim 
as a dependent on your return doesn't have an 
SSN, either you or that person should apply for 
an SSN as soon as possible by filing Form 
SS-5, Application for a Social Security Card, 
with the Social Security Administration (SSA). 
Y ou can get Form SS -5 online at SSA.gov/
forms/ss-5.pdf or at your local SSA office.
It usually takes about 2 weeks to get an SSN 
once the SSA has all the information it needs. If 
you don’t have a required SSN by the filing due 
date, you can file Form 4868 for an extension of 
time to file.
Born and died in 2023.  If your child was 
born and died in 2023, and you don’t have an 
SSN for the child, you may attach a copy of the 
child's birth certificate, death certificate, or hos-
pital records instead. The document must show 
the child was born alive. If you do this, enter 
“DIED” in column (2) of the Dependents section 
of your Form 1040 or 1040-SR. 
Alien or adoptee with no SSN.  If your de-
pendent doesn't have and can’t get an SSN, 
you must show the Individual T axpayer Identifi-
cation Number (ITIN) or adoption taxpayer iden-
tification number (ATIN) instead of an SSN.
Taxpayer identification numbers for ali-
ens. If your dependent is a resident or nonresi-
dent alien who doesn't have and isn't eligible to 
get an SSN, your dependent must apply for an 
ITIN. For details on how to apply, see Form 
W-7, Application for IRS Individual T axpayer 
Identification Number.
CAUTION
!
Taxpayer identification numbers for 
adoptees. If you have a child who was placed 
with you by an authorized placement agency, 
you may be able to claim the child as a depend-
ent. However, if you can’t get an SSN or an ITIN 
for the child, you must get an ATIN for the child 
from the IRS. See Form W -7A, Application for 
T axpayer Identification Number for Pending U.S. 
Adoptions, for details.
4.
Tax Withholding 
and Estimated 
Tax
What's New for 2024
Tax law changes for 2024.  When you figure 
how much income tax you want withheld from 
your pay and when you figure your estimated 
tax, consider tax law changes effective in 2024. 
For more information, see Pub. 505, T ax With-
holding and Estimated T ax.
Reminders
Estimated tax safe harbor for higher in-
come taxpayers. If your 2023 adjusted gross 
income was more than $150,000 ($75,000 if 
you are married filing a separate return), you 
must pay the smaller of 90% of your expected 
tax for 2024 or 110% of the tax shown on your 
2023 return to avoid an estimated tax penalty.
Introduction
This chapter discusses how to pay your tax as 
you earn or receive income during the year. In 
general, the federal income tax is a 
pay-as-you-go tax. There are two ways to pay 
as you go.
• Withholding. If you are an employee, your 
employer probably withholds income tax 
from your pay. T ax may also be withheld 
from certain other income, such as pen-
sions, bonuses, commissions, and gam-
bling winnings. The amount withheld is 
paid to the IRS in your name. 
• Estimated tax. If you don't pay your tax 
through withholding, or don't pay enough 
tax that way, you may have to pay estima-
ted tax. People who are in business for 
themselves will generally have to pay their 
tax this way. Also, you may have to pay es-
timated tax if you receive income such as 
dividends, interest, capital gains, rent, and 
royalties. Estimated tax is used to pay not 
only income tax, but self-employment tax 
and alternative minimum tax as well. 
This chapter explains these methods. In ad-
dition, it also explains the following.
• Credit for withholding and estimated 
tax. When you file your 2023 income tax 
return, take credit for all the income tax 
withheld from your salary, wages, pen-
sions, etc., and for the estimated tax you 
paid for 2023. Also take credit for any ex-
cess social security or railroad retirement 
tax withheld. See Pub. 505.
• Underpayment penalty. If you didn't pay 
enough tax during the year, either through 
withholding or by making estimated tax 
payments, you may have to pay a penalty. 
In most cases, the IRS can figure this pen-
alty for you. See Underpayment Penalty for 
2023 at the end of this chapter. 
Useful Items
Y ou may want to see:
Publication
505 T ax Withholding and Estimated T ax
Form (and Instructions)
W-4 Employee's Withholding Certificate
W-4P Withholding Certificate for Periodic 
Pension or Annuity Payments
W-4S Request for Federal Income T ax 
Withholding From Sick Pay
W-4V Voluntary Withholding Request
1040-ES Estimated T ax for Individuals
2210 Underpayment of Estimated T ax by 
Individuals, Estates, and T rusts
2210-F Underpayment of Estimated T ax 
by Farmers and Fishermen
Tax Withholding
for 2024
This section discusses income tax withholding 
on:
• Salaries and wages,
• Tips,
• T axable fringe benefits,
• Sick pay,
• Pensions and annuities,
• Gambling winnings,
• Unemployment compensation, and
• Certain federal payments.
This section explains the rules for withholding 
tax from each of these types of income.
This section also covers backup withholding 
on interest, dividends, and other payments.
Salaries and Wages
Income tax is withheld from the pay of most em-
ployees. Y our pay includes your regular pay, bo-
nuses, commissions, and vacation allowances. 
  505
  W-4
  W-4P
  W-4S
  W-4V
  1040-ES
  2210
  2210-F
Page 39 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17 (2023) Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax 37

It also includes reimbursements and other ex-
pense allowances paid under a nonaccountable 
plan. See Supplemental Wages, later, for more 
information about reimbursements and allowan-
ces paid under a nonaccountable plan.
If your income is low enough that you won't 
have to pay income tax for the year, you may be 
exempt from withholding. This is explained un-
der Exemption From Withholding, later.
Y ou can ask your employer to withhold in-
come tax from noncash wages and other wages 
not subject to withholding. If your employer 
doesn't agree to withhold tax, or if not enough is 
withheld, you may have to pay estimated tax, as 
discussed later under Estimated T ax for 2024.
Military retirees.  Military retirement pay is 
treated in the same manner as regular pay for 
income tax withholding purposes, even though 
it is treated as a pension or annuity for other tax 
purposes.
Household workers.  If you are a household 
worker, you can ask your employer to withhold 
income tax from your pay. A household worker 
is an employee who performs household work 
in a private home, local college club, or local fra-
ternity or sorority chapter.
T ax is withheld only if you want it withheld 
and your employer agrees to withhold it. If you 
don't have enough income tax withheld, you 
may have to pay estimated tax, as discussed 
later under Estimated T ax for 2024.
Farmworkers. Generally, income tax is with-
held from your cash wages for work on a farm 
unless your employer does both of these:
• Pays you cash wages of less than $150 
during the year, and
• Has expenditures for agricultural labor to-
taling less than $2,500 during the year.
Differential wage payments.  When employ-
ees are on leave from employment for military 
duty, some employers make up the difference 
between the military pay and civilian pay. Pay-
ments to an employee who is on active duty for 
a period of more than 30 days will be subject to 
income tax withholding, but not subject to social 
security, Medicare, or federal unemployment 
(FUTA) tax withholding. The wages and with-
holding will be reported on Form W -2, Wage 
and T ax Statement.
Determining Amount of Tax 
Withheld Using Form W-4
The amount of income tax your employer with-
holds from your regular pay depends on two 
things.
• The amount you earn in each payroll pe-
riod.
• The information you give your employer on 
Form W-4.
Form W-4 includes steps to help you figure 
your withholding. Complete Steps 2 through 4 
only if they apply to you.
• Step 1. Enter your personal information in-
cluding your filing status.
• Step 2. Complete this step if you have 
more than one job at the same time or are 
married filing jointly and you and your 
spouse both work.
• Step 3. Complete this step if you claim de-
pendents and other credits.
• Step 4. Complete this optional step to 
make other adjustments.
*Other income
*Deductions
*Extra withholding
New Job
When you start a new job, you must fill out Form 
W-4 and give it to your employer. Y our employer 
should have copies of the form. If you need to 
change the information later, you must fill out a 
new form.
If you work only part of the year (for exam-
ple, you start working after the beginning of the 
year), too much tax may be withheld. Y ou may 
be able to avoid overwithholding if your em-
ployer agrees to use the part -year method. See 
Part-Y ear Method in chapter 1 of Pub. 505 for 
more information.
Employee also receiving pension income. 
If you receive pension or annuity income and 
begin a new job, you will need to file Form W -4 
with your new employer. However, you can 
choose to split your withholding between your 
pension and job in any manner.
Changing Your Withholding
During the year, changes may occur to your 
marital status, adjustments, deductions, or 
credits you expect to claim on your tax return. 
When this happens, you may need to give your 
employer a new Form W-4 to change your with-
holding status.
If a change in personal circumstances re-
duces the amount of withholding you are enti-
tled to claim, you are required to give your em-
ployer a new Form W -4 within 10 days after the 
change occurs.
Changing your withholding for 2025.  If 
events in 2024 will change the amount of with-
holding you should claim for 2025, you must 
give your employer a new Form W-4 by Decem-
ber 1, 2024. If the event occurs in December 
2024, submit a new Form W-4 within 10 days.
Checking Your Withholding
After you have given your employer a Form 
W-4, you can check to see whether the amount 
of tax withheld from your pay is too little or too 
much. If too much or too little tax is being with-
held, you should give your employer a new 
Form W -4 to change your withholding. Y ou 
should try to have your withholding match your 
actual tax liability. If not enough tax is withheld, 
you will owe tax at the end of the year and may 
have to pay interest and a penalty. If too much 
tax is withheld, you will lose the use of that 
money until you get your refund. Always check 
your withholding if there are personal or finan-
cial changes in your life or changes in the law 
that might change your tax liability.
Note. Y ou can’t give your employer a pay-
ment to cover withholding on salaries and wa-
ges for past pay periods or a payment for esti-
mated tax.
Completing Form W-4 and 
Worksheets
Form W-4 has worksheets to help you figure the 
correct amount of withholding you can claim. 
The worksheets are for your own records. Don't 
give them to your employer.
Multiple Jobs Worksheet. If you have income 
from more than one job at the same time, or are 
married filing jointly and you and your spouse 
both work, complete the Multiple Jobs Work-
sheet on the Form W-4.
If you and your spouse expect to file sepa-
rate returns, figure your withholding using sepa-
rate worksheets based on your own individual 
income, adjustments, deductions, and credits.
Deductions Worksheet.  Use the Deductions 
Worksheet on Form W -4 if you plan to itemize 
deductions or claim certain adjustments to in-
come and you want to reduce your withholding. 
Also complete this worksheet when you have 
changes to these items to see if you need to 
change your withholding.
Getting the Right Amount of Tax 
Withheld
In most situations, the tax withheld from your 
pay will be close to the tax you figure on your re-
turn if you follow these two rules.
• Y ou accurately complete all the Form W-4 
worksheets that apply to you.
• Y ou give your employer a new Form W-4 
when changes occur.
But because the worksheets and withhold-
ing methods don't account for all possible situa-
tions, you may not be getting the right amount 
withheld. This is most likely to happen in the fol-
lowing situations.
• Y ou are married and both you and your 
spouse work.
• Y ou have more than one job at a time.
• Y ou have nonwage income, such as inter-
est, dividends, alimony, unemployment 
compensation, or self-employment in-
come.
• Y ou will owe additional amounts with your 
return, such as self-employment tax.
• Y our withholding is based on obsolete 
Form W-4 information for a substantial part 
of the year.
• Y ou work only part of the year.
• Y ou change the amount of your withholding 
during the year.
• Y ou are subject to Additional Medicare T ax 
or Net Investment Income T ax (NIIT). If you 
anticipate liability for Additional Medicare 
T ax or NIIT , you may request that your em-
ployer withhold an additional amount of in-
come tax withholding on Form W-4.
Cumulative wage method.  If you change the 
amount of your withholding during the year, too 
much or too little tax may have been withheld 
for the period before you made the change. Y ou 
may be able to compensate for this if your em-
ployer agrees to use the cumulative wage with-
holding method for the rest of the year. Y ou 
must ask your employer in writing to use this 
method.
Page 40 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
38 Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax Publication 17 (2023)

T o be eligible, you must have been paid for 
the same kind of payroll period (weekly, bi-
weekly, etc.) since the beginning of the year.
Publication 505
T o make sure you are getting the right amount 
of tax withheld, get Pub. 505. It will help you 
compare the total tax to be withheld during the 
year with the tax you can expect to figure on 
your return. It will also help you determine how 
much, if any, additional withholding is needed 
each payday to avoid owing tax when you file 
your return. If you don't have enough tax with-
held, you may have to pay estimated tax, as ex-
plained under Estimated T ax for 2024, later.
Y ou can use the T ax Withholding Esti-
mator at IRS.gov/W4App, instead of 
Pub. 505 or the worksheets included 
with Form W-4, to determine whether you need 
to have your withholding increased or de-
creased.
Rules Your Employer Must Follow
It may be helpful for you to know some of the 
withholding rules your employer must follow. 
These rules can affect how to fill out your Form 
W-4 and how to handle problems that may 
arise.
New Form W -4. When you start a new job, 
your employer should have you complete a 
Form W -4. Beginning with your first payday, 
your employer will use the information you give 
on the form to figure your withholding.
If you later fill out a new Form W -4, your em-
ployer can put it into effect as soon as possible. 
The deadline for putting it into effect is the start 
of the first payroll period ending 30 or more 
days after you turn it in.
No Form W -4. If you don't give your employer 
a completed Form W -4, your employer must 
withhold at the highest rate, as if you were sin-
gle.
Repaying withheld tax.  If you find you are 
having too much tax withheld because you 
didn't claim the correct amount of withholding 
you are entitled to, you should give your em-
ployer a new Form W-4. Y our employer can’t re-
pay any of the tax previously withheld. Instead, 
claim the full amount withheld when you file 
your tax return.
However, if your employer has withheld 
more than the correct amount of tax for the 
Form W-4 you have in effect, you don't have to 
fill out a new Form W-4 to have your withholding 
lowered to the correct amount. Y our employer 
can repay the amount that was withheld incor-
rectly. If you aren’t repaid, your Form W -2 will 
reflect the full amount actually withheld, which 
you would claim when you file your tax return.
Exemption From Withholding
If you claim exemption from withholding, your 
employer won't withhold federal income tax 
from your wages. The exemption applies only to 
income tax, not to social security, Medicare, or 
FUTA tax withholding.
TIP
Y ou can claim exemption from withholding 
for 2024 only if both of the following situations 
apply.
• For 2023, you had a right to a refund of all 
federal income tax withheld because you 
had no tax liability.
• For 2024, you expect a refund of all federal 
income tax withheld because you expect to 
have no tax liability.
Students. If you are a student, you aren’t auto-
matically exempt. See chapter 1  to find out if 
you must file a return. If you work only part time 
or only during the summer, you may qualify for 
exemption from withholding.
Age 65 or older or blind.  If you are 65 or 
older or blind, use Worksheet 1 -1 or 1 -2 in 
chapter 1 of Pub. 505 to help you decide if you 
qualify for exemption from withholding. Don't 
use either worksheet if you will itemize deduc-
tions or claim tax credits on your 2024 return. 
Instead, see Itemizing deductions or claiming 
credits in chapter 1 of Pub. 505.
Claiming exemption from withholding.  T o 
claim exemption, you must give your employer a 
Form W -4. Write “Exempt” on the form in the 
space below Step 4(c) and complete the appli-
cable steps of the form.
If you claim exemption, but later your situa-
tion changes so that you will have to pay in-
come tax after all, you must file a new Form W-4 
within 10 days after the change. If you claim ex-
emption in 2024, but you expect to owe income 
tax for 2025, you must file a new Form W -4 by 
December 1, 2024.
Y our claim of exempt status may be re-
viewed by the IRS.
An exemption is good for only 1 year. Y ou 
must give your employer a new Form W -4 by 
February 15 each year to continue your exemp-
tion.
Supplemental Wages
Supplemental wages include bonuses, commis-
sions, overtime pay, vacation allowances, cer-
tain sick pay, and expense allowances under 
certain plans. The payer can figure withholding 
on supplemental wages using the same method 
used for your regular wages. However, if these 
payments are identified separately from your 
regular wages, your employer or other payer of 
supplemental wages can withhold income tax 
from these wages at a flat rate.
Expense allowances.  Reimbursements or 
other expense allowances paid by your em-
ployer under a nonaccountable plan are treated 
as supplemental wages.
Reimbursements or other expense allowan-
ces paid under an accountable plan that are 
more than your proven expenses are treated as 
paid under a nonaccountable plan if you don't 
return the excess payments within a reasonable 
period of time.
For more information about accountable and 
nonaccountable expense allowance plans, see 
Pub. 505.
Penalties
Y ou may have to pay a penalty of $500 if both of 
the following apply.
• Y ou make statements or claim withholding 
on your Form W-4 that reduce the amount 
of tax withheld.
• Y ou have no reasonable basis for those 
statements or withholding at the time you 
prepare your Form W-4.
There is also a criminal penalty for willfully 
supplying false or fraudulent information on your 
Form W-4 or for willfully failing to supply infor-
mation that would increase the amount with-
held. The penalty upon conviction can be either 
a fine of up to $1,000 or imprisonment for up to 
1 year, or both.
These penalties will apply if you deliberately 
and knowingly falsify your Form W -4 in an at-
tempt to reduce or eliminate the proper with-
holding of taxes. A simple error or an honest 
mistake won't result in one of these penalties.
Tips
The tips you receive while working on your job 
are considered part of your pay. Y ou must in-
clude your tips on your tax return on the same 
line as your regular pay. However, tax isn't with-
held directly from tip income, as it is from your 
regular pay. Nevertheless, your employer will 
take into account the tips you report when figur-
ing how much to withhold from your regular pay.
For more information on reporting your tips 
to your employer and on the withholding rules 
for tip income, see Pub. 531, Reporting Tip In-
come.
How employer figures amount to withhold. 
The tips you report to your employer are coun-
ted as part of your income for the month you re-
port them. Y our employer can figure your with-
holding in either of two ways.
• By withholding at the regular rate on the 
sum of your pay plus your reported tips.
• By withholding at the regular rate on your 
pay plus a percentage of your reported 
tips.
Not enough pay to cover taxes.  If your regu-
lar pay isn't enough for your employer to with-
hold all the tax (including income tax and social 
security and Medicare taxes (or the equivalent 
railroad retirement tax)) due on your pay plus 
your tips, you can give your employer money to 
cover the shortage. See Pub. 531 for more infor-
mation.
Allocated tips.  Y our employer shouldn't with-
hold income tax, Medicare tax, social security 
tax, or railroad retirement tax on any allocated 
tips. Withholding is based only on your pay plus 
your reported tips. Y our employer should refund 
to you any incorrectly withheld tax. See Pub. 
531 for more information.
Taxable Fringe Benefits
The value of certain noncash fringe benefits you 
receive from your employer is considered part 
of your pay. Y our employer must generally with-
hold income tax on these benefits from your 
regular pay.
Page 41 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17 (2023) Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax 39

For information on fringe benefits, see 
Fringe Benefits under Employee Compensation 
in chapter 5.
Although the value of your personal use of 
an employer-provided car, truck, or other high-
way motor vehicle is taxable, your employer can 
choose not to withhold income tax on that 
amount. Y our employer must notify you if this 
choice is made.
For more information on withholding on taxa-
ble fringe benefits, see chapter 1 of Pub. 505.
Sick Pay
Sick pay is a payment to you to replace your 
regular wages while you are temporarily absent 
from work due to sickness or personal injury. T o 
qualify as sick pay, it must be paid under a plan 
to which your employer is a party.
If you receive sick pay from your employer or 
an agent of your employer, income tax must be 
withheld. An agent who doesn't pay regular wa-
ges to you may choose to withhold income tax 
at a flat rate.
However, if you receive sick pay from a third 
party who isn't acting as an agent of your em-
ployer, income tax will be withheld only if you 
choose to have it withheld. See Form W -4S, 
later.
If you receive payments under a plan in 
which your employer doesn't participate (such 
as an accident or health plan where you paid all 
the premiums), the payments aren’t sick pay 
and usually aren’t taxable.
Union agreements. If you receive sick pay un-
der a collective bargaining agreement between 
your union and your employer, the agreement 
may determine the amount of income tax with-
holding. See your union representative or your 
employer for more information.
Form W-4S. If you choose to have income tax 
withheld from sick pay paid by a third party, 
such as an insurance company, you must fill out 
Form W-4S. Its instructions contain a worksheet 
you can use to figure the amount you want with-
held. They also explain restrictions that may ap-
ply.
Give the completed form to the payer of your 
sick pay. The payer must withhold according to 
your directions on the form.
Estimated tax. If you don't request withholding 
on Form W -4S, or if you don't have enough tax 
withheld, you may have to make estimated tax 
payments. If you don't pay enough tax, either 
through estimated tax or withholding, or a com-
bination of both, you may have to pay a penalty. 
See Underpayment Penalty for 2023  at the end 
of this chapter.
Pensions and Annuities
Income tax will usually be withheld from your 
pension or annuity distributions unless you 
choose not to have it withheld. This rule applies 
to distributions from:
• A traditional individual retirement arrange-
ment (IRA);
• A life insurance company under an endow-
ment, annuity, or life insurance contract;
• A pension, annuity, or profit-sharing plan;
• A stock bonus plan; and
• Any other plan that defers the time you re-
ceive compensation.
The amount withheld depends on whether 
you receive payments spread out over more 
than 1 year (periodic payments), within 1 year 
(nonperiodic payments), or as an eligible roll-
over distribution (ERD). Income tax withholding 
from an ERD is mandatory.
More information.  For more information on 
withholding on pensions and annuities, includ-
ing a discussion of Form W -4P , see Pensions 
and Annuities in chapter 1 of Pub. 505.
Gambling Winnings
Income tax is withheld at a flat 24% rate from 
certain kinds of gambling winnings.
Gambling winnings of more than $5,000 
from the following sources are subject to in-
come tax withholding.
• Any sweepstakes; wagering pool, including 
payments made to winners of poker tour-
naments; or lottery.
• Any other wager, if the proceeds are at 
least 300 times the amount of the bet.
It doesn't matter whether your winnings are paid 
in cash, in property, or as an annuity. Winnings 
not paid in cash are taken into account at their 
fair market value.
Exception.  Gambling winnings from bingo, 
keno, and slot machines generally aren’t sub-
ject to income tax withholding. However, you 
may need to provide the payer with a social se-
curity number to avoid withholding. See Backup 
withholding on gambling winnings in chapter 1 
of Pub. 505. If you receive gambling winnings 
not subject to withholding, you may need to pay 
estimated tax. See Estimated T ax for 2024 , 
later.
If you don't pay enough tax, either through 
withholding or estimated tax, or a combination 
of both, you may have to pay a penalty. See Un-
derpayment Penalty for 2023  at the end of this 
chapter.
Form W -2G. If a payer withholds income tax 
from your gambling winnings, you should re-
ceive a Form W -2G, Certain Gambling Win-
nings, showing the amount you won and the 
amount withheld. Report the tax withheld on 
Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 25c.
Unemployment 
Compensation
Y ou can choose to have income tax withheld 
from unemployment compensation. T o make 
this choice, fill out Form W -4V (or a similar form 
provided by the payer) and give it to the payer.
All unemployment compensation is taxable. 
If you don't have income tax withheld, you may 
have to pay estimated tax. See Estimated T ax 
for 2024, later.
If you don't pay enough tax, either through 
withholding or estimated tax, or a combination 
of both, you may have to pay a penalty. See Un-
derpayment Penalty for 2023  at the end of this 
chapter.
Federal Payments
Y ou can choose to have income tax withheld 
from certain federal payments you receive. 
These payments are the following.
1. Social security benefits.
2. Tier 1 railroad retirement benefits.
3. Commodity credit corporation loans you 
choose to include in your gross income.
4. Payments under the Agricultural Act of 
1949 (7 U.S.C. 1421 et seq.), as amen-
ded, or title II of the Disaster Assistance 
Act of 1988, that are treated as insurance 
proceeds and that you receive because:
a. Y our crops were destroyed or dam-
aged by drought, flood, or any other 
natural disaster; or
b. Y ou were unable to plant crops be-
cause of a natural disaster described 
in (a).
5. Any other payment under federal law as 
determined by the Secretary.
T o make this choice, fill out Form W-4V (or a 
similar form provided by the payer) and give it to 
the payer.
If you don't choose to have income tax with-
held, you may have to pay estimated tax. See 
Estimated T ax for 2024, later.
If you don't pay enough tax, either through 
withholding or estimated tax, or a combination 
of both, you may have to pay a penalty. See Un-
derpayment Penalty for 2023  at the end of this 
chapter.
More information. For more information about 
the tax treatment of social security and railroad 
retirement benefits, see chapter 7 . Get Pub. 
225, Farmer's T ax Guide, for information about 
the tax treatment of commodity credit corpora-
tion loans or crop disaster payments.
Backup Withholding
Banks or other businesses that pay you certain 
kinds of income must file an information return 
(Form 1099) with the IRS. The information re-
turn shows how much you were paid during the 
year. It also includes your name and taxpayer 
identification number (TIN). TINs are explained 
in chapter 1 under Social Security Number 
(SSN).
These payments generally aren’t subject to 
withholding. However, “backup” withholding is 
required in certain situations. Backup withhold-
ing can apply to most kinds of payments that 
are reported on Form 1099.
The payer must withhold at a flat 24% rate in 
the following situations.
• Y ou don't give the payer your TIN in the re-
quired manner.
• The IRS notifies the payer that the TIN you 
gave is incorrect.
• Y ou are required, but fail, to certify that you 
aren’t subject to backup withholding.
• The IRS notifies the payer to start withhold-
ing on interest or dividends because you 
have underreported interest or dividends 
on your income tax return. The IRS will do 
Page 42 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
40 Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax Publication 17 (2023)

this only after it has mailed you four noti-
ces.
Go to IRS.gov/Businesses/Small-
Businesses-Self-Employed/Backup-
Withholding for more information on kinds of 
payments subject to backup withholding.
Penalties. There are civil and criminal penal-
ties for giving false information to avoid backup 
withholding. The civil penalty is $500. The crimi-
nal penalty, upon conviction, is a fine of up to 
$1,000 or imprisonment of up to 1 year, or both.
Estimated Tax for 2024
Estimated tax is the method used to pay tax on 
income that isn't subject to withholding. This in-
cludes income from self -employment, interest, 
dividends, alimony, rent, gains from the sale of 
assets, prizes, and awards. Y ou may also have 
to pay estimated tax if the amount of income tax 
being withheld from your salary, pension, or 
other income isn't enough.
Estimated tax is used to pay both income 
tax and self -employment tax, as well as other 
taxes and amounts reported on your tax return. 
If you don't pay enough tax, either through with-
holding or estimated tax, or a combination of 
both, you may have to pay a penalty. If you don't 
pay enough by the due date of each payment 
period (see When T o Pay Estimated T ax, later), 
you may be charged a penalty even if you are 
due a refund when you file your tax return. For 
information on when the penalty applies, see 
Underpayment Penalty for 2023  at the end of 
this chapter.
Who Doesn't Have To Pay 
Estimated Tax
If you receive salaries or wages, you can avoid 
having to pay estimated tax by asking your em-
ployer to take more tax out of your earnings. T o 
do this, give a new Form W -4 to your employer. 
See chapter 1 of Pub. 505.
Estimated tax not required. Y ou don't have to 
pay estimated tax for 2024 if you meet all three 
of the following conditions.
• Y ou had no tax liability for 2023.
• Y ou were a U.S. citizen or resident alien for 
the whole year.
• Y our 2023 tax year covered a 12-month pe-
riod.
Y ou had no tax liability for 2023 if your total 
tax was zero or you didn't have to file an income 
tax return. For the definition of “total tax” for 
2023, see Pub. 505, chapter 2.
Who Must Pay Estimated 
Tax
If you owe additional tax for 2023, you may have 
to pay estimated tax for 2024.
Y ou can use the following general rule as a 
guide during the year to see if you will have 
enough withholding, or if you should increase 
your withholding or make estimated tax pay-
ments.
General rule. In most cases, you must pay es-
timated tax for 2024 if both of the following ap-
ply.
1. Y ou expect to owe at least $1,000 in tax for 
2024, after subtracting your withholding 
and refundable credits.
2. Y ou expect your withholding plus your re-
fundable credits to be less than the 
smaller of:
a. 90% of the tax to be shown on your 
2024 tax return, or
b. 100% of the tax shown on your 2023 
tax return (but see Special rules for 
farmers, fishermen, and higher in-
come taxpayers, later). Y our 2023 tax 
return must cover all 12 months.
If the result from using the general rule 
above suggests that you won't have 
enough withholding, complete the 
2024 Estimated T ax Worksheet in Pub. 505 for a 
more accurate calculation.
Special rules for farmers, fishermen, and 
higher income taxpayers.  If at least 
two-thirds of your gross income for tax year 
2023 or 2024 is from farming or fishing, substi-
tute 66 2/3% for 90% in (2a) under the General 
rule, earlier. If your AGI for 2023 was more than 
$150,000 ($75,000 if your filing status for 2024 
is married filing a separate return), substitute 
110% for 100% in (2b) under General rule, ear-
lier. See Figure 4-A and Pub. 505, chapter 2, for 
more information.
Aliens.  Resident and nonresident aliens may 
also have to pay estimated tax. Resident aliens 
should follow the rules in this chapter unless no-
ted otherwise. Nonresident aliens should get 
Form 1040 -ES (NR), U.S. Estimated T ax for 
Nonresident Alien Individuals.
CAUTION
!
Figure 4-A. Do You Have To Pay Estimated Tax?
Start Here
No
Yes
Yes
NoNo
Yes
Will you owe $1,000 or more 
for 2024 after subtracting 
income tax withholding and 
refundable credits* from your 
total tax? (Don’t subtract any 
estimated tax payments.)
Will your income tax 
withholding and refundable 
credits* be at least 90%       
(662/3% for farmers and 
/f_ishermen) of the tax shown on 
your 2024 tax return?
Will your income tax 
withholding and refundable 
credits* be at least 100%** of 
the tax shown on your 2023 
tax return?
Note. Your 2023 return must 
have covered a 12-month 
period.
You are NOT required to pay 
estimated tax.
*Use the refundable credits shown on the 2024 Estimated Tax Worksheet in Pub. 505.
**110% if less than two-thirds of your gross income for 2023 and 2024 is from farming or /f_ishing and your 2023 
   adjusted gross income was more than $150,000 ($75,000 if your /f_iling status for 2024 is married /f_iling a separate return).
You MUST make estimated 
tax payment(s) by the 
required due date(s).
See When To Pay 
Estimated Tax.
Page 43 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17 (2023) Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax 41

Y ou are an alien if you aren’t a citizen or na-
tional of the United States. Y ou are a resident 
alien if you either have a green card or meet the 
substantial presence test. For more information 
about the substantial presence test, see Pub. 
519, U.S. T ax Guide for Aliens.
Married taxpayers. If you qualify to make joint 
estimated tax payments, apply the rules dis-
cussed here to your joint estimated income.
Y ou and your spouse can make joint estima-
ted tax payments even if you aren’t living to-
gether.
However, you and your spouse can’t make 
joint estimated tax payments if:
• Y ou are legally separated under a decree 
of divorce or separate maintenance,
• Y ou and your spouse have different tax 
years, or
• Either spouse is a nonresident alien (un-
less that spouse elected to be treated as a 
resident alien for tax purposes (see chap-
ter 1 of Pub. 519)).
If you and your spouse can’t make estimated 
tax payments, apply these rules to your sepa-
rate estimated income. Making joint or separate 
estimated tax payments won't affect your choice 
of filing a joint tax return or separate returns for 
2024.
2023 separate returns and 2024 joint re-
turn. If you plan to file a joint return with your 
spouse for 2024 but you filed separate returns 
for 2023, your 2023 tax is the total of the tax 
shown on your separate returns. Y ou filed a 
separate return if you filed as single, head of 
household, or married filing separately.
2023 joint return and 2024 separate re-
turns. If you plan to file a separate return for 
2024 but you filed a joint return for 2023, your 
2023 tax is your share of the tax on the joint re-
turn. Y ou file a separate return if you file as sin-
gle, head of household, or married filing sepa-
rately.
T o figure your share of the tax on the joint re-
turn, first figure the tax both you and your 
spouse would have paid had you filed separate 
returns for 2023 using the same filing status as 
for 2024. Then, multiply the tax on the joint re-
turn by the following fraction.
The tax you would have paid had 
you filed a separate return
The total tax you and your 
spouse would have paid had 
you filed separate returns
Example. T axpayer A and T axpayer B filed 
a joint return for 2023 showing taxable income 
of $48,500 and tax of $5,383. Of the $48,500 
taxable income, $40,100 was T axpayer A’s and 
the rest was T axpayer B's. For 2024, they plan 
to file married filing separately. T axpayer A fig-
ures tax on the 2023 joint return as follows.
T ax on $40,100 based on a 
separate return ....... $4,595
T ax on $8,400 based on a 
separate return .......  843
T otal ............... $5,438
T axpayer A's percentage of 
total ($4,595 ÷ $5,438) ... 85% 
T axpayer A's share of tax on 
joint return 
($5,383 × 85%) ....... $4,576
How To Figure
Estimated Tax
T o figure your estimated tax, you must figure 
your expected adjusted gross income (AGI), 
taxable income, taxes, deductions, and credits 
for the year.
When figuring your 2024 estimated tax, it 
may be helpful to use your income, deductions, 
and credits for 2023 as a starting point. Use 
your 2023 federal tax return as a guide. Y ou can 
use Form 1040 -ES and Pub. 505 to figure your 
estimated tax. Nonresident aliens use Form 
1040-ES (NR) and Pub. 505 to figure estimated 
tax (see chapter 8 of Pub. 519 for more informa-
tion).
Y ou must make adjustments both for 
changes in your own situation and for recent 
changes in the tax law. For a discussion of 
these changes, visit IRS.gov.
For more complete information on how to 
figure your estimated tax for 2024, see chap-
ter 2 of Pub. 505.
When To Pay Estimated 
Tax
For estimated tax purposes, the tax year is divi-
ded into four payment periods. Each period has 
a specific payment due date. If you don't pay 
enough tax by the due date of each payment 
period, you may be charged a penalty even if 
you are due a refund when you file your income 
tax return. The payment periods and due dates 
for estimated tax payments are shown next.
For the period: Due date:*
Jan. 1–March 31 ...... April 15
April 1–May 31 ....... June 17
June 1–August 31 ..... Sept. 16
Sept. 1–Dec. 31 ...... Jan. 15, next year
. 
*See Saturday, Sunday, holiday rule and January 
payment.
Saturday, Sunday, holiday rule.  If the due 
date for an estimated tax payment falls on a 
Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the payment 
will be on time if you make it on the next day 
that isn't a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday.
January payment.  If you file your 2024 Form 
1040 or 1040-SR by January 31, 2025, and pay 
the rest of the tax you owe, you don't need to 
make the payment due on January 15, 2025.
Fiscal year taxpayers. If your tax year doesn't 
start on January 1, see the Form 1040 -ES in-
structions for your payment due dates.
When To Start
Y ou don't have to make estimated tax payments 
until you have income on which you will owe in-
come tax. If you have income subject to estima-
ted tax during the first payment period, you 
must make your first payment by the due date 
for the first payment period. Y ou can pay all your 
estimated tax at that time, or you can pay it in 
installments. If you choose to pay in install-
ments, make your first payment by the due date 
for the first payment period. Make your remain-
ing installment payments by the due dates for 
the later periods.
No income subject to estimated tax during 
first period.  If you don't have income subject 
to estimated tax until a later payment period, 
you must make your first payment by the due 
date for that period. Y ou can pay your entire es-
timated tax by the due date for that period or 
you can pay it in installments by the due date for 
that period and the due dates for the remaining 
periods.
General Due Dates for 
Estimated Tax 
Installment Payments
T able 4-1.
If you first 
have income 
on which you 
must pay 
estimated tax:
Make 
installments 
by:*
Make later 
installments 
by:*
Before April 1 April 15 June 15
Sept. 15
Jan. 15, next 
year
April 1–May 31 June 15 Sept. 15
Jan. 15, next 
year
June 1–Aug. 31 Sept. 15 Jan. 15, next 
year
After Aug. 31 Jan. 15, next 
year
(None)
*See Saturday, Sunday, holiday rule and January 
payment. 
How much to pay to avoid a penalty.  T o de-
termine how much you should pay by each pay-
ment due date, see How T o Figure Each Pay-
ment next.
How To Figure
Each Payment
Y ou should pay enough estimated tax by the 
due date of each payment period to avoid a 
penalty for that period. Y ou can figure your re-
quired payment for each period by using either 
the regular installment method or the annual-
ized income installment method. These meth-
ods are described in chapter 2 of Pub. 505. If 
you don't pay enough during each payment pe-
riod, you may be charged a penalty even if you 
are due a refund when you file your tax return.
If the earlier discussion of No income sub-
ject to estimated tax during first period  or the 
Page 44 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
42 Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax Publication 17 (2023)

later discussion of Change in estimated tax  ap-
plies to you, you may benefit from reading An-
nualized Income Installment Method in chap-
ter 2 of Pub. 505 for information on how to avoid 
a penalty.
Underpayment penalty. Under the regular in-
stallment method, if your estimated tax payment 
for any period is less than one-fourth of your es-
timated tax, you may be charged a penalty for 
underpayment of estimated tax for that period 
when you file your tax return. Under the annual-
ized income installment method, your estimated 
tax payments vary with your income, but the 
amount required must be paid each period. See 
Instructions for Form 2210 for more information.
Change in estimated tax.  After you make an 
estimated tax payment, changes in your in-
come, adjustments, deductions, or credits may 
make it necessary for you to refigure your esti-
mated tax. Pay the unpaid balance of your 
amended estimated tax by the next payment 
due date after the change or in installments by 
that date and the due dates for the remaining 
payment periods.
Estimated Tax Payments
Not Required
Y ou don't have to pay estimated tax if your with-
holding in each payment period is at least as 
much as:
• One-fourth of your required annual pay-
ment, or
• Y our required annualized income install-
ment for that period.
Y ou also don't have to pay estimated tax if you 
will pay enough through withholding to keep the 
amount you owe with your return under $1,000.
How To Pay Estimated Tax
There are several ways to pay estimated tax.
• Credit an overpayment on your 2023 return 
to your 2024 estimated tax.
• Pay by direct transfer from your bank ac-
count, or pay by debit or credit card using a 
pay-by-phone system or the Internet.
• Send in your payment (check or money or-
der) with a payment voucher from Form 
1040-ES.
Credit an Overpayment
If you show an overpayment of tax after com-
pleting your Form 1040 or 1040 -SR for 2023, 
you can apply part or all of it to your estimated 
tax for 2024. On line 36 of Form 1040 or 
1040-SR, enter the amount you want credited to 
your estimated tax rather than refunded. T ake 
the amount you have credited into account 
when figuring your estimated tax payments.
Y ou can’t have any of the amount you credi-
ted to your estimated tax refunded to you until 
you file your tax return for the following year. Y ou 
also can’t use that overpayment in any other 
way.
Pay Online
The IRS offers an electronic payment option 
that is right for you. Paying online is convenient, 
secure, and helps make sure we get your pay-
ments on time. T o pay your taxes online or for 
more information, go to IRS.gov/Payments. Y ou 
can pay using any of the following methods.
• IRS Direct Pay. For online transfers di-
rectly from your checking or savings ac-
count at no cost to you, go to IRS.gov/
Payments.
• Pay by Card or Digital Wallet. T o pay by 
debit or credit card or digital wallet, go to 
IRS.gov/Payments. A fee is charged by 
these service providers.Y ou can also pay 
by phone with a debit or credit card. See 
Debit or credit card under Pay by Phone, 
later.
• Electronic Funds Withdrawal (EFW). 
This is an integrated e-file/e-pay option of-
fered only when filing your federal taxes 
electronically using tax preparation soft-
ware, through a tax professional, or the IRS 
at IRS.gov/OPA.
• Online Payment Agreement. If you can’t 
pay in full by the due date of your tax re-
turn, you can apply for an online monthly 
installment agreement at IRS.gov/
Payments. Once you complete the online 
process, you will receive immediate notifi-
cation of whether your agreement has 
been approved. A user fee is charged.
• IRS2GO. This is the mobile application of 
the IRS. Y ou can access Direct Pay or Pay 
By Card by downloading the application.
Electronic Federal Tax Payment 
System (EFTPS)
This system allows you to pay your taxes online 
or by phone directly from your checking or sav-
ing account.There is no fee for this service. Y ou 
must be enrolled either online or have an enroll-
ment form mailed to you. See EFTPS under Pay 
by Phone, later.
Pay by Phone
Paying by phone is another safe and secure 
method of paying electronically. Use one of the 
following methods: (1) call one of the debit or 
credit card providers, or (2) use the Electronic 
Federal T ax Payment System (EFTPS) to pay 
directly from your checking or savings account.
Debit or credit card.  Call one of our service 
providers. Each charges a fee that varies by 
provider, card type, and payment amount.
WorldPay US, Inc.
844-PAY-TAX-8TM (844-729-8298)
www.payUSAtax.com
ACI Payments, Inc. (Formerly Official 
Payments)
888-272-9829
www.fed.acipayonline.com
Link2Gov Corporation
888-PAY-1040TM (888-729-1040)
www.PAY1040.com
EFTPS.  T o get more information about EFTPS 
or to enroll in EFTPS, visit EFTPS.gov or call 
800-555-4477. T o contact EFTPS using T ele-
communications Relay Services (TRS) for peo-
ple who are deaf, hard of hearing, or have a 
speech disability, dial 711 and then provide the 
TRS assistant the 800-555-4477 number above 
or 800 -733-4829. Additional information about 
EFTPS is also available in Pub. 966.
Pay by Mobile Device
T o pay through your mobile device, download 
the IRS2Go application.
Pay by Cash
Cash is an in-person payment option for individ-
uals provided through retail partners with a 
maximum of $1,000 per day per transaction. T o 
make a cash payment, you must choose a pay-
ment processor online with ACI Payments, Inc. 
at fed.acipayonline.com or www.Pay1040.com, 
our official payment provider. For more informa-
tion, go to IRS.gov/paywithcash or see Pub 
5250. Don't send cash payments through the 
mail.
Pay by Check or Money Order 
Using the Estimated Tax
Payment Voucher
Before submitting a payment through the mail 
using the estimated tax payment voucher, 
please consider alternative methods. One of 
our safe, quick, and easy electronic payment 
options might be right for you.
If you choose to mail in your payment, each 
payment of estimated tax by check or money or-
der must be accompanied by a payment 
voucher from Form 1040-ES.
During 2023, if you:
• Made at least one estimated tax payment 
but not by electronic means,
• Didn't use software or a paid preparer to 
prepare or file your return,
then you should receive a copy of the 2024 
Form 1040-ES with payment vouchers.
The enclosed payment vouchers will be pre-
printed with your name, address, and social se-
curity number. Using the preprinted vouchers 
will speed processing, reduce the chance of er-
ror, and help save processing costs.
Use the window envelopes that came with 
your Form 1040 -ES package. If you use your 
own envelopes, make sure you mail your pay-
ment vouchers to the address shown in the 
Form 1040-ES instructions for the place where 
you live.
No checks of $100 million or more accep-
ted.  The IRS can’t accept a single check (in-
cluding a cashier’s check) for amounts of 
$100,000,000 ($100 million) or more. If you are 
sending $100 million or more by check, you’ll 
need to spread the payment over two or more 
checks with each check made out for an 
amount less than $100 million. This limit doesn’t 
apply to other methods of payment (such as 
electronic payments). Please consider a 
method of payment other than check if the 
amount of the payment is over $100 million.
Note. These criteria can change without no-
tice. If you don't receive a Form 1040 -ES pack-
age and you are required to make an estimated 
Page 45 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17 (2023) Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax 43

tax payment, you should go to IRS.gov/
Form1040ES and print a copy of Form 1040 -ES 
that includes four blank payment vouchers. 
Complete one of these and make your payment 
timely to avoid penalties for paying late.
Don't use the address shown in the In-
structions for Form 1040 for your esti-
mated tax payments.
If you didn't pay estimated tax last year, you 
can order Form 1040 -ES from the IRS (see the 
inside back cover of this publication) or down-
load it from IRS.gov. Follow the instructions to 
make sure you use the vouchers correctly.
Joint estimated tax payments.  If you file a 
joint return and are making joint estimated tax 
payments, enter the names and social security 
numbers on the payment voucher in the same 
order as they will appear on the joint return.
Change of address. Y ou must notify the IRS if 
you are making estimated tax payments and 
you changed your address during the year. 
Complete Form 8822, Change of Address, and 
mail it to the address shown in the instructions 
for that form.
Credit for Withholding 
and Estimated Tax
for 2023
When you file your 2023 income tax return, take 
credit for all the income tax and excess social 
security or railroad retirement tax withheld from 
your salary, wages, pensions, etc. Also take 
credit for the estimated tax you paid for 2023. 
These credits are subtracted from your total tax. 
Because these credits are refundable, you 
should file a return and claim these credits, 
even if you don't owe tax.
Two or more employers.  If you had two or 
more employers in 2023 and were paid wages 
of more than $160,200, too much social secur-
ity or tier 1 railroad retirement tax may have 
been withheld from your pay. Y ou may be able 
to claim the excess as a credit against your in-
come tax when you file your return. See the In-
structions for Form 1040 for more information.
Withholding
If you had income tax withheld during 2023, you 
should be sent a statement by January 31, 
2024, showing your income and the tax with-
held. Depending on the source of your income, 
you should receive:
• Form W-2, Wage and T ax Statement;
• Form W-2G, Certain Gambling Winnings; 
or
• A form in the 1099 series.
Forms W-2 and W -2G. If you file a paper re-
turn, always file Form W -2 with your income tax 
return. File Form W-2G with your return only if it 
shows any federal income tax withheld from 
your winnings.
Y ou should get at least two copies of each 
form. If you file a paper return, attach one copy 
to the front of your federal income tax return. 
Keep one copy for your records. Y ou should 
CAUTION
!
also receive copies to file with your state and lo-
cal returns.
Form W-2
Y our employer is required to provide or send 
Form W -2 to you no later than January 31, 
2024. Y ou should receive a separate Form W-2 
from each employer you worked for.
If you stopped working before the end of 
2023, your employer could have given you your 
Form W-2 at any time after you stopped work-
ing. However, your employer must provide or 
send it to you by January 31, 2024.
If you ask for the form, your employer must 
send it to you within 30 days after receiving your 
written request or within 30 days after your final 
wage payment, whichever is later.
If you haven't received your Form W -2 by 
January 31, you should ask your employer for it. 
If you don't receive it by early February, call the 
IRS.
Form W -2 shows your total pay and other 
compensation and the income tax, social secur-
ity tax, and Medicare tax that was withheld dur-
ing the year. Include the federal income tax 
withheld (as shown in box 2 of Form W -2) on 
Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 25a.
In addition, Form W -2 is used to report any 
taxable sick pay you received and any income 
tax withheld from your sick pay.
Form W-2G
If you had gambling winnings in 2023, the payer 
may have withheld income tax. If tax was with-
held, the payer will give you a Form W -2G 
showing the amount you won and the amount of 
tax withheld.
Report the amounts you won on Schedule 1 
(Form 1040). T ake credit for the tax withheld on 
Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 25c.
The 1099 Series
Most forms in the 1099 series aren’t filed with 
your return. These forms should be furnished to 
you by January 31, 2024 (or, for Forms 1099 -B, 
1099-S, and certain Forms 1099 -MISC, by Feb-
ruary 15, 2024). Unless instructed to file any of 
these forms with your return, keep them for your 
records. There are several different forms in this 
series, which are not listed. See the instructions 
for the specific Form 1099 for more information.
Form 1099-R. Attach Form 1099-R to your pa-
per return if box 4 shows federal income tax 
withheld. Include the amount withheld in the to-
tal on line 25b of Form 1040 or 1040-SR.
Backup withholding.  If you were subject to 
backup withholding on income you received 
during 2023, include the amount withheld, as 
shown on your Form 1099, in the total on 
line 25b of Form 1040 or 1040-SR.
Form Not Correct
If you receive a form with incorrect information 
on it, you should ask the payer for a corrected 
form. Call the telephone number or write to the 
address given for the payer on the form. The 
corrected Form W-2G or Form 1099 you receive 
will have an “X” in the “CORRECTED” box at the 
top of the form. A special form, Form W -2c, 
Corrected Wage and T ax Statement, is used to 
correct a Form W-2.
In certain situations, you will receive two 
forms in place of the original incorrect form. This 
will happen when your taxpayer identification 
number is wrong or missing, your name and ad-
dress are wrong, or you received the wrong 
type of form (for example, a Form 1099 -DIV , 
Dividends and Distributions, instead of a Form 
1099-INT , Interest Income). One new form you 
receive will be the same incorrect form or have 
the same incorrect information, but all money 
amounts will be zero. This form will have an “X” 
in the “CORRECTED” box at the top of the form. 
The second new form should have all the cor-
rect information, prepared as though it is the 
original (the “CORRECTED” box won't be 
checked).
Form Received After Filing
If you file your return and you later receive a 
form for income that you didn't include on your 
return, you should report the income and take 
credit for any income tax withheld by filing Form 
1040-X, Amended U.S. Individual Income T ax 
Return.
Separate Returns
If you are married but file a separate return, you 
can take credit only for the tax withheld from 
your own income. Don't include any amount 
withheld from your spouse's income. However, 
different rules may apply if you live in a com-
munity property state.
Community property states are listed in 
chapter 2. For more information on these rules, 
and some exceptions, see Pub. 555, Commun-
ity Property.
Estimated Tax
T ake credit for all your estimated tax payments 
for 2023 on Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, line 26. In-
clude any overpayment from 2022 that you had 
credited to your 2023 estimated tax.
Name changed.  If you changed your name, 
and you made estimated tax payments using 
your old name, attach a brief statement to the 
front of your paper tax return indicating:
• When you made the payments,
• The amount of each payment,
• Y our name when you made the payments, 
and
• Y our social security number.
The statement should cover payments you 
made jointly with your spouse as well as any 
you made separately.
Be sure to report the change to the Social 
Security Administration. This prevents delays in 
processing your return and issuing any refunds.
Separate Returns
If you and your spouse made separate estima-
ted tax payments for 2023 and you file separate 
returns, you can take credit only for your own 
payments.
If you made joint estimated tax payments, 
you must decide how to divide the payments 
between your returns. One of you can claim all 
Page 46 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
44 Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax Publication 17 (2023)

of the estimated tax paid and the other none, or 
you can divide it in any other way you agree on. 
If you can’t agree, you must divide the pay-
ments in proportion to each spouse's individual 
tax as shown on your separate returns for 2023.
Divorced Taxpayers
If you made joint estimated tax payments for 
2023, and you were divorced during the year, 
either you or your former spouse can claim all of 
the joint payments, or you each can claim part 
of them. If you can’t agree on how to divide the 
payments, you must divide them in proportion to 
each spouse's individual tax as shown on your 
separate returns for 2023.
If you claim any of the joint payments on 
your tax return, enter your former spouse's so-
cial security number (SSN) in the space provi-
ded on the front of Form 1040 or 1040 -SR. If 
you divorced and remarried in 2023, enter your 
present spouse's SSN in the space provided on 
the front of Form 1040 or 1040 -SR. Also, on the 
dotted line next to line 26, enter your former 
spouse’s SSN, followed by “DIV .”
Underpayment Penalty 
for 2023
If you didn't pay enough tax, either through with-
holding or by making timely estimated tax pay-
ments, you will have an underpayment of esti-
mated tax and you may have to pay a penalty.
Generally, you won't have to pay a penalty 
for 2023 if any of the following apply.
• The total of your withholding and estimated 
tax payments was at least as much as your 
2022 tax (or 110% of your 2022 tax if your 
AGI was more than $150,000, $75,000 if 
your 2023 filing status is married filing sep-
arately) and you paid all required estima-
ted tax payments on time;
• The tax balance due on your 2023 return is 
no more than 10% of your total 2023 tax, 
and you paid all required estimated tax 
payments on time;
• Y our total 2023 tax minus your withholding 
and refundable credits is less than $1,000;
• Y ou didn't have a tax liability for 2022 and 
your 2022 tax year was 12 months; or
• Y ou didn't have any withholding taxes and 
your current year tax less any household 
employment taxes is less than $1,000.
Farmers and fishermen. Special rules apply if 
you are a farmer or fisherman. See the Instruc-
tions for Form 2210-F for more information.
IRS can figure the penalty for you.  If you 
think you owe the penalty but you don't want to 
figure it yourself when you file your tax return, 
you may not have to. Generally, the IRS will fig-
ure the penalty for you and send you a bill. How-
ever, if you think you are able to lower or elimi-
nate your penalty, you must complete Form 
2210 or Form 2210-F and attach it to your paper 
return. See Instructions for Form 2210  for more 
information.
Page 47 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17 (2023) Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax 45

Part Two.
Income and 
Adjustments to 
Income
The five chapters in this part discuss many kinds of income and 
adjustments to income. They explain which income is and isn’t taxed and 
discuss some of the adjustments to income that you can make in figuring 
your adjusted gross income.
The Form 1040 and Form 1040-SR schedules that are discussed in these 
chapters are:
• Schedule 1, Additional Income and Adjustments to Income;
• Schedule 2 (Part II), Other T axes; and
• Schedule 3 (Part II), Other Payments and Refundable Credits.
T able V . Other Adjustments to Income
Use this table to find information about other adjustments to income not covered in this part of the publication.
IF you are looking for more information about the 
deduction for...
THEN see...
contributions to a health savings account Pub. 969, Health Savings Accounts and Other T ax-Favored 
Health Plans.
moving expenses Pub. 3, Armed Forces’ T ax Guide.
part of your self-employment tax chapter 11.
self-employed health insurance Pub. 502, Medical and Dental Expenses.
payments to self-employed SEP , SIMPLE, and qualified plans Pub. 560, Retirement Plans for Small Business.
penalty on the early withdrawal of savings chapter 6.
contributions to an Archer MSA Pub. 969.
reforestation amortization or expense chapters 4 and 7 of Pub. 225, Farmer's T ax Guide.
contributions to Internal Revenue Code section 501(c)(18)(D) 
pension plans
Pub. 525, T axable and Nontaxable Income.
expenses from the rental of personal property chapter 8.
certain required repayments of supplemental unemployment 
benefits (sub-pay)
chapter 8.
foreign housing costs chapter 4 of Pub. 54, T ax Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resident 
Aliens Abroad.
jury duty pay given to your employer chapter 8.
contributions by certain ministers or chaplains to Internal 
Revenue Code section 403(b) plans
Pub. 517, Social Security and Other Information for Members of 
the Clergy and Religious Workers.
attorney fees and certain costs for actions involving IRS awards 
to whistleblowers
Pub. 525.
Page 48 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
46 Chapter 4 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax Publication 17 (2023)

5.
Wages, Salaries, 
and Other 
Earnings
What’s New
Deferred compensation contribution limit 
increased. If you participate in a 401(k) plan, 
403(b) plan, or the federal government's Thrift 
Savings Plan, the total annual amount you can 
contribute is increased to $22,500 ($30,000 if 
age 50 or older) for 2023. This also applies to 
most 457 plans.
Health flexible spending arrangements 
(health FSAs) under cafeteria plans.  For tax 
years beginning in 2023, the dollar limitation un-
der section 125(i) on voluntary employee salary 
reductions for contributions to health FSAs is 
$3,050.
Introduction
This chapter discusses compensation received 
for services as an employee, such as wages, 
salaries, and fringe benefits. The following top-
ics are included.
• Bonuses and awards.
• Special rules for certain employees.
• Sickness and injury benefits.
The chapter explains what income is inclu-
ded and isn’t included in the employee's gross 
income and what’s not included.
Useful Items
Y ou may want to see:
Publication
463 T ravel, Gift, and Car Expenses
502 Medical and Dental Expenses
524 Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
525 T axable and Nontaxable Income
526 Charitable Contributions
550 Investment Income and Expenses
554 T ax Guide for Seniors
575 Pension and Annuity Income
907 T ax Highlights for Persons With 
Disabilities
926 Household Employer's T ax Guide
3920 T ax Relief for Victims of T errorist 
Attacks
For these and other useful items, go to IRS.gov/
Forms.
  463
  502
  524
  525
  526
  550
  554
  575
  907
  926
  3920
Employee 
Compensation
This section discusses various types of em-
ployee compensation, including fringe benefits, 
retirement plan contributions, stock options, 
and restricted property.
Form W -2. If you’re an employee, you should 
receive a Form W -2 from your employer show-
ing the pay you received for your services. In-
clude your pay on Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, 
line 1a, even if you don’t receive a Form W-2.
In some instances, your employer isn’t re-
quired to give you a Form W -2. Y our employer 
isn’t required to give you a Form W -2 if you per-
form household work in your employer's home 
for less than $2,600 in cash wages during the 
calendar year and you have no federal income 
taxes withheld from your wages. Household 
work is work done in or around an employer's 
home. Some examples of workers who do 
household work are:
• Babysitters,
• Caretakers,
• House cleaning workers,
• Domestic workers,
• Drivers,
• Health aides,
• Housekeepers,
• Maids,
• Nannies,
• Private nurses, and
• Y ard workers.
See Schedule H (Form 1040), Household 
Employment T axes, and its instructions, and 
Pub. 926 for more information.
If you performed services, other than as an 
independent contractor, and your employer 
didn’t withhold social security and Medicare 
taxes from your pay, you must file Form 8919, 
Uncollected Social Security and Medicare T ax 
on Wages, with your Form 1040 or 1040 -SR. 
See Form 8919 and its instructions for more in-
formation on how to figure unreported wages 
and taxes and how to include them on your in-
come tax return.
Childcare providers. If you provide childcare, 
either in the child's home or in your home or 
other place of business, the pay you receive 
must be included in your income. If you aren’t 
an employee, you’re probably self -employed 
and must include payments for your services on 
Schedule C (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From 
Business. Y ou generally aren’t an employee un-
less you’re subject to the will and control of the 
person who employs you as to what you’re to do 
and how you’re to do it.
Babysitting. If you’re paid to babysit, even 
for relatives or neighborhood children, whether 
on a regular basis or only periodically, the rules 
for childcare providers apply to you.
Self-employment tax. Whether you're an em-
ployee or self -employed person, your income 
could be subject to self -employment tax. See 
the instructions for Schedules C and SE (Form 
1040) if you're self -employed. Also, see Pub. 
926 for more information.
Miscellaneous 
Compensation
This section discusses different types of em-
ployee compensation.
Advance commissions and other earnings. 
If you receive advance commissions or other 
amounts for services to be performed in the fu-
ture and you’re a cash -method taxpayer, you 
must include these amounts in your income in 
the year you receive them.
If you repay unearned commissions or other 
amounts in the same year you receive them, re-
duce the amount included in your income by the 
repayment. If you repay them in a later tax year, 
you can deduct the repayment as an itemized 
deduction on your Schedule A (Form 1040), 
line 16, or you may be able to take a credit for 
that year. See Repayments in chapter 8.
Allowances and reimbursements.  If you re-
ceive travel, transportation, or other business 
expense allowances or reimbursements from 
your employer, see Pub. 463, T ravel, Gift, and 
Car Expenses. If you’re a member of the military 
and you’re reimbursed for moving expenses, 
see Pub. 521, Moving Expenses.
Back pay awards. If you receive an amount in 
payment of a settlement or judgment for back 
pay, you must include the amount of the pay-
ment in your income. This includes payments 
made to you for damages, unpaid life insurance 
premiums, and unpaid health insurance premi-
ums. They should be reported to you by your 
employer on Form W-2.
Bonuses and awards.  If you receive a bonus 
or award (cash, goods, services, etc.) from your 
employer, you must include its value in your in-
come. However, if your employer merely prom-
ises to pay you a bonus or award at some future 
time, it isn’t taxable until you receive it or it’s 
made available to you.
Employee achievement award.  If you re-
ceive tangible personal property (other than 
cash, a gift certificate, or an equivalent item) as 
an award for length of service or safety achieve-
ment, you can generally exclude its value from 
your income. The amount you can exclude is 
limited to your employer's cost and can’t be 
more than $1,600 for qualified plan awards or 
$400 for nonqualified plan awards for all such 
awards you receive during the year. Y our em-
ployer can tell you whether your award is a 
qualified plan award. Y our employer must make 
the award as part of a meaningful presentation, 
under conditions and circumstances that don’t 
create a significant likelihood of it being dis-
guised pay.
However, the exclusion doesn’t apply to the 
following awards.
• A length-of-service award if you received it 
for less than 5 years of service or if you re-
ceived another length-of-service award 
during the year or the previous 4 years.
• A safety achievement award if you’re a 
manager, administrator, clerical employee, 
or other professional employee or if more 
than 10% of eligible employees previously 
Page 49 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17 (2023) Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings 47

received safety achievement awards dur-
ing the year.
Example. Y ou received three employee 
achievement awards during the year: a nonqua-
lified plan award of a watch valued at $250, two 
qualified plan awards of a stereo valued at 
$1,000, and a set of golf clubs valued at $500. 
Assuming that the requirements for qualified 
plan awards are otherwise satisfied, each award 
by itself would be excluded from income. How-
ever, because the $1,750 total value of the 
awards is more than $1,600, you must include 
$150 ($1,750 – $1,600) in your income.
Differential wage payments. This is any pay-
ment made to you by an employer for any pe-
riod during which you are, for a period of more 
than 30 days, an active duty member of the uni-
formed services and represents all or a portion 
of the wages you would have received from the 
employer during that period. These payments 
are treated as wages and are subject to income 
tax withholding, but not FICA or FUTA taxes. 
The payments are reported as wages on Form 
W-2.
Government cost -of-living allowances. 
Most payments received by U.S. Government 
civilian employees for working abroad are taxa-
ble. However, certain cost -of-living allowances 
are tax free. Pub. 516, U.S. Government Civilian 
Employees Stationed Abroad, explains the tax 
treatment of allowances, differentials, and other 
special pay you receive for employment abroad.
Nonqualified deferred compensation plans. 
Y our employer may report to you the total 
amount of deferrals for the year under a non-
qualified deferred compensation plan on Form 
W-2, box 12, using code Y . This amount isn’t in-
cluded in your income.
However, if at any time during the tax year, 
the plan fails to meet certain requirements, or 
isn’t operated under those requirements, all 
amounts deferred under the plan for the tax 
year and all preceding tax years to the extent 
vested and not previously included in income 
are included in your income for the current year. 
This amount is included in your wages shown 
on Form W -2, box 1. It’s also shown on Form 
W-2, box 12, using code Z.
Note received for services.  If your employer 
gives you a secured note as payment for your 
services, you must include the fair market value 
(usually the discount value) of the note in your 
income for the year you receive it. When you 
later receive payments on the note, a propor-
tionate part of each payment is the recovery of 
the fair market value that you previously inclu-
ded in your income. Don’t include that part 
again in your income. Include the rest of the 
payment in your income in the year of payment.
If your employer gives you a nonnegotiable 
unsecured note as payment for your services, 
payments on the note that are credited toward 
the principal amount of the note are compensa-
tion income when you receive them.
Severance pay.  If you receive a severance 
payment when your employment with your em-
ployer ends or is terminated, you must include 
this amount in your income.
Accrued leave payment. If you’re a federal 
employee and receive a lump -sum payment for 
accrued annual leave when you retire or resign, 
this amount will be included as wages on your 
Form W-2.
If you resign from one agency and are reem-
ployed by another agency, you may have to re-
pay part of your lump -sum annual leave pay-
ment to the second agency. Y ou can reduce 
gross wages by the amount you repaid in the 
same tax year in which you received it. Attach to 
your tax return a copy of the receipt or state-
ment given to you by the agency you repaid to 
explain the difference between the wages on 
the return and the wages on your Forms W-2.
Outplacement services.  If you choose to 
accept a reduced amount of severance pay so 
that you can receive outplacement services 
(such as training in résumé writing and inter-
view techniques), you must include the unre-
duced amount of the severance pay in income.
Sick pay. Pay you receive from your employer 
while you’re sick or injured is part of your salary 
or wages. In addition, you must include in your 
income sick pay benefits received from any of 
the following payers.
• A welfare fund.
• A state sickness or disability fund.
• An association of employers or employees.
• An insurance company, if your employer 
paid for the plan.
However, if you paid the premiums on an acci-
dent or health insurance policy yourself, the 
benefits you receive under the policy aren’t tax-
able. For more information, see Pub. 525, T axa-
ble and Nontaxable Income.
Social security and Medicare taxes paid by 
employer. If you and your employer have an 
agreement that your employer pays your social 
security and Medicare taxes without deducting 
them from your gross wages, you must report 
the amount of tax paid for you as taxable wages 
on your tax return. The payment is also treated 
as wages for figuring your social security and 
Medicare taxes and your social security and 
Medicare benefits. However, these payments 
aren’t treated as social security and Medicare 
wages if you’re a household worker or a farm 
worker.
Stock appreciation rights.  Don’t include a 
stock appreciation right granted by your em-
ployer in income until you exercise (use) the 
right. When you use the right, you’re entitled to 
a cash payment equal to the fair market value of 
the corporation's stock on the date of use minus 
the fair market value on the date the right was 
granted. Y ou include the cash payment in your 
income in the year you use the right.
Fringe Benefits
Fringe benefits received in connection with the 
performance of your services are included in 
your income as compensation unless you pay 
fair market value for them or they’re specifically 
excluded by law. Refraining from the perform-
ance of services (for example, under a covenant 
not to compete) is treated as the performance 
of services for purposes of these rules.
Accounting period.  Y ou must use the same 
accounting period your employer uses to report 
your taxable noncash fringe benefits. Y our em-
ployer has the option to report taxable noncash 
fringe benefits by using either of the following 
rules.
• The general rule: benefits are reported for 
a full calendar year (January 1–December 
31).
• The special accounting period rule: bene-
fits provided during the last 2 months of the 
calendar year (or any shorter period) are 
treated as paid during the following calen-
dar year. For example, each year your em-
ployer reports the value of benefits provi-
ded during the last 2 months of the prior 
year and the first 10 months of the current 
year.
Y our employer doesn’t have to use the same ac-
counting period for each fringe benefit, but must 
use the same period for all employees who re-
ceive a particular benefit.
Y ou must use the same accounting period 
that you use to report the benefit to claim an 
employee business deduction (for use of a car, 
for example).
Form W-2. Y our employer must include all tax-
able fringe benefits in Form W -2, box 1, as wa-
ges, tips, and other compensation and, if appli-
cable, in boxes 3 and 5 as social security and 
Medicare wages. Although not required, your 
employer may include the total value of fringe 
benefits in box 14 (or on a separate statement). 
However, if your employer provided you with a 
vehicle and included 100% of its annual lease 
value in your income, the employer must sepa-
rately report this value to you in box 14 (or on a 
separate statement).
Accident or Health Plan
In most cases, the value of accident or health 
plan coverage provided to you by your employer 
isn’t included in your income. Benefits you re-
ceive from the plan may be taxable, as ex-
plained later under Sickness and Injury Bene-
fits.
For information on the items covered in this 
section, other than long -term care coverage, 
see Pub. 969, Health Savings Accounts and 
Other T ax-Favored Health Plans.
Long-term care coverage.  Contributions by 
your employer to provide coverage for long-term 
care services generally aren’t included in your 
income. However, contributions made through a 
flexible spending or similar arrangement offered 
by your employer must be included in your in-
come. This amount will be reported as wages in 
Form W-2, box 1.
Contributions you make to the plan are dis-
cussed in Pub. 502, Medical and Dental Expen-
ses.
Archer MSA contributions.  Contributions by 
your employer to your Archer MSA generally 
aren’t included in your income. Their total will be 
reported in Form W-2, box 12, with code R. Y ou 
must report this amount on Form 8853, Archer 
MSAs and Long -T erm Care Insurance Con-
tracts. File the form with your return.
Health flexible spending arrangement 
(health FSA).  If your employer provides a 
health FSA that qualifies as an accident or 
health plan, the amount of your salary 
Page 50 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
48 Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings Publication 17 (2023)

reduction, and reimbursements of your medical 
care expenses, in most cases, aren’t included in 
your income.
Note.  Health FSAs are subject to a limit on 
salary reduction contributions for plan years be-
ginning after 2012. For tax years beginning in 
2023, the dollar limitation (as indexed for infla-
tion) on voluntary employee salary reductions 
for contributions to health FSAs is $3,050.
Health reimbursement arrangement (HRA). 
If your employer provides an HRA that qualifies 
as an accident or health plan, coverage and re-
imbursements of your medical care expenses 
generally aren’t included in your income.
Health savings account (HSA).  If you’re an 
eligible individual, you and any other person, in-
cluding your employer or a family member, can 
make contributions to your HSA. Contributions, 
other than employer contributions, are deducti-
ble on your return whether or not you itemize 
deductions. Contributions made by your em-
ployer aren’t included in your income. Distribu-
tions from your HSA that are used to pay quali-
fied medical expenses aren’t included in your 
income. Distributions not used for qualified 
medical expenses are included in your income. 
See Pub. 969 for the requirements of an HSA.
Contributions by a partnership to a bona fide 
partner's HSA aren’t contributions by an em-
ployer. The contributions are treated as a distri-
bution of money and aren’t included in the part-
ner's gross income. Contributions by a 
partnership to a partner's HSA for services ren-
dered are treated as guaranteed payments that 
are includible in the partner's gross income. In 
both situations, the partner can deduct the con-
tribution made to the partner's HSA.
Contributions by an S corporation to a 2% 
shareholder-employee's HSA for services ren-
dered are treated as guaranteed payments and 
are includible in the shareholder -employee's 
gross income. The shareholder -employee can 
deduct the contribution made to the share-
holder-employee's HSA.
Qualified HSA funding distribution.  Y ou 
can make a one-time distribution from your indi-
vidual retirement account (IRA) to an HSA and 
you generally won’t include any of the distribu-
tion in your income.
Adoption Assistance
Y ou may be able to exclude from your income 
amounts paid or expenses incurred by your em-
ployer for qualified adoption expenses in con-
nection with your adoption of an eligible child. 
See the Instructions for Form 8839, Qualified 
Adoption Expenses, for more information.
Adoption benefits are reported by your em-
ployer in Form W -2, box 12, with code T . They 
are also included as social security and Medi-
care wages in boxes 3 and 5. However, they 
aren’t included as wages in box 1. T o determine 
the taxable and nontaxable amounts, you must 
complete Part III of Form 8839. File the form 
with your return.
De Minimis (Minimal) Benefits
If your employer provides you with a product or 
service and the cost of it is so small that it would 
be unreasonable for the employer to account for 
it, you generally don’t include its value in your 
income. In most cases, don’t include in your in-
come the value of discounts at company cafete-
rias, cab fares home when working overtime, 
and company picnics.
Holiday gifts. If your employer gives you a tur-
key, ham, or other item of nominal value at 
Christmas or other holidays, don’t include the 
value of the gift in your income. However, if your 
employer gives you cash or a cash equivalent, 
you must include it in your income.
Educational Assistance
Y ou can exclude from your income up to $5,250 
of qualified employer -provided educational as-
sistance. For more information, see Pub. 970, 
T ax Benefits for Education.
Group-Term Life Insurance
In most cases, the cost of up to $50,000 of 
group-term life insurance coverage provided to 
you by your employer (or former employer) isn’t 
included in your income. However, you must in-
clude in income the cost of employer -provided 
insurance that is more than the cost of $50,000 
of coverage reduced by any amount you pay to-
ward the purchase of the insurance.
For exceptions, see Entire cost excluded 
and Entire cost taxed, later.
If your employer provided more than 
$50,000 of coverage, the amount included in 
your income is reported as part of your wages in 
Form W-2, box 1. Also, it’s shown separately in 
box 12 with code C.
Group-term life insurance.  This insurance is 
term life insurance protection (insurance for a 
fixed period of time) that:
• Provides a general death benefit,
• Is provided to a group of employees,
• Is provided under a policy carried by the 
employer, and
• Provides an amount of insurance to each 
employee based on a formula that prevents 
individual selection.
Permanent benefits. If your group -term life 
insurance policy includes permanent benefits, 
such as a paid -up or cash surrender value, you 
must include in your income, as wages, the cost 
of the permanent benefits minus the amount 
you pay for them. Y our employer should be able 
to tell you the amount to include in your income.
Accidental death benefits.  Insurance that 
provides accidental or other death benefits but 
doesn’t provide general death benefits (travel 
insurance, for example) isn’t group -term life in-
surance.
Former employer.  If your former employer 
provided more than $50,000 of group -term life 
insurance coverage during the year, the amount 
included in your income is reported as wages in 
Form W-2, box 1. Also, it’s shown separately in 
box 12 with code C. Box 12 will also show the 
amount of uncollected social security and Medi-
care taxes on the excess coverage, with codes 
M and N. Y ou must pay these taxes with your in-
come tax return. Include them on Schedule 2 
(Form 1040), line 13.
Two or more employers.  Y our exclusion for 
employer-provided group -term life insurance 
coverage can’t exceed the cost of $50,000 of 
coverage, whether the insurance is provided by 
a single employer or multiple employers. If two 
or more employers provide insurance coverage 
that totals more than $50,000, the amounts re-
ported as wages on your Forms W -2 won’t be 
correct. Y ou must figure how much to include in 
your income. Reduce the amount you figure by 
any amount reported in Form W -2, box 12, with 
code C, add the result to the wages reported in 
box 1, and report the total on your return.
Figuring the taxable cost.  Use Worksheet 
5-1 to figure the amount to include in your in-
come.
Worksheet 5-1. Figuring the 
Cost of Group-Term Life 
Insurance To Include in 
Income
Keep for Y our Records
1. Enter the total amount of 
your insurance coverage 
from your 
employer(s) ............ 1.  
2. Limit on exclusion for 
employer-provided 
group-term life insurance 
coverage .............. 2. 50,000
3. Subtract line 2 from 
line 1 ................. 3.  
4. Divide line 3 by $1,000. 
Figure to the nearest 
tenth ................. 4.  
5. Go to T able 5-1. Using your 
age on the last day of the tax 
year, find your age group in 
the left column, and enter the 
cost from the column on the 
right for your age 
group ................ 5.  
6. Multiply line 4 by 
line 5 ................. 6.  
7. Enter the number of full 
months of coverage at this 
cost .................. 7.  
8. Multiply line 6 by 
line 7 ................. 8.  
9. Enter the 
premiums you paid 
per month ..... 9.  
10. Enter the number 
of months you paid 
the 
premiums ..... 10. 
11. Multiply line 9 by 
line 10 ................ 11. 
12. Subtract line 11 from line 8. 
Include this amount in 
your income as 
wages ............... 12. 
Page 51 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17 (2023) Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings 49

T able 5-1. Cost of $1,000 of 
Group-Term Life Insurance for 1 
Month
Age Cost
Under 25 ................. $ 0.05
25 through 29 .............. 0.06
30 through 34 .............. 0.08
35 through 39 .............. 0.09
40 through 44 .............. 0.10
45 through 49 .............. 0.15
50 through 54 .............. 0.23
55 through 59 .............. 0.43
60 through 64 .............. 0.66
65 through 69 .............. 1.27
70 and above .............. 2.06
Example.  Y ou are 51 years old and work 
for employers A and B. Both employers provide 
group-term life insurance coverage for you for 
the entire year. Y our coverage is $35,000 with 
employer A and $45,000 with employer B. Y ou 
pay premiums of $4.15 a month under the em-
ployer B group plan. Y ou figure the amount to 
include in your income as shown in Worksheet 
5-1. Figuring the Cost of Group -T erm Life Insur-
ance T o Include in Income—Illustrated next.
Worksheet 5-1. Figuring the 
Cost of Group-Term Life 
Insurance To Include in 
Income—Illustrated
Keep for Y our Records
1. Enter the total amount of 
your insurance coverage 
from your 
employer(s) ............ 1. 80,000
2. Limit on exclusion for 
employer-provided 
group-term life insurance 
coverage .............. 2. 50,000
3. Subtract line 2 from 
line 1 ................. 3. 30,000
4. Divide line 3 by $1,000. 
Figure to the nearest 
tenth ................. 4. 30.0
5. Go to T able 5-1. Using your 
age on the last day of the tax 
year, find your age group in 
the left column, and enter the 
cost from the column on the 
right for your age 
group ................ 5. 0.23
6. Multiply line 4 by 
line 5 ................. 6. 6.90
7. Enter the number of full 
months of coverage at this 
cost .................. 7. 12
8. Multiply line 6 by 
line 7 ................. 8. 82.80
9. Enter the 
premiums you paid 
per month ..... 9. 4.15
10. Enter the number 
of months you paid 
the 
premiums ..... 10. 12
11. Multiply line 9 by 
line 10 ................ 11. 49.80
12. Subtract line 11 from line 8. 
Include this amount in 
your income as 
wages ............... 12. 33.00
Entire cost excluded. Y ou aren’t taxed on the 
cost of group-term life insurance if any of the fol-
lowing circumstances apply.
1. Y ou’re permanently and totally disabled 
and have ended your employment.
2. Y our employer is the beneficiary of the pol-
icy for the entire period the insurance is in 
force during the tax year.
3. A charitable organization (defined in Pub. 
526, Charitable Contributions) to which 
contributions are deductible is the only 
beneficiary of the policy for the entire pe-
riod the insurance is in force during the tax 
year. (Y ou aren’t entitled to a deduction for 
a charitable contribution for naming a 
charitable organization as the beneficiary 
of your policy.)
4. The plan existed on January 1, 1984, and:
a. Y ou retired before January 2, 1984, 
and were covered by the plan when 
you retired, or
b. Y ou reached age 55 before January 2, 
1984, and were employed by the em-
ployer or its predecessor in 1983.
Entire cost taxed.  Y ou’re taxed on the entire 
cost of group -term life insurance if either of the 
following circumstances apply.
• The insurance is provided by your em-
ployer through a qualified employees' trust, 
such as a pension trust or a qualified annu-
ity plan.
• Y ou're a key employee and your employer's 
plan discriminates in favor of key employ-
ees.
Retirement Planning Services
Generally, don’t include the value of qualified re-
tirement planning services provided to you and 
your spouse by your employer's qualified retire-
ment plan. Qualified services include retirement 
planning advice, information about your em-
ployer's retirement plan, and information about 
how the plan may fit into your overall individual 
retirement income plan. Y ou can’t exclude the 
value of any tax preparation, accounting, legal, 
or brokerage services provided by your em-
ployer.
Transportation
If your employer provides you with a qualified 
transportation fringe benefit, it can be excluded 
from your income, up to certain limits. A quali-
fied transportation fringe benefit is:
• T ransportation in a commuter highway ve-
hicle (such as a van) between your home 
and work place,
• A transit pass, or
• Qualified parking.
Cash reimbursement by your employer for these 
expenses under a bona fide reimbursement ar-
rangement is also excludable. However, cash 
reimbursement for a transit pass is excludable 
only if a voucher or similar item that can be ex-
changed only for a transit pass isn’t readily 
available for direct distribution to you.
Exclusion limit.  The exclusion for commuter 
vehicle transportation and transit pass fringe 
benefits can’t be more than $300 a month.
The exclusion for the qualified parking fringe 
benefit can’t be more than $300 a month.
If the benefits have a value that is more than 
these limits, the excess must be included in 
your income.
Commuter highway vehicle.  This is a high-
way vehicle that seats at least six adults (not in-
cluding the driver). At least 80% of the vehicle's 
mileage must reasonably be expected to be:
• For transporting employees between their 
homes and workplace, and
• On trips during which employees occupy at 
least half of the vehicle's adult seating ca-
pacity (not including the driver).
Transit pass. This is any pass, token, farecard, 
voucher, or similar item entitling a person to ride 
mass transit (whether public or private) free or 
at a reduced rate or to ride in a commuter high-
way vehicle operated by a person in the busi-
ness of transporting persons for compensation.
Qualified parking. This is parking provided to 
an employee at or near the employer's place of 
business. It also includes parking provided on 
or near a location from which the employee 
commutes to work by mass transit, in a com-
muter highway vehicle, or by carpool. It doesn’t 
include parking at or near the employee's home.
Retirement Plan 
Contributions
Y our employer's contributions to a qualified re-
tirement plan for you aren’t included in income 
at the time contributed. (Y our employer can tell 
you whether your retirement plan is qualified.) 
However, the cost of life insurance coverage in-
cluded in the plan may have to be included. See 
Group-T erm Life Insurance , earlier, under 
Fringe Benefits.
If your employer pays into a nonqualified 
plan for you, you must generally include the 
contributions in your income as wages for the 
tax year in which the contributions are made. 
However, if your interest in the plan isn’t trans-
ferable or is subject to a substantial risk of for-
feiture (you have a good chance of losing it) at 
the time of the contribution, you don’t have to in-
clude the value of your interest in your income 
until it’s transferable or is no longer subject to a 
substantial risk of forfeiture.
For information on distributions from re-
tirement plans, see Pub. 575, Pension 
and Annuity Income (or Pub. 721, T ax 
Guide to U.S. Civil Service Retirement Benefits, 
if you’re a federal employee or retiree).
Elective deferrals. If you’re covered by certain 
kinds of retirement plans, you can choose to 
have part of your compensation contributed by 
your employer to a retirement fund, rather than 
have it paid to you. The amount you set aside 
(called an “elective deferral”) is treated as an 
employer contribution to a qualified plan. An 
elective deferral, other than a designated Roth 
contribution (discussed later), isn’t included in 
wages subject to income tax at the time 
TIP
Page 52 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
50 Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings Publication 17 (2023)

contributed. Rather, it’s subject to income tax 
when distributed from the plan. However, it’s in-
cluded in wages subject to social security and 
Medicare taxes at the time contributed.
Elective deferrals include elective contribu-
tions to the following retirement plans.
1. Cash or deferred arrangements (section 
401(k) plans).
2. The Thrift Savings Plan for federal employ-
ees.
3. Salary reduction simplified employee pen-
sion plans (SARSEP).
4. Savings incentive match plans for employ-
ees (SIMPLE plans).
5. T ax-sheltered annuity plans (section 
403(b) plans).
6. Section 501(c)(18)(D) plans.
7. Section 457 plans.
Qualified automatic contribution arrange-
ments.  Under a qualified automatic contribu-
tion arrangement, your employer can treat you 
as having elected to have a part of your com-
pensation contributed to a section 401(k) plan. 
Y ou are to receive written notice of your rights 
and obligations under the qualified automatic 
contribution arrangement. The notice must ex-
plain:
• Y our rights to elect not to have elective 
contributions made, or to have contribu-
tions made at a different percentage; and
• How contributions made will be invested in 
the absence of any investment decision by 
you.
Y ou must be given a reasonable period of 
time after receipt of the notice and before the 
first elective contribution is made to make an 
election with respect to the contributions.
Overall limit on deferrals.  For 2023, in 
most cases, you shouldn’t have deferred more 
than a total of $22,500 of contributions to the 
plans listed in (1) through (3) and (5) above. 
The limit for SIMPLE plans is $15,500. The limit 
for section 501(c)(18)(D) plans is the lesser of 
$7,000 or 25% of your compensation. The limit 
for section 457 plans is the lesser of your in-
cludible compensation or $22,500. Amounts 
deferred under specific plan limits are part of 
the overall limit on deferrals.
Designated Roth contributions.  Employ-
ers with section 401(k) plans, section 403(b) 
plans, and governmental section 457 plans can 
create qualified Roth contribution programs so 
that you may elect to have part or all of your 
elective deferrals to the plan designated as af-
ter-tax Roth contributions. Designated Roth 
contributions are treated as elective deferrals, 
except that they’re included in income at the 
time contributed.
Excess deferrals.  Y our employer or plan 
administrator should apply the proper annual 
limit when figuring your plan contributions. How-
ever, you’re responsible for monitoring the total 
you defer to ensure that the deferrals aren’t 
more than the overall limit.
If you set aside more than the limit, the ex-
cess must generally be included in your income 
for that year, unless you have an excess deferral 
of a designated Roth contribution. See Pub. 525 
for a discussion of the tax treatment of excess 
deferrals.
Catch-up contributions.  Y ou may be al-
lowed catch -up contributions (additional elec-
tive deferral) if you’re age 50 or older by the end 
of the tax year.
Stock Options
If you receive a nonstatutory option to buy or 
sell stock or other property as payment for your 
services, you will usually have income when 
you receive the option, when you exercise the 
option (use it to buy or sell the stock or other 
property), or when you sell or otherwise dispose 
of the option. However, if your option is a statu-
tory stock option, you won’t have any income 
until you sell or exchange your stock. Y our em-
ployer can tell you which kind of option you 
hold. For more information, see Pub. 525.
Restricted Property
In most cases, if you receive property for your 
services, you must include its fair market value 
in your income in the year you receive the prop-
erty. However, if you receive stock or other 
property that has certain restrictions that affect 
its value, you don’t include the value of the 
property in your income until it has substantially 
vested. (Although you can elect to include the 
value of the property in your income in the year 
it’s transferred to you.) For more information, 
see Restricted Property in Pub. 525. 
Dividends received on restricted stock. 
Dividends you receive on restricted stock are 
treated as compensation and not as dividend 
income. Y our employer should include these 
payments on your Form W-2.
Stock you elected to include in income. 
Dividends you receive on restricted stock you 
elected to include in your income in the year 
transferred are treated the same as any other 
dividends. Report them on your return as divi-
dends. For a discussion of dividends, see Pub. 
550, Investment Income and Expenses.
For information on how to treat dividends re-
ported on both your Form W -2 and Form 
1099-DIV , see Dividends received on restricted 
stock in Pub. 525.
Special Rules for
Certain Employees
This section deals with special rules for people 
in certain types of employment: members of the 
clergy, members of religious orders, people 
working for foreign employers, military person-
nel, and volunteers.
Clergy
Generally, if you’re a member of the clergy, you 
must include in your income offerings and fees 
you receive for marriages, baptisms, funerals, 
masses, etc., in addition to your salary. If the of-
fering is made to the religious institution, it isn’t 
taxable to you.
If you’re a member of a religious organiza-
tion and you give your outside earnings to the 
religious organization, you must still include the 
earnings in your income. However, you may be 
entitled to a charitable contribution deduction 
for the amount paid to the organization. See 
Pub. 526.
Pension. A pension or retirement pay for a 
member of the clergy is usually treated as any 
other pension or annuity. It must be reported on 
lines 5a and 5b of Form 1040 or 1040-SR.
Housing. Special rules for housing apply to 
members of the clergy. Under these rules, you 
don’t include in your income the rental value of 
a home (including utilities) or a designated 
housing allowance provided to you as part of 
your pay. However, the exclusion can’t be more 
than the reasonable pay for your services. If you 
pay for the utilities, you can exclude any allow-
ance designated for utility cost, up to your ac-
tual cost. The home or allowance must be provi-
ded as compensation for your services as an 
ordained, licensed, or commissioned minister. 
However, you must include the rental value of 
the home or the housing allowance as earnings 
from self -employment on Schedule SE (Form 
1040) if you’re subject to the self -employment 
tax. For more information, see Pub. 517, Social 
Security and Other Information for Members of 
the Clergy and Religious Workers.
Members of Religious 
Orders
If you’re a member of a religious order who has 
taken a vow of poverty, how you treat earnings 
that you renounce and turn over to the order de-
pends on whether your services are performed 
for the order.
Services performed for the order.  If you’re 
performing the services as an agent of the order 
in the exercise of duties required by the order, 
don’t include in your income the amounts turned 
over to the order.
If your order directs you to perform services 
for another agency of the supervising church or 
an associated institution, you’re considered to 
be performing the services as an agent of the 
order. Any wages you earn as an agent of an or-
der that you turn over to the order aren’t inclu-
ded in your income.
Example.  Y ou’re a member of a church or-
der and have taken a vow of poverty. Y ou re-
nounce any claims to your earnings and turn 
over to the order any salaries or wages you 
earn. Y ou’re a registered nurse, so your order 
assigns you to work in a hospital that is an as-
sociated institution of the church. However, you 
remain under the general direction and control 
of the order. Y ou’re considered to be an agent of 
the order and any wages you earn at the hospi-
tal that you turn over to your order aren’t inclu-
ded in your income.
Services performed outside the order.  If 
you’re directed to work outside the order, your 
services aren’t an exercise of duties required by 
the order unless they meet both of the following 
requirements.
• They’re the kind of services that are ordina-
rily the duties of members of the order.
Page 53 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17 (2023) Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings 51

• They’re part of the duties that you must ex-
ercise for, or on behalf of, the religious or-
der as its agent.
If you’re an employee of a third party, the serv-
ices you perform for the third party won’t be 
considered directed or required of you by the 
order. Amounts you receive for these services 
are included in your income, even if you have 
taken a vow of poverty.
Example.  Y ou are a member of a religious 
order and have taken a vow of poverty. Y ou re-
nounce all claims to your earnings and turn over 
your earnings to the order.
Y ou are a schoolteacher. Y ou were instruc-
ted by the superiors of the order to get a job 
with a private tax -exempt school. Y ou became 
an employee of the school, and, at your re-
quest, the school made the salary payments di-
rectly to the order.
Because you are an employee of the school, 
you’re performing services for the school rather 
than as an agent of the order. The wages you 
earn working for the school are included in your 
income.
Foreign Employer
Special rules apply if you work for a foreign em-
ployer.
U.S. citizen. If you’re a U.S. citizen who works 
in the United States for a foreign government, 
an international organization, a foreign em-
bassy, or any foreign employer, you must in-
clude your salary in your income.
Social security and Medicare taxes. 
Y ou’re exempt from social security and Medi-
care employee taxes if you’re employed in the 
United States by an international organization or 
a foreign government. However, you must pay 
self-employment tax on your earnings from 
services performed in the United States, even 
though you aren’t self -employed. This rule also 
applies if you’re an employee of a qualifying 
wholly owned instrumentality of a foreign gov-
ernment.
Employees of international organizations or 
foreign governments. Y our compensation for 
official services to an international organization 
is exempt from federal income tax if you aren’t a 
citizen of the United States or you’re a citizen of 
the Philippines (whether or not you’re a citizen 
of the United States).
Y our compensation for official services to a 
foreign government is exempt from federal in-
come tax if all of the following are true.
• Y ou aren’t a citizen of the United States or 
you’re a citizen of the Philippines (whether 
or not you’re a citizen of the United States).
• Y our work is like the work done by employ-
ees of the United States in foreign coun-
tries.
• The foreign government gives an equal ex-
emption to employees of the United States 
in its country.
Waiver of alien status.  If you’re an alien 
who works for a foreign government or interna-
tional organization and you file a waiver under 
section 247(b) of the Immigration and National-
ity Act to keep your immigrant status, different 
rules may apply. See Foreign Employer in Pub. 
525.
Employment abroad.  For information on the 
tax treatment of income earned abroad, see 
Pub. 54.
Military
Payments you receive as a member of a military 
service are generally taxed as wages except for 
retirement pay, which is taxed as a pension. Al-
lowances generally aren’t taxed. For more infor-
mation on the tax treatment of military allowan-
ces and benefits, see Pub. 3, Armed Forces' 
T ax Guide.
Differential wage payments.  Any payments 
made to you by an employer during the time 
you’re performing service in the uniformed serv-
ices are treated as compensation. These wages 
are subject to income tax withholding and are 
reported on a Form W -2. See the discussion 
under Miscellaneous Compensation, earlier.
Military retirement pay. If your retirement pay 
is based on age or length of service, it’s taxable 
and must be included in your income as a pen-
sion on lines 5a and 5b of Form 1040 or 
1040-SR. Don’t include in your income the 
amount of any reduction in retirement or re-
tainer pay to provide a survivor annuity for your 
spouse or children under the Retired Service-
man's Family Protection Plan or the Survivor 
Benefit Plan.
For more detailed discussion of survivor an-
nuities, see Pub. 575, Pension and Annuity In-
come.
Disability. If you’re retired on disability, see 
Military and Government Disability Pensions un-
der Sickness and Injury Benefits, later.
Veterans' benefits.  Don’t include in your in-
come any veterans' benefits paid under any law, 
regulation, or administrative practice adminis-
tered by the Department of Veterans Affairs 
(VA). The following amounts paid to veterans or 
their families aren’t taxable.
• Education, training, and subsistence allow-
ances.
• Disability compensation and pension pay-
ments for disabilities paid either to veter-
ans or their families.
• Grants for homes designed for wheelchair 
living.
• Grants for motor vehicles for veterans who 
lost their sight or the use of their limbs.
• Veterans' insurance proceeds and divi-
dends paid either to veterans or their bene-
ficiaries, including the proceeds of a veter-
an's endowment policy paid before death.
• Interest on insurance dividends you leave 
on deposit with the VA.
• Benefits under a dependent-care assis-
tance program.
• The death gratuity paid to a survivor of a 
member of the Armed Forces who died af-
ter September 10, 2001.
• Payments made under the compensated 
work therapy program.
• Any bonus payment by a state or political 
subdivision because of service in a combat 
zone.
Volunteers
The tax treatment of amounts you receive as a 
volunteer worker for the Peace Corps or similar 
agency is covered in the following discussions.
Peace Corps.  Living allowances you receive 
as a Peace Corps volunteer or volunteer leader 
for housing, utilities, household supplies, food, 
and clothing are generally exempt from tax.
Taxable allowances.  The following allow-
ances, however, must be included in your in-
come and reported as wages.
• Allowances paid to your spouse and minor 
children while you’re a volunteer leader 
training in the United States.
• Living allowances designated by the Direc-
tor of the Peace Corps as basic compen-
sation. These are allowances for personal 
items such as domestic help, laundry and 
clothing maintenance, entertainment and 
recreation, transportation, and other mis-
cellaneous expenses.
• Leave allowances.
• Readjustment allowances or termination 
payments. These are considered received 
by you when credited to your account.
Example.  Y ou are a Peace Corps volun-
teer and get $175 a month as a readjustment al-
lowance during your period of service, to be 
paid to you in a lump sum at the end of your tour 
of duty. Although the allowance isn’t available to 
you until the end of your service, you must in-
clude it in your income on a monthly basis as it’s 
credited to your account.
Volunteers in Service to America (VISTA). If 
you’re a VISTA volunteer, you must include meal 
and lodging allowances paid to you in your in-
come as wages.
National Senior Services Corps programs. 
Don’t include in your income amounts you re-
ceive for supportive services or reimbursements 
for out -of-pocket expenses from the following 
programs.
• Retired Senior Volunteer Program (RSVP).
• Foster Grandparent Program.
• Senior Companion Program. 
Service Corps of Retired Executives 
(SCORE). If you receive amounts for suppor-
tive services or reimbursements for 
out-of-pocket expenses from SCORE, don’t in-
clude these amounts in gross income.
Volunteer tax counseling.  Don’t include in 
your income any reimbursements you receive 
for transportation, meals, and other expenses 
you have in training for, or actually providing, 
volunteer federal income tax counseling for the 
elderly (TCE).
Y ou can deduct as a charitable contribution 
your unreimbursed out -of-pocket expenses in 
taking part in the volunteer income tax assis-
tance (VITA) program. See Pub. 526.
Page 54 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
52 Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings Publication 17 (2023)

Volunteer firefighters and emergency medi-
cal responders.  If you are a volunteer fire-
fighter or emergency medical responder, don’t 
include in your income the following benefits 
you receive from a state or local government.
• Rebates or reductions of property or in-
come taxes you receive because of serv-
ices you performed as a volunteer fire-
fighter or emergency medical responder.
• Payments you receive because of services 
you performed as a volunteer firefighter or 
emergency medical responder, up to $50 
for each month you provided services.
The excluded income reduces any related tax 
or contribution deduction.
Sickness and Injury 
Benefits
This section discusses sickness and injury ben-
efits, including disability pensions, long -term 
care insurance contracts, workers' compensa-
tion, and other benefits.
In most cases, you must report as income 
any amount you receive for personal injury or 
sickness through an accident or health plan that 
is paid for by your employer. If both you and 
your employer pay for the plan, only the amount 
you receive that is due to your employer's pay-
ments is reported as income. However, certain 
payments may not be taxable to you. For infor-
mation on nontaxable payments, see Military 
and Government Disability Pensions  and Other 
Sickness and Injury Benefits , later in this dis-
cussion.
Don’t report as income any amounts 
paid to reimburse you for medical ex-
penses you incurred after the plan was 
established.
Cost paid by you. If you pay the entire cost of 
a health or accident insurance plan, don’t in-
clude any amounts you receive from the plan for 
personal injury or sickness as income on your 
tax return. If your plan reimbursed you for medi-
cal expenses you deducted in an earlier year, 
you may have to include some, or all, of the re-
imbursement in your income. See What if Y ou 
Receive Insurance Reimbursement in a Later 
Y ear? in Pub. 502, Medical and Dental Expen-
ses.
Cafeteria plans. In most cases, if you’re cov-
ered by an accident or health insurance plan 
through a cafeteria plan, and the amount of the 
insurance premiums wasn’t included in your in-
come, you aren’t considered to have paid the 
premiums and you must include any benefits 
you receive in your income. If the amount of the 
premiums was included in your income, you’re 
considered to have paid the premiums, and any 
benefits you receive aren’t taxable.
Disability Pensions
If you retired on disability, you must include in 
income any disability pension you receive under 
a plan that is paid for by your employer. Y ou 
must report your taxable disability payments on 
line 1h of Form 1040 or 1040-SR until you reach 
minimum retirement age. Minimum retirement 
TIP
age is generally the age at which you can first 
receive a pension or annuity if you’re not disa-
bled.
Y ou may be entitled to a tax credit if 
you were permanently and totally disa-
bled when you retired. For information 
on this credit and the definition of permanent 
and total disability, see Pub. 524, Credit for the 
Elderly or the Disabled.
Beginning on the day after you reach mini-
mum retirement age, payments you receive are 
taxable as a pension or annuity. Report the pay-
ments on lines 5a and 5b of Form 1040 or 
1040-SR. The rules for reporting pensions are 
explained in Disability Pensions in Pub. 575.
For information on disability payments from 
a governmental program provided as a substi-
tute for unemployment compensation, see Un-
employment Benefits in chapter 8.
Retirement and profit -sharing plans.  If you 
receive payments from a retirement or 
profit-sharing plan that doesn’t provide for disa-
bility retirement, don’t treat the payments as a 
disability pension. The payments must be re-
ported as a pension or annuity. For more infor-
mation on pensions, see Pub. 575.
Accrued leave payment. If you retire on disa-
bility, any lump-sum payment you receive for ac-
crued annual leave is a salary payment. The 
payment is not a disability payment. Include it in 
your income in the tax year you receive it.
Military and Government
Disability Pensions
Certain military and government disability pen-
sions aren’t taxable.
Service-connected disability.  Y ou may be 
able to exclude from income amounts you re-
ceive as a pension, annuity, or similar allowance 
for personal injury or sickness resulting from ac-
tive service in one of the following government 
services.
• The armed forces of any country.
• The National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration.
• The Public Health Service.
• The Foreign Service.
Conditions for exclusion. Don’t include the 
disability payments in your income if any of the 
following conditions apply.
1. Y ou were entitled to receive a disability 
payment before September 25, 1975.
2. Y ou were a member of a listed government 
service or its reserve component, or were 
under a binding written commitment to be-
come a member, on September 24, 1975.
3. Y ou receive the disability payments for a 
combat-related injury. This is a personal 
injury or sickness that:
a. Results directly from armed conflict;
b. T akes place while you’re engaged in 
extra-hazardous service;
c. T akes place under conditions simulat-
ing war, including training exercises 
such as maneuvers; or
TIP
d. Is caused by an instrumentality of war.
4. Y ou would be entitled to receive disability 
compensation from the Department of Vet-
erans Affairs (VA) if you filed an applica-
tion for it. Y our exclusion under this condi-
tion is equal to the amount you would be 
entitled to receive from the VA.
Pension based on years of service.  If you 
receive a disability pension based on years of 
service, in most cases you must include it in 
your income. However, if the pension qualifies 
for the exclusion for a service-connected disa-
bility (discussed earlier), don’t include in income 
the part of your pension that you would have re-
ceived if the pension had been based on a per-
centage of disability. Y ou must include the rest 
of your pension in your income.
Retroactive VA determination. If you retire 
from the armed services based on years of 
service and are later given a retroactive serv-
ice-connected disability rating by the VA, your 
retirement pay for the retroactive period is ex-
cluded from income up to the amount of VA dis-
ability benefits you would have been entitled to 
receive. Y ou can claim a refund of any tax paid 
on the excludable amount (subject to the statute 
of limitations) by filing an amended return on 
Form 1040-X for each previous year during the 
retroactive period. Y ou must include with each 
Form 1040-X a copy of the official VA determi-
nation letter granting the retroactive benefit. The 
letter must show the amount withheld and the 
effective date of the benefit.
If you receive a lump -sum disability sever-
ance payment and are later awarded VA disabil-
ity benefits, exclude 100% of the severance 
benefit from your income. However, you must 
include in your income any lump -sum readjust-
ment or other nondisability severance payment 
you received on release from active duty, even if 
you’re later given a retroactive disability rating 
by the VA.
Special period of limitation.  In most ca-
ses, under the period of limitation, a claim for 
credit or refund must be filed within 3 years from 
the time a return was filed or 2 years from the 
time the tax was paid. However, if you receive a 
retroactive service -connected disability rating 
determination, the period of limitation is exten-
ded by a 1-year period beginning on the date of 
the determination. This 1 -year extended period 
applies to claims for credit or refund filed after 
June 17, 2008, and doesn’t apply to any tax 
year that began more than 5 years before the 
date of the determination.
Terrorist attack or military action.  Don’t in-
clude in your income disability payments you re-
ceive for injuries incurred as a direct result of a 
terrorist attack or military action directed against 
the United States (or its allies), whether outside 
or within the United States or from military ac-
tion. See Pub. 3920 and Pub. 907 for more in-
formation.
Long-Term Care
Insurance Contracts
Long-term care insurance contracts in most ca-
ses are treated as accident and health insur-
ance contracts. Amounts you receive from them 
Page 55 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17 (2023) Chapter 5 Wages, Salaries, and Other Earnings 53

(other than policyholder dividends or premium 
refunds) in most cases are excludable from in-
come as amounts received for personal injury 
or sickness. T o claim an exclusion for payments 
made on a per diem or other periodic basis un-
der a long -term care insurance contract, you 
must file Form 8853 with your return.
A long-term care insurance contract is an in-
surance contract that only provides coverage 
for qualified long -term care services. The con-
tract must:
• Be guaranteed renewable;
• Not provide for a cash surrender value or 
other money that can be paid, assigned, 
pledged, or borrowed;
• Provide that refunds, other than refunds on 
the death of the insured or complete sur-
render or cancellation of the contract, and 
dividends under the contract, may only be 
used to reduce future premiums or in-
crease future benefits; and
• In most cases, not pay or reimburse expen-
ses incurred for services or items that 
would be reimbursed under Medicare, ex-
cept where Medicare is a secondary payer 
or the contract makes per diem or other 
periodic payments without regard to ex-
penses.
Qualified long-term care services.  Qualified 
long-term care services are:
• Necessary diagnostic, preventive, thera-
peutic, curing, treating, mitigating, and re-
habilitative services, and maintenance and 
personal care services; and
• Required by a chronically ill individual and 
provided pursuant to a plan of care prescri-
bed by a licensed health care practitioner.
Chronically ill individual. A chronically ill indi-
vidual is one who has been certified by a li-
censed health care practitioner within the previ-
ous 12 months as one of the following.
• An individual who, for at least 90 days, is 
unable to perform at least two activities of 
daily living without substantial assistance 
due to loss of functional capacity. Activities 
of daily living are eating, toileting, transfer-
ring, bathing, dressing, and continence.
• An individual who requires substantial su-
pervision to be protected from threats to 
health and safety due to severe cognitive 
impairment.
Limit on exclusion. Y ou can generally exclude 
from gross income up to $420 a day for 2023. 
See Limit on exclusion , under Long-T erm Care 
Insurance Contracts, under Sickness and Injury 
Benefits in Pub. 525 for more information.
Workers' Compensation
Amounts you receive as workers' compensation 
for an occupational sickness or injury are fully 
exempt from tax if they’re paid under a workers' 
compensation act or a statute in the nature of a 
workers' compensation act. The exemption also 
applies to your survivors. The exemption, how-
ever, doesn’t apply to retirement plan benefits 
you receive based on your age, length of serv-
ice, or prior contributions to the plan, even if you 
retired because of an occupational sickness or 
injury.
If part of your workers' compensation 
reduces your social security or equiva-
lent railroad retirement benefits re-
ceived, that part is considered social security 
(or equivalent railroad retirement) benefits and 
may be taxable. For more information, see Pub. 
915, Social Security and Equivalent Railroad 
Retirement Benefits.
Return to work.  If you return to work after 
qualifying for workers' compensation, salary 
payments you receive for performing light duties 
are taxable as wages.
Other Sickness and Injury 
Benefits
In addition to disability pensions and annuities, 
you may receive other payments for sickness or 
injury.
Railroad sick pay.  Payments you receive as 
sick pay under the Railroad Unemployment In-
surance Act are taxable and you must include 
them in your income. However, don’t include 
them in your income if they’re for an on -the-job 
injury.
If you received income because of a disabil-
ity, see Disability Pensions, earlier.
Federal Employees' Compensation Act 
(FECA). Payments received under this Act for 
personal injury or sickness, including payments 
to beneficiaries in case of death, aren’t taxable. 
However, you’re taxed on amounts you receive 
under this Act as continuation of pay for up to 
45 days while a claim is being decided. Report 
this income as wages. Also, pay for sick leave 
while a claim is being processed is taxable and 
must be included in your income as wages.
If part of the payments you receive un-
der FECA reduces your social security 
or equivalent railroad retirement bene-
fits received, that part is considered social se-
curity (or equivalent railroad retirement) benefits 
and may be taxable. See Pub. 554 for more in-
formation.
Other compensation.  Many other amounts 
you receive as compensation for sickness or in-
jury aren’t taxable. These include the following 
amounts.
• Compensatory damages you receive for 
physical injury or physical sickness, 
whether paid in a lump sum or in periodic 
payments.
• Benefits you receive under an accident or 
health insurance policy on which either you 
paid the premiums or your employer paid 
the premiums but you had to include them 
in your income.
• Disability benefits you receive for loss of in-
come or earning capacity as a result of in-
juries under a no-fault car insurance policy.
• Compensation you receive for permanent 
loss or loss of use of a part or function of 
your body, or for your permanent disfigure-
ment. This compensation must be based 
only on the injury and not on the period of 
CAUTION
!
CAUTION
!
your absence from work. These benefits 
aren’t taxable even if your employer pays 
for the accident and health plan that pro-
vides these benefits.
Reimbursement for medical care.  A reim-
bursement for medical care is generally not tax-
able. However, it may reduce your medical ex-
pense deduction. For more information, see 
Pub. 502.
6.
Interest Income
Reminders
Foreign source income. If you are a U.S. citi-
zen with interest income from sources outside 
the United States (foreign income), you must re-
port that income on your tax return unless it is 
exempt by U.S. law. This is true whether you re-
side inside or outside the United States and 
whether or not you receive a Form 1099 from 
the foreign payer.
 
Automatic 6-month extension. If you receive 
your Form 1099 reporting your interest income 
late and you need more time to file your tax re-
turn, you can request a 6 -month extension of 
time to file. See Automatic Extension  in chap-
ter 1.
 
Children who have unearned income.  See 
Form 8615 and its instructions for the rules and 
rates that apply to certain children with un-
earned income.
Introduction
This chapter discusses the following topics.
• Different types of interest income.
• What interest is taxable and what interest 
is nontaxable.
• When to report interest income.
• How to report interest income on your tax 
return.
In general, any interest you receive or that is 
credited to your account and can be withdrawn 
is taxable income. Exceptions to this rule are 
discussed later in this chapter.
Y ou may be able to deduct expenses you 
have in earning this income on Schedule A 
(Form 1040) if you itemize your deductions. See 
Money borrowed to invest in certificate of de-
posit, later, and chapter 12.
Page 56 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
54 Chapter 6 Interest Income Publication 17 (2023)

Useful Items
Y ou may want to see:
Publication
537 Installment Sales
550 Investment Income and Expenses
1212 Guide to Original Issue Discount 
(OID) Instruments
Form (and Instructions)
1040 U.S. Individual Income T ax Return
1040-SR U.S. Income T ax Return for 
Seniors
Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized 
Deductions
Schedule B (Form 1040) Interest and 
Ordinary Dividends
1099 General Instructions for Certain 
Information Returns
3115 Application for Change in 
Accounting Method
8615 T ax for Certain Children Who Have 
Unearned Income
8814 Parents' Election T o Report Child's 
Interest and Dividends
8815 Exclusion of Interest From Series EE 
and I U.S. Savings Bonds Issued 
After 1989
8818 Optional Form T o Record 
Redemption of Series EE and I U.S. 
Savings Bonds Issued After 1989
For these and other useful items, go to IRS.gov/
Forms.
General Information
A few items of general interest are covered 
here.
Recordkeeping. Y ou should keep a 
list showing sources of interest income 
and interest amounts received during 
the year. Also, keep the forms you receive 
showing your interest income (Forms 1099 -INT , 
for example) as an important part of your re-
cords.
Tax on unearned income of certain chil-
dren. Part of a child's 2023 unearned income 
may be taxed at the parent's tax rate. If so, Form 
8615 must be completed and attached to the 
child's tax return. If not, Form 8615 isn't required 
and the child's income is taxed at his or her own 
tax rate.
Some parents can choose to include the 
child's interest and dividends on the parent's re-
turn. If you can, use Form 8814 for this purpose.
For more information about the tax on un-
earned income of children and the parents' 
election, go to Form 8615.
Beneficiary of an estate or trust. Interest you 
receive as a beneficiary of an estate or trust is 
generally taxable income. Y ou should receive a 
Schedule K-1 (Form 1041), Beneficiary's Share 
of Income, Deductions, Credits, etc., from the fi-
duciary. Y our copy of Schedule K-1 (Form 1041) 
  537 
  550 
  1212
  1040
  1040-SR
  Schedule A (Form 1040)
  Schedule B (Form 1040)
  1099
  3115
  8615
  8814
  8815
  8818
RECORDS
and its instructions will tell you where to report 
the income on your Form 1040 or 1040-SR.
Taxpayer identification number (TIN).  Y ou 
must give your name and TIN (either a social 
security number (SSN), an employer identifica-
tion number (EIN), an adoption taxpayer identifi-
cation number (ATIN), or an individual tax iden-
tification number (ITIN)) to any person required 
by federal tax law to make a return, statement, 
or other document that relates to you. This in-
cludes payers of interest. If you don't give your 
TIN to the payer of interest, the payer will gener-
ally be required to backup withhold on the inter-
est payments at a rate of 24%, and you may 
also be subject to a penalty. Use Form W-9, Re-
quest for T axpayer Identification Number and 
Certification, to provide the necessary informa-
tion. See Form W-9 and its instructions.
TIN for joint account.  Generally, if the 
funds in a joint account belong to one person, 
list that person's name first on the account and 
give that person's TIN to the payer. (For infor-
mation on who owns the funds in a joint ac-
count, see Joint accounts, later.) If the joint ac-
count contains combined funds, give the TIN of 
the person whose name is listed first on the ac-
count. This is because only one name and TIN 
can be shown on Form 1099.
These rules apply to both joint ownership by 
a married couple and to joint ownership by 
other individuals. For example, if you open a 
joint savings account with your child using funds 
belonging to the child, list the child's name first 
on the account and give the child's TIN.
Form W-9 and its instructions provide: If this 
Form W-9 is for a joint account (other than an 
account maintained by a foreign financial insti-
tution (FFI)), list first, and then circle, the name 
of the person or entity whose number you en-
tered in Part I of Form W -9. If you are providing 
Form W -9 to an FFI to document a joint ac-
count, each holder of the account that is a U.S. 
person must provide a Form W -9. See Form 
W-9 and its instructions.
Custodian account for your child.  If your 
child is the actual owner of an account that is 
recorded in your name as custodian for the 
child, give the child's TIN to the payer. For ex-
ample, you must give your child's SSN to the 
payer of interest on an account owned by your 
child, even though the interest is paid to you as 
custodian.
Penalty for failure to supply TIN.  If you 
don't give your TIN to the payer of interest, you 
may have to pay a penalty. See Failure to supply 
SSN under Penalties in chapter 1. Backup with-
holding may also apply.
Backup withholding.  Y our interest income is 
generally not subject to regular withholding. 
However, it may be subject to backup withhold-
ing to ensure that income tax is collected on the 
income. Under backup withholding, the payer of 
interest must withhold, as income tax, on the 
amount you are paid, by applying the appropri-
ate withholding rate. The current rate is 24%. 
Withholding is required only if there is a condi-
tion for backup withholding, such as failing to 
provide your TIN to the payer or failing to certify 
your TIN under penalties of perjury, if required.
Backup withholding may also be required if 
the IRS has determined that you underreported 
your interest or dividend income. For more infor-
mation, see Backup Withholding in chapter 4.
Reporting backup withholding.  If backup 
withholding is deducted from your interest in-
come, the amount withheld will be reported on 
your Form 1099 -INT . The Form 1099-INT will 
show any backup withholding as “Federal in-
come tax withheld.”
Joint accounts.  If two or more persons hold 
property (such as a savings account or bond) 
as joint tenants, tenants by the entirety, or ten-
ants in common, each person's share of any in-
terest from the property is determined by local 
law.
Income from property given to a child. 
Property you give as a parent to your child un-
der the Model Gifts of Securities to Minors Act, 
the Uniform Gifts to Minors Act, or any similar 
law becomes the child's property.
Income from the property is taxable to the 
child, except that any part used to satisfy a legal 
obligation to support the child is taxable to the 
parent or guardian having that legal obligation.
Savings account with parent as trustee. 
Interest income from a savings account opened 
for a minor child, but placed in the name and 
subject to the order of the parents as trustees, 
is taxable to the child if, under the law of the 
state in which the child resides, both of the fol-
lowing are true.
• The savings account legally belongs to the 
child.
• The parents aren't legally permitted to use 
any of the funds to support the child.
Form 1099 -INT. Interest income is generally 
reported to you on Form 1099 -INT , or a similar 
statement, by banks, savings and loans, and 
other payers of interest. This form shows you 
the interest income you received during the 
year. Keep this form for your records. Y ou don't 
have to attach it to your tax return.
Report on your tax return the total interest in-
come you receive for the tax year. See the Form 
1099-INT Instructions for Recipient to see 
whether you need to adjust any of the amounts 
reported to you.
Interest not reported on Form 1099 -INT. 
Even if you don't receive a Form 1099 -INT , you 
must still report all of your interest income. For 
example, you may receive distributive shares of 
interest from partnerships or S corporations. 
This interest is reported to you on Schedule K -1 
(Form 1065), Partner's Share of Income, De-
duction, Credits, etc.; or Schedule K -1 (Form 
1120-S), Shareholder's Share of Income, De-
ductions, Credits, etc.
Nominees. Generally, if someone receives 
interest as a nominee for you, that person must 
give you a Form 1099 -INT showing the interest 
received on your behalf.
If you receive a Form 1099 -INT and interest 
as a nominee for another person, see the dis-
cussion on nominee distributions under How T o 
Report Interest Income  in Publication 550, 
chapter 1 or the Schedule B (Form 1040) in-
structions.
Incorrect amount.  If you receive a Form 
1099-INT that shows an incorrect amount or 
other incorrect information, you should ask the 
Page 57 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17 (2023) Chapter 6 Interest Income 55

issuer for a corrected form. The new Form 
1099-INT you receive will have the “CORREC-
TED” box checked.
Form 1099 -OID. Reportable interest income 
may also be shown on Form 1099 -OID, Original 
Issue Discount. For more information about 
amounts shown on this form, see Original Issue 
Discount (OID), later in this chapter.
The box references discussed below 
are from the January 2022 revisions of 
Form 1099 -INT and Form 1099 -DIV . 
Later revisions may have different box referen-
ces.
Exempt-interest dividends.  Exempt-interest 
dividends you receive from a mutual fund or 
other regulated investment company (RIC) 
aren't included in your taxable income. (How-
ever, see Information reporting requirement 
next.) Exempt -interest dividends should be 
shown on Form 1099 -DIV , box 12. Y ou don't re-
duce your basis for distributions that are ex-
empt-interest dividends.
Information reporting requirement.  Al-
though exempt-interest dividends aren't taxable, 
you must show them on your tax return if you 
have to file. This is an information reporting re-
quirement and doesn't change the exempt-inter-
est dividends into taxable income.
Note. Exempt-interest dividends paid by a 
mutual fund or other RIC on specified private 
activity bonds may be subject to the alternative 
minimum tax (AMT). The exempt -interest divi-
dends subject to the AMT should be shown in 
box 13 of Form 1099 -DIV . See Alternative Mini-
mum T ax (AMT) in chapter 13 for more informa-
tion. Publication 550, chapter 1 contains a dis-
cussion on private activity bonds under State or 
Local Government Obligations.
Interest on VA dividends.  Interest on insur-
ance dividends left on deposit with the Depart-
ment of Veterans Affairs (VA) isn't taxable. This 
includes interest paid on dividends on conver-
ted United States Government Life Insurance 
and on National Service Life Insurance policies.
Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs). 
Interest on a Roth IRA generally isn't taxable. In-
terest on a traditional IRA is tax deferred. Y ou 
generally don't include interest earned in an IRA 
in your income until you make withdrawals from 
the IRA. See chapter 9.
Taxable 
Interest—General
T axable interest includes interest you receive 
from bank accounts, loans you make to others, 
and other sources. The following are some 
sources of taxable interest.
Dividends that are actually interest.  Certain 
distributions commonly called dividends are ac-
tually interest. Y ou must report as interest 
so-called dividends on deposits or on share ac-
counts in:
• Cooperative banks,
• Credit unions,
• Domestic building and loan associations,
CAUTION
!
• Domestic savings and loan associations,
• Federal savings and loan associations, 
and
• Mutual savings banks.
The “dividends” will be shown as interest in-
come on Form 1099-INT .
Money market funds.  Money market funds 
pay dividends and are offered by nonbank fi-
nancial institutions, such as mutual funds and 
stock brokerage houses. Generally, amounts 
you receive from money market funds should be 
reported as dividends, not as interest.
Certificates of deposit and other deferred 
interest accounts.  If you buy a certificate of 
deposit or open a deferred interest account, in-
terest may be paid at fixed intervals of 1 year or 
less during the term of the account. Y ou must 
generally include this interest in your income 
when you actually receive it or are entitled to re-
ceive it without paying a substantial penalty. 
The same is true for accounts that mature in 1 
year or less and pay interest in a single payment 
at maturity. If interest is deferred for more than 1 
year, see Original Issue Discount (OID), later.
Interest subject to penalty for early with-
drawal. If you withdraw funds from a deferred 
interest account before maturity, you may have 
to pay a penalty. Y ou must report the total 
amount of interest paid or credited to your ac-
count during the year, without subtracting the 
penalty. See Penalty on early withdrawal of sav-
ings in Publication 550, chapter 1 for more infor-
mation on how to report the interest and deduct 
the penalty.
Money borrowed to invest in certificate of 
deposit. The interest you pay on money bor-
rowed from a bank or savings institution to meet 
the minimum deposit required for a certificate of 
deposit from the institution and the interest you 
earn on the certificate are two separate items. 
Y ou must report the total interest income you 
earn on the certificate in your income. If you 
itemize deductions, you can deduct the interest 
you pay as investment interest, up to the 
amount of your net investment income. See In-
terest Expenses in Publication 550, chapter 3.
Example. Y ou purchase a $10,000 certifi-
cate of deposit by borrowing $5,000 from Bank 
and adding an additional $5,000 of your funds. 
The certificate earned $575 at maturity in 2023, 
but you received only $265, which represented 
the $575 you earned minus $310 interest 
charged on your $5,000 loan. The bank gives 
you a Form 1099 -INT for 2023 showing the 
$575 interest you earned. The bank also gives 
you a statement showing that you paid $310 of 
interest for 2023. Y ou must include the $575 in 
your income. If you itemize your deductions on 
Schedule A (Form 1040), you can deduct $310, 
subject to the net investment income limit.
Gift for opening account.  If you receive non-
cash gifts or services for making deposits or for 
opening an account in a savings institution, you 
may have to report the value as interest.
For deposits of less than $5,000, gifts or 
services valued at more than $10 must be re-
ported as interest. For deposits of $5,000 or 
more, gifts or services valued at more than $20 
must be reported as interest. The value is 
determined by the cost to the financial institu-
tion.
Example. Y ou open a savings account at 
your local bank and deposit $800. The account 
earns $20 interest. Y ou also receive a $15 cal-
culator. If no other interest is credited to your 
account during the year, the Form 1099-INT you 
receive will show $35 interest for the year. Y ou 
must report $35 interest income on your tax re-
turn.
Interest on insurance dividends.  Interest on 
insurance dividends left on deposit with an in-
surance company that can be withdrawn annu-
ally is taxable to you in the year it is credited to 
your account. However, if you can withdraw it 
only on the anniversary date of the policy (or 
other specified date), the interest is taxable in 
the year that date occurs.
Prepaid insurance premiums.  Any increase 
in the value of prepaid insurance premiums, ad-
vance premiums, or premium deposit funds is 
interest if it is applied to the payment of premi-
ums due on insurance policies or made availa-
ble for you to withdraw.
U.S. obligations.  Interest on U.S. obligations 
issued by any agency or instrumentality of the 
United States, such as U.S. T reasury bills, 
notes, and bonds, is taxable for federal income 
tax purposes.
Interest on tax refunds.  Interest you receive 
on tax refunds is taxable income.
Interest on condemnation award.  If the con-
demning authority pays you interest to compen-
sate you for a delay in payment of an award, the 
interest is taxable.
Installment sale payments.  If a contract for 
the sale or exchange of property provides for 
deferred payments, it also usually provides for 
interest payable with the deferred payments. 
Generally, that interest is taxable when you re-
ceive it. If little or no interest is provided for in a 
deferred payment contract, part of each pay-
ment may be treated as interest. See Unstated 
Interest and Original Issue Discount (OID) in 
Pub. 537, Installment Sales.
Interest on annuity contract.  Accumulated 
interest on an annuity contract you sell before 
its maturity date is taxable.
Usurious interest. Usurious interest is interest 
charged at an illegal rate. This is taxable as in-
terest unless state law automatically changes it 
to a payment on the principal.
Interest income on frozen deposits. Exclude 
from your gross income interest on frozen de-
posits. A deposit is frozen if, at the end of the 
year, you can't withdraw any part of the deposit 
because:
• The financial institution is bankrupt or in-
solvent, or
• The state where the institution is located 
has placed limits on withdrawals because 
other financial institutions in the state are 
bankrupt or insolvent.
Page 58 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
56 Chapter 6 Interest Income Publication 17 (2023)

The amount of interest you must exclude is 
the interest that was credited on the frozen de-
posits minus the sum of:
• The net amount you withdrew from these 
deposits during the year, and
• The amount you could have withdrawn as 
of the end of the year (not reduced by any 
penalty for premature withdrawals of a time 
deposit).
If you receive a Form 1099 -INT for interest in-
come on deposits that were frozen at the end of 
2023, see Frozen deposits under How T o Re-
port Interest Income  in Publication 550, chap-
ter 1 for information about reporting this interest 
income exclusion on your tax return.
The interest you exclude is treated as credi-
ted to your account in the following year. Y ou 
must include it in income in the year you can 
withdraw it.
Example. $100 of interest was credited on 
your frozen deposit during the year. Y ou with-
drew $80 but couldn't withdraw any more as of 
the end of the year. Y ou must include $80 in 
your income and exclude $20 from your income 
for the year. Y ou must include the $20 in your in-
come for the year you can withdraw it.
Bonds traded flat.  If you buy a bond at a dis-
count when interest has been defaulted or when 
the interest has accrued but hasn't been paid, 
the transaction is described as trading a bond 
flat. The defaulted or unpaid interest isn't in-
come and isn't taxable as interest if paid later. 
When you receive a payment of that interest, it 
is a return of capital that reduces the remaining 
cost basis of your bond. Interest that accrues 
after the date of purchase, however, is taxable 
interest income for the year it is received or ac-
crued. See Bonds Sold Between Interest Dates, 
later, for more information.
Below-market loans. Generally, a “below-mar-
ket loan” means any loan if (A) in the case of a 
gift or demand loan, interest is payable on the 
loan at a rate less than the applicable Federal 
rate, or (B) in the case of a term loan, the 
amount loaned exceeds the present value (us-
ing a discount rate equal to the applicable Fed-
eral rate) of all payments due under the loan. 
(See Code section 7872 for details.) Section 
7872 applies to certain below -market loans, in-
cluding gift loans, compensation -related loans, 
and corporation -shareholder loans. (See Code 
section 7872(c).) If you are the lender of a be-
low-market loan, you may have additional inter-
est income. See Below-Market Loans in Publi-
cation 550, chapter 1 for more information.
U.S. Savings Bonds
This section provides tax information on U.S. 
savings bonds. It explains how to report the in-
terest income on these bonds and how to treat 
transfers of these bonds.
U.S. savings bonds currently offered to indi-
viduals include Series EE bonds and Series I 
bonds.
For information about U.S. savings 
bonds, go to T reasuryDirect.gov/
savings-bonds/.
If you prefer, write to:
 
T reasury Retail Securities Services
P .O. Box 9150
Minneapolis, MN 55480-9150
Accrual method taxpayers. If you use an ac-
crual method of accounting, you must report in-
terest on U.S. savings bonds each year as it ac-
crues. Y ou can't postpone reporting interest 
until you receive it or until the bonds mature. Ac-
crual methods of accounting are explained in 
chapter 1 under Accounting Methods.
Cash method taxpayers.  If you use the cash 
method of accounting, as most individual tax-
payers do, you generally report the interest on 
U.S. savings bonds when you receive it. The 
cash method of accounting is explained in 
chapter 1 under Accounting Methods . But see 
Reporting options for cash method taxpayers , 
later.
Series H and HH bonds.  These bonds were 
issued at face value in exchange for other sav-
ings bonds. Series HH bonds were issued be-
tween 1980 and 2004. They mature 20 years af-
ter issue. Series HH bonds that have not 
matured pay interest twice a year (usually by di-
rect deposit to your bank account). If you are a 
cash method taxpayer, you must report this in-
terest as income in the year you receive it.
Series H bonds were issued before 1980. All 
Series H bonds have matured and are no longer 
earning interest.
In addition to the twice -a-year interest pay-
ments, most H/HH bonds have a deferred inter-
est component. The reporting of this as income 
is addressed later in this chapter.
Series EE and Series I bonds.  Interest on 
these bonds is payable when you redeem the 
bonds. The difference between the purchase 
price and the redemption value is taxable inter-
est.
Series E and EE bonds.  Series E bonds 
were issued before July 1980. All Series E 
bonds have matured and are no longer earning 
interest. Series EE bonds were first offered in 
January 1980 and have a maturity period of 30 
years; they were offered in paper (definitive) 
form until 2012. Paper Series EE and Series E 
bonds were issued at a discount and increase 
in value as they earn interest. Electronic 
(book-entry) Series EE bonds were first offered 
in 2003; they are issued at face value and in-
crease in value as they earn interest. For all 
Series E and Series EE bonds, the purchase 
price plus all accrued interest is payable to you 
at redemption.
Series I bonds. Series I bonds were first of-
fered in 1998. These are inflation -indexed 
bonds issued at face value with a maturity pe-
riod of 30 years. Series I bonds increase in 
value as they earn interest. The face value plus 
all accrued interest is payable to you at redemp-
tion.
Reporting options for cash method tax-
payers. If you use the cash method of report-
ing income, you can report the interest on Ser-
ies EE and Series I bonds in either of the 
following ways.
1. Method 1. Postpone reporting the interest 
until the earlier of the year you cash or dis-
pose of the bonds or the year they mature. 
(However, see Savings bonds traded, 
later.)
Note. Series EE bonds issued in 1993 
matured in 2023. If you used method 1, 
you must generally report the interest on 
these bonds on your 2023 return.
2. Method 2. Choose to report the increase 
in redemption value as interest each year.
Y ou must use the same method for all Series EE 
and Series I bonds you own. If you don't choose 
method 2 by reporting the increase in redemp-
tion value as interest each year, you must use 
method 1.
If you plan to cash your bonds in the 
same year you will pay for higher edu-
cation expenses, you may want to use 
method 1 because you may be able to exclude 
the interest from your income. T o learn how, see 
Education Savings Bond Program, later.
Change from method 1.  If you want to 
change your method of reporting the interest 
from method 1 to method 2, you can do so with-
out permission from the IRS. In the year of 
change, you must report all interest accrued to 
date and not previously reported for all your 
bonds.
Once you choose to report the interest each 
year, you must continue to do so for all Series 
EE and Series I bonds you own and for any you 
get later, unless you request permission to 
change, as explained next.
Change from method 2.  T o change from 
method 2 to method 1, you must request per-
mission from the IRS. Permission for the 
change is automatically granted if you send the 
IRS a statement that meets all the following re-
quirements.
1. Y ou have typed or printed the following 
number at the top: “131.”
2. It includes your name and social security 
number under “131.”
3. It includes the year of change (both the be-
ginning and ending dates).
4. It identifies the savings bonds for which 
you are requesting this change.
5. It includes your agreement to:
a. Report all interest on any bonds ac-
quired during or after the year of 
change when the interest is realized 
upon disposition, redemption, or final 
maturity, whichever is earliest; and
b. Report all interest on the bonds ac-
quired before the year of change 
when the interest is realized upon dis-
position, redemption, or final maturity, 
whichever is earliest, with the excep-
tion of the interest reported in prior tax 
years.
TIP
Page 59 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17 (2023) Chapter 6 Interest Income 57

Y ou must attach this statement to your tax 
return for the year of change, which you must 
file by the due date (including extensions).
Y ou can have an automatic extension of 6 
months from the due date of your return for the 
year of change (excluding extensions) to file the 
statement with an amended return. On the 
statement, type or print “Filed pursuant to sec-
tion 301. 9100-2.” T o get this extension, you 
must have filed your original return for the year 
of the change by the due date (including exten-
sions).
Instead of filing this statement, you can re-
quest permission to change from method 2 to 
method 1 by filing Form 3115, Application for 
Change in Accounting Method. In that case, fol-
low the form instructions for an automatic 
change. No user fee is required.
Co-owners. If a U.S. savings bond is issued in 
the names of co -owners, such as you and your 
child or you and your spouse, interest on the 
bond is generally taxable to the co -owner who 
bought the bond.
One co -owner's funds used.  If you used 
your funds to buy the bond, you must pay the 
tax on the interest. This is true even if you let the 
other co -owner redeem the bond and keep all 
the proceeds. Under these circumstances, the 
co-owner who redeemed the bond will receive a 
Form 1099 -INT at the time of redemption and 
must provide you with another Form 1099 -INT 
showing the amount of interest from the bond 
taxable to you. The co -owner who redeemed 
the bond is a “nominee.” See Nominee distribu-
tions under How T o Report Interest Income  in 
Publication 550, chapter 1 for more information 
about how a person who is a nominee reports 
interest income belonging to another person.
Both co -owners' funds used.  If you and 
the other co -owner each contribute part of the 
bond's purchase price, the interest is generally 
taxable to each of you, in proportion to the 
amount each of you paid.
Community property.  If you and your 
spouse live in a community property state and 
hold bonds as community property, one -half of 
the interest is considered received by each of 
you. If you file separate returns, each of you 
must generally report one-half of the bond inter-
est. For more information about community 
property, see Pub. 555.
Table 6-1. These rules are also shown in T a-
ble 6-1.
Ownership transferred.  If you bought Series 
EE or Series I bonds entirely with your own 
funds and had them reissued in your co-owner's 
name or beneficiary's name alone, you must in-
clude in your gross income for the year of reis-
sue all interest that you earned on these bonds 
and have not previously reported. But, if the 
bonds were reissued in your name alone, you 
don't have to report the interest accrued at that 
time.
This same rule applies when bonds (other 
than bonds held as community property) are 
transferred between spouses or incident to di-
vorce.
Purchased jointly.  If you and a co -owner 
each contributed funds to buy Series EE or Ser-
ies I bonds jointly and later have the bonds reis-
sued in the co -owner's name alone, you must 
include in your gross income for the year of reis-
sue your share of all the interest earned on the 
bonds that you have not previously reported. 
The former co -owner doesn't have to include in 
gross income at the time of reissue his or her 
share of the interest earned that was not repor-
ted before the transfer. This interest, however, 
as well as all interest earned after the reissue, is 
income to the former co-owner.
This income -reporting rule also applies 
when a new co -owner purchases your share of 
the bond and the bonds are reissued in the 
name of your former co -owner and a new 
co-owner. But the new co-owner will report only 
his or her share of the interest earned after the 
transfer.
If bonds that you and a co -owner bought 
jointly are reissued to each of you separately in 
the same proportion as your contribution to the 
purchase price, neither you nor your co -owner 
has to report at that time the interest earned be-
fore the bonds were reissued.
Example 1.  Y ou and your spouse each 
spent an equal amount to buy a $1,000 Series 
EE savings bond. The bond was issued to you 
and your spouse as co -owners. Y ou both post-
pone reporting interest on the bond. Y ou later 
have the bond reissued as two $500 bonds, one 
in your name and one in your spouse's name. At 
that time, neither you nor your spouse has to re-
port the interest earned to the date of reissue.
Example 2. Y ou bought a $1,000 Series EE 
savings bond entirely with your own funds. The 
bond was issued to you and your spouse as 
co-owners. Y ou both postpone reporting interest 
on the bond. Y ou later have the bond reissued 
as two $500 bonds, one in your name and one 
in your spouse's name. Y ou must report half the 
interest earned to the date of reissue.
Transfer to a trust.  If you own Series EE or 
Series I bonds and transfer them to a trust, giv-
ing up all rights of ownership, you must include 
in your income for that year the interest earned 
to the date of transfer if you have not already re-
ported it. However, if you are considered the 
owner of the trust and if the increase in value 
both before and after the transfer continues to 
be taxable to you, you can continue to defer re-
porting the interest earned each year. Y ou must 
include the total interest in your income in the 
year you cash or dispose of the bonds or the 
year the bonds finally mature, whichever is ear-
lier.
The same rules apply to previously unrepor-
ted interest on Series EE or Series E bonds if 
the transfer to a trust consisted of Series HH 
bonds you acquired in a trade for the Series EE 
or Series E bonds. See Savings bonds traded , 
later.
Decedents. The manner of reporting interest 
income on Series EE or Series I bonds, after the 
death of the owner (decedent), depends on the 
accounting and income -reporting methods pre-
viously used by the decedent. This is explained 
in Publication 550, chapter 1.
Savings bonds traded.  Prior to September 
2004, you could trade (exchange) Series E or 
EE bonds for Series H or HH bonds. At the time 
of the trade, you had the choice to postpone 
(defer) reporting the interest earned on your 
Series E or EE bonds until the Series H or HH 
bonds received in the trade were redeemed or 
matured. Any cash you received in the transac-
tion was income up to the amount of the interest 
that had accrued on the Series E or EE bonds. 
The amount of income that you chose to post-
pone reporting was recorded on the face of the 
Series H or HH bonds as “Deferred Interest”; 
this amount is also equal to the difference be-
tween the redemption value of the Series H or 
HH bonds and your cost. Y our cost is the sum of 
the amount you paid for the exchanged Series E 
or EE bonds plus any amount you had to pay at 
the time of the transaction.
Example. Y ou traded Series EE bonds (on 
which you postponed reporting the interest) for 
$2,500 in Series HH bonds and $223 in cash. 
Y ou reported the $223 as taxable income on 
your tax return. At the time of the trade, the Ser-
ies EE bonds had accrued interest of $523 and 
a redemption value of $2,723. Y ou hold the Ser-
ies HH bonds until maturity, when you receive 
$2,500. Y ou must report $300 as interest in-
come in the year of maturity. This is the differ-
ence between their redemption value, $2,500, 
and your cost, $2,200 (the amount you paid for 
the Series EE bonds). It is also the difference 
between the accrued interest of $523 on the 
Series EE bonds and the $223 cash received 
on the trade.
Note. The $300 amount that is reportable 
upon redemption or maturity may be found re-
corded on the face of the Series HH bond as 
“Deferred Interest.” If more than one Series HH 
bond is received in the exchange, the total 
amount of interest postponed/deferred in the 
transaction is divided proportionately among 
the Series HH bonds.
Choice to report interest in year of trade. 
Y ou can choose to treat all of the previously un-
reported accrued interest on the Series EE 
bonds traded for Series HH bonds as income in 
the year of the trade. If you made this choice, it 
is treated as a change from method 1. See 
Change from method 1, earlier. If you choose to 
report the interest, then the “Deferred Interest” 
T able 6-1. Who Pays the Tax on U.S. Savings Bond Interest
IF ... THEN the interest must be reported by...
you buy a bond in your name and the name of another 
person as co-owners, using only your own funds
you.
you buy a bond in the name of another person, who is the 
sole owner of the bond
the person for whom you bought the bond.
you and another person buy a bond as co-owners, each 
contributing part of the purchase price
both you and the other co-owner, in proportion to the 
amount each paid for the bond.
you and your spouse, who live in a community property 
state, buy a bond that is community property
you and your spouse. If you file separate returns, both you 
and your spouse generally report one-half of the interest.
Page 60 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
58 Chapter 6 Interest Income Publication 17 (2023)

notation on the face of the Series HH bonds re-
ceived in the trade will be $0 or blank.
Form 1099-INT for U.S. savings bonds inter-
est. When you cash a bond, the bank or other 
payer that redeems it must give you a Form 
1099-INT if the interest part of the payment you 
receive is $10 or more. Box 3 of your Form 
1099-INT should show the interest as the differ-
ence between the amount you received and the 
amount paid for the bond. However, your Form 
1099-INT may show more interest than you 
have to include on your income tax return. For 
example, this may happen if any of the following 
are true.
• Y ou chose to report the increase in the re-
demption value of the bond each year. The 
interest shown on your Form 1099-INT 
won't be reduced by amounts previously 
included in income.
• Y ou received the bond from a decedent. 
The interest shown on your Form 1099-INT 
won't be reduced by any interest reported 
by the decedent before death, or on the 
decedent's final return, or by the estate on 
the estate's income tax return.
• Ownership of the bond was transferred. 
The interest shown on your Form 1099-INT 
won't be reduced by interest that accrued 
before the transfer.
Note. This is true for paper bonds, but 
the T reasury reporting process for elec-
tronic bonds is more refined—if T reasury is 
aware that the transfer of an electronic sav-
ings bond is a reportable event, then the 
transferor will receive a Form 1099 -INT for 
the year of the transfer for the interest ac-
crued up to the time of the transfer; when 
the transferee later disposes of the bond 
(redemption, maturity, or further transfer), 
the transferee will receive a Form 1099-INT 
reduced by the amount reported to the 
transferor at the time of the original trans-
fer.
• Y ou were named as a co-owner, and the 
other co-owner contributed funds to buy 
the bond. The interest shown on your Form 
1099-INT won't be reduced by the amount 
you received as nominee for the other 
co-owner. (See Co-owners, earlier in this 
chapter, for more information about the re-
porting requirements.)
• Y ou received the bond in a taxable distribu-
tion from a retirement or profit-sharing 
plan. The interest shown on your Form 
1099-INT won't be reduced by the interest 
portion of the amount taxable as a distribu-
tion from the plan and not taxable as inter-
est. (This amount is generally shown on 
Form 1099-R, Distributions From Pen-
sions, Annuities, Retirement or Profit-Shar-
ing Plans, IRAs, Insurance Contracts, etc., 
for the year of distribution.)
For more information on including the cor-
rect amount of interest on your return, see How 
T o Report Interest Income, later. Pub. 550 in-
cludes examples showing how to report these 
amounts.
Interest on U.S. savings bonds is ex-
empt from state and local taxes. The 
Form 1099 -INT you receive will indi-
cate the amount that is for U.S. savings bond in-
terest in box 3. Do not include this income on 
your state or local income tax return.
Education Savings Bond 
Program
Y ou may be able to exclude from income all or 
part of the interest you receive on the redemp-
tion of qualified U.S. savings bonds during the 
year if you pay qualified higher educational ex-
penses during the same year. This exclusion is 
known as the Education Savings Bond Pro-
gram.
Y ou don't qualify for this exclusion if your fil-
ing status is married filing separately.
Form 8815.  Use Form 8815 to figure your 
exclusion. Attach the form to your Form 1040 or 
1040-SR.
Qualified U.S. savings bonds.  A qualified 
U.S. savings bond is a Series EE bond issued 
after 1989 or a Series I bond. The bond must be 
issued either in your name (sole owner) or in 
your and your spouse's names (co -owners). 
Y ou must be at least 24 years old before the 
bond's issue date. For example, a bond bought 
by a parent and issued in the name of his or her 
child under age 24 doesn't qualify for the exclu-
sion by the parent or child.
The issue date of a bond may be ear-
lier than the date the bond is pur-
chased because the issue date as-
signed to a bond is the first day of the month in 
which it is purchased.
Beneficiary. Y ou can designate any individual 
(including a child) as a beneficiary of the bond.
Verification by IRS.  If you claim the exclu-
sion, the IRS will check it by using bond re-
demption information from the Department of 
the T reasury.
Qualified expenses.  Qualified higher edu-
cation expenses are tuition and fees required 
for you, your spouse, or your dependent (for 
whom you claim an exemption) to attend an eli-
gible educational institution.
Qualified expenses include any contribution 
you make to a qualified tuition program or to a 
Coverdell education savings account (ESA).
Qualified expenses don't include expenses 
for room and board or for courses involving 
sports, games, or hobbies that aren't part of a 
degree- or certificate-granting program.
Eligible educational institutions.  These 
institutions include most public, private, and 
nonprofit universities, colleges, and vocational 
schools that are accredited and eligible to par-
ticipate in student aid programs run by the U.S. 
Department of Education.
Reduction for certain benefits.  Y ou must 
reduce your qualified higher education expen-
ses by all of the following tax-free benefits.
1. T ax-free part of scholarships and fellow-
ships (see Scholarships and fellowships in 
chapter 8).
TIP
CAUTION
!
2. Expenses used to figure the tax-free por-
tion of distributions from a Coverdell ESA.
3. Expenses used to figure the tax-free por-
tion of distributions from a qualified tuition 
program.
4. Any tax-free payments (other than gifts or 
inheritances) received for educational ex-
penses, such as:
a. Veterans' educational assistance ben-
efits,
b. Qualified tuition reductions, or
c. Employer-provided educational assis-
tance.
5. Any expense used in figuring the Ameri-
can opportunity and lifetime learning cred-
its.
Amount excludable.  If the total proceeds 
(interest and principal) from the qualified U.S. 
savings bonds you redeem during the year 
aren't more than your adjusted qualified higher 
education expenses for the year, you may be 
able to exclude all of the interest. If the pro-
ceeds are more than the expenses, you may be 
able to exclude only part of the interest.
T o determine the excludable amount, multi-
ply the interest part of the proceeds by a frac-
tion. The numerator of the fraction is the quali-
fied higher education expenses you paid during 
the year. The denominator of the fraction is the 
total proceeds you received during the year.
Example. In January 2023, Mark and Joan, 
a married couple, cashed qualified Series EE 
U.S. savings bonds with a total denomination of 
$10,000 that they bought in January 2007 for 
$5,000. They received proceeds of $8,848, rep-
resenting principal of $5,000 and interest of 
$3,848. In 2023, they paid $4,000 of their 
daughter's college tuition. They aren't claiming 
an education credit for that amount, and their 
daughter doesn't have any tax -free educational 
assistance. They can exclude $1,739. 60 
($3,848 × ($4,000 ÷ $8,848)) of interest in 2023. 
They must include the remaining $2,108. 40 
($3,848 − $1,739.60) interest in gross income.
Modified adjusted gross income limit. 
The interest exclusion is limited if your modified 
adjusted gross income (modified AGI) is:
• $137,800 to $167,800 for married taxpay-
ers filing jointly, and
• $91,850 to $106,850 for all other taxpay-
ers.
Y ou don't qualify for the interest exclusion if your 
modified AGI is equal to or more than the upper 
limit for your filing status.
Modified AGI, for purposes of this exclusion, 
is adjusted gross income (Form 1040 or 
1040-SR, line 11) figured before the interest ex-
clusion, and modified by adding back any:
1. Foreign earned income exclusion,
2. Foreign housing exclusion and deduction,
3. Exclusion of income for bona fide resi-
dents of American Samoa,
4. Exclusion for income from Puerto Rico,
5. Exclusion for adoption benefits received 
under an employer's adoption assistance 
program, and
Page 61 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17 (2023) Chapter 6 Interest Income 59

6. Deduction for student loan interest.
Use the Line 9 Worksheet in the Form 8815 
instructions to figure your modified AGI.
If you have investment interest expense in-
curred to earn royalties and other investment in-
come, see Education Savings Bond Program 
and Royalties included in modified AGI in Publi-
cation 550, chapter 1.
Recordkeeping. If you claim the inter-
est exclusion, you must keep a written 
record of the qualified U.S. savings 
bonds you redeem. Y our record must include 
the serial number, issue date, face value, and 
total redemption proceeds (principal and inter-
est) of each bond. Y ou can use Form 8818 to 
record this information. Y ou should also keep 
bills, receipts, canceled checks, or other docu-
mentation that shows you paid qualified higher 
education expenses during the year.
U.S. Treasury Bills,
Notes, and Bonds
T reasury bills, notes, and bonds are direct debts 
(obligations) of the U.S. Government.
Taxation of interest.  Interest income from 
T reasury bills, notes, and bonds is subject to 
federal income tax but is exempt from all state 
and local income taxes. Y ou should receive a 
Form 1099-INT showing the interest paid to you 
for the year in box 3.
Treasury bills. These bills generally have a 
4-week, 8-week, 13-week, 26-week, or 52-week 
maturity period. They are generally issued at a 
discount in the amount of $100 and multiples of 
$100. The difference between the discounted 
price you pay for the bills and the face value you 
receive at maturity is interest income. Generally, 
you report this interest income when the bill is 
paid at maturity. If you paid a premium for a bill 
(more than the face value), you generally report 
the premium as a section 171 deduction when 
the bill is paid at maturity.
If you reinvest your T reasury bill at its matur-
ity in a new T reasury bill, note, or bond, you will 
receive payment for the difference between the 
proceeds of the maturing bill (par amount less 
any tax withheld) and the purchase price of the 
new T reasury security. However, you must re-
port the full amount of the interest income on 
each of your T reasury bills at the time it reaches 
maturity.
Treasury notes and bonds. T reasury notes 
generally have maturity periods of more than 1 
year, ranging up to 10 years. Maturity periods 
for T reasury bonds are generally longer than 10 
years. Both are generally issued in denomina-
tions of $100 to $1,000,000 and generally pay 
interest every 6 months. Generally, you report 
this interest for the year paid. For more informa-
tion, see U.S. T reasury Bills, Notes, and Bonds 
in Publication 550, chapter 1.
For other information on T reasury notes 
or bonds, write to:
T reasury Retail Securities Services
P .O. Box 9150
Minneapolis, MN 55480-9150
RECORDS
Or, on the Internet, go to 
T reasuryDirect.gov/marketable-
securities/.
For information on Series EE, Series I, and 
Series HH savings bonds, see U.S. Savings 
Bonds, earlier.
Treasury inflation -protected securities 
(TIPS). These securities pay interest twice a 
year at a fixed rate, based on a principal amount 
adjusted to take into account inflation and defla-
tion. For the tax treatment of these securities, 
see Inflation-Indexed Debt Instruments  under 
Original Issue Discount (OID)  in IRS.gov/
Pub550.
Bonds Sold Between
Interest Dates
If you sell a bond between interest payment 
dates, part of the sales price represents interest 
accrued to the date of sale. Y ou must report that 
part of the sales price as interest income for the 
year of sale.
If you buy a bond between interest payment 
dates, part of the purchase price represents in-
terest accrued before the date of purchase. 
When that interest is paid to you, treat it as a 
nontaxable return of your capital investment, 
rather than as interest income. See Accrued in-
terest on bonds  under How T o Report Interest 
Income in Publication 550, chapter 1 for infor-
mation on reporting the payment.
Insurance
Life insurance proceeds paid to you as benefi-
ciary of the insured person are usually not taxa-
ble. But if you receive the proceeds in install-
ments, you must usually report a part of each 
installment payment as interest income.
For more information about insurance pro-
ceeds received in installments, see Pub. 525, 
T axable and Nontaxable Income.
Annuity. If you buy an annuity with life insur-
ance proceeds, the annuity payments you re-
ceive are taxed as pension and annuity income 
from a nonqualified plan, not as interest income. 
See chapter 5  for information on pension and 
annuity income from nonqualified plans.
State or Local
Government Obligations
Interest on a bond used to finance government 
operations generally isn't taxable if the bond is 
issued by a state, the District of Columbia, a ter-
ritory of the United States, or any of their politi-
cal subdivisions.
Bonds issued after 1982 by an Indian tribal 
government (including tribal economic develop-
ment bonds issued after February 17, 2009) are 
treated as issued by a state. Interest on these 
bonds is generally tax exempt if the bonds are 
part of an issue of which substantially all pro-
ceeds are to be used in the exercise of any es-
sential government function. However, the es-
sential government function requirement does 
not apply to tribal economic development bonds 
issued after February 17, 2009. See section 
7871(f).
For information on federally guaranteed 
bonds, mortgage revenue bonds, arbitrage 
bonds, private activity bonds, qualified bonds, 
and tax credit bonds, including whether interest 
on some of these bonds is taxable, see State or 
Local Government Obligations  in Publication 
550, chapter 1.
Information reporting requirement. If you file 
a tax return, you are required to show any 
tax-exempt interest you received on your return. 
T ax-exempt interest paid to you will be reported 
to you on Form 1099-INT , box 8. This is an infor-
mation reporting requirement only. It doesn't 
change tax-exempt interest to taxable interest.
Original Issue Discount 
(OID)
OID is a form of interest. Y ou generally include 
OID in your income as it accrues over the term 
of the debt instrument, whether or not you re-
ceive any payments from the issuer.
A debt instrument generally has OID when 
the instrument is issued for a price that is less 
than its stated redemption price at maturity. OID 
is the difference between the stated redemption 
price at maturity and the issue price.
All debt instruments that pay no interest be-
fore maturity are presumed to be issued at a 
discount. Zero coupon bonds are one example 
of these instruments.
The OID accrual rules generally don't apply 
to short-term obligations (those with a fixed ma-
turity date of 1 year or less from date of issue). 
See Discount on Short -T erm Obligations in 
Publication 550, chapter 1.
De minimis OID. Y ou can treat the discount as 
zero if it is less than one -fourth of 1% (0. 0025) 
of the stated redemption price at maturity multi-
plied by the number of full years from the date 
of original issue to maturity. This small discount 
is known as de minimis OID.
Example 1.  Y ou bought a 10 -year bond 
with a stated redemption price at maturity of 
$1,000, issued at $980 with OID of $20. 
One-fourth of 1% of $1,000 (stated redemption 
price) times 10 (the number of full years from 
the date of original issue to maturity) equals 
$25. Because the $20 discount is less than $25, 
the OID is treated as zero. (If you hold the bond 
at maturity, you will recognize $20 ($1,000 − 
$980) of capital gain.)
Example 2.  The facts are the same as in 
Example 1, except that the bond was issued at 
$950. The OID is $50. Because the $50 dis-
count is more than the $25 figured in Exam-
ple 1, you must include the OID in income as it 
accrues over the term of the bond.
Debt instrument bought after original is-
sue. If you buy a debt instrument with de mini-
mis OID at a premium, the de minimis OID isn't 
includible in income. If you buy a debt instru-
ment with de minimis OID at a discount, the dis-
count is reported under the market discount 
rules. See Market Discount Bonds  in Publica-
tion 550, chapter 1.
Exceptions to reporting OID as current in-
come. The OID rules discussed in this chapter 
don't apply to the following debt instruments.
Page 62 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
60 Chapter 6 Interest Income Publication 17 (2023)

1. T ax-exempt obligations. (However, see 
Stripped tax-exempt obligations under 
Stripped Bonds and Coupons in Publica-
tion 550, chapter 1.)
2. U.S. savings bonds.
3. Short-term debt instruments (those with a 
fixed maturity date of not more than 1 year 
from the date of issue).
4. Loans between individuals if all the follow-
ing are true.
a. The loan is not made in the course of 
a trade or business of the lender.
b. The amount of the loan, plus the 
amount of any outstanding prior loans 
between the same individuals, is 
$10,000 or less.
c. Avoiding any federal tax isn't one of 
the principal purposes of the loan.
5. A debt instrument purchased at a pre-
mium.
Form 1099-OID. The issuer of the debt instru-
ment (or your broker if you held the instrument 
through a broker) should give you Form 
1099-OID, or a similar statement, if the total OID 
for the calendar year is $10 or more. Form 
1099-OID will show, in box 1, the amount of OID 
for the part of the year that you held the bond. It 
will also show, in box 2, the stated interest you 
must include in your income. Box 8 shows OID 
on a U.S. T reasury obligation for the part of the 
year you owned it and isn't included in box 1. A 
copy of Form 1099 -OID will be sent to the IRS. 
Don't file your copy with your return. Keep it for 
your records.
In most cases, you must report the entire 
amount in boxes 1, 2, and 8 of Form 1099 -OID 
as interest income. But see Refiguring OID 
shown on Form 1099 -OID, later in this discus-
sion, for more information.
Form 1099-OID not received.  If you had OID 
for the year but didn't receive a Form 1099 -OID, 
you may have to figure the correct amount of 
OID to report on your return. See Pub. 1212 for 
details on how to figure the correct OID.
Nominee. If someone else is the holder of 
record (the registered owner) of an OID instru-
ment belonging to you and receives a Form 
1099-OID on your behalf, that person must give 
you a Form 1099-OID.
Refiguring OID shown on Form 1099 -OID. 
Y ou may need to refigure the OID shown in 
box 1 or box 8 of Form 1099 -OID if either of the 
following applies.
• Y ou bought the debt instrument after its 
original issue and paid a premium or an ac-
quisition premium.
• The debt instrument is a stripped bond or a 
stripped coupon (including certain zero 
coupon instruments).
If you acquired your debt instrument before 
2014, your payer is only required to report a 
gross amount of OID in box 1 or box 8 of Form 
1099-OID.
For information about figuring the correct 
amount of OID to include in your income, see 
Figuring OID on Long -T erm Debt Instruments in 
Pub. 1212 and the Form 1099 -OID Instructions 
for Recipient.
If you acquired your debt instrument after 
2013, unless you have informed your payer that 
you do not want to amortize bond premium, 
your payer must generally report either (1) a net 
amount of OID that reflects the offset of OID by 
the amount of bond premium or acquisition pre-
mium amortization for the year, or (2) a gross 
amount for both the OID and the bond premium 
or acquisition premium amortization for the 
year.
Refiguring periodic interest shown on Form 
1099-OID. If you disposed of a debt instrument 
or acquired it from another holder during the 
year, see Bonds Sold Between Interest Dates , 
earlier, for information about the treatment of 
periodic interest that may be shown in box 2 of 
Form 1099-OID for that instrument.
Certificates of deposit (CDs). A CD is a debt 
instrument. If you buy a CD with a maturity of 
more than 1 year, you must include in income 
each year a part of the total interest due and re-
port it in the same manner as other OID.
This also applies to similar deposit arrange-
ments with banks, building and loan associa-
tions, etc., including:
• Time deposits,
• Bonus plans,
• Savings certificates,
• Deferred income certificates,
• Bonus savings certificates, and
• Growth savings certificates.
Bearer CDs.  CDs issued after 1982 must 
generally be in registered form. Bearer CDs are 
CDs not in registered form. They aren't issued 
in the depositor's name and are transferable 
from one individual to another.
Banks must provide the IRS and the person 
redeeming a bearer CD with a Form 1099-INT .
More information. See Publication 550, chap-
ter 1 for more information about OID and related 
topics, such as market discount bonds.
When To Report 
Interest Income
When to report your interest income depends 
on whether you use the cash method or an ac-
crual method to report income.
Cash method.  Most individual taxpayers use 
the cash method. If you use this method, you 
generally report your interest income in the year 
in which you actually or constructively receive it. 
However, there are special rules for reporting 
the discount on certain debt instruments. See 
U.S. Savings Bonds  and Original Issue Dis-
count (OID), earlier.
Example. On September 1, 2021, you 
loaned another individual $2,000 at 4% interest, 
compounded annually. Y ou aren't in the busi-
ness of lending money. The note stated that 
principal and interest would be due on August 
31, 2023. In 2023, you received $2,163. 20 
($2,000 principal and $163.20 interest). If you 
use the cash method, you must include in in-
come on your 2023 return the $163.20 interest 
you received in that year.
Constructive receipt. Y ou constructively re-
ceive income when it is credited to your account 
or made available to you. Y ou don't need to 
have physical possession of it. For example, 
you are considered to receive interest, divi-
dends, or other earnings on any deposit or ac-
count in a bank, savings and loan, or similar fi-
nancial institution, or interest on life insurance 
policy dividends left to accumulate, when they 
are credited to your account and subject to your 
withdrawal.
Y ou constructively receive income on the de-
posit or account even if you must:
• Make withdrawals in multiples of even 
amounts;
• Give a notice to withdraw before making 
the withdrawal;
• Withdraw all or part of the account to with-
draw the earnings; or
• Pay a penalty on early withdrawals, unless 
the interest you are to receive on an early 
withdrawal or redemption is substantially 
less than the interest payable at maturity.
Accrual method.  If you use an accrual 
method, you report your interest income when 
you earn it, whether or not you have received it. 
Interest is earned over the term of the debt in-
strument.
Example. If, in the previous example, you 
use an accrual method, you must include the in-
terest in your income as you earn it. Y ou would 
report the interest as follows: 2021, $26. 67; 
2022, $81.06; and 2023, $55.47.
Coupon bonds. Interest on bearer bonds with 
detachable coupons is generally taxable in the 
year the coupon becomes due and payable. It 
doesn't matter when you mail the coupon for 
payment.
How To Report
Interest Income
Generally, you report all your taxable interest in-
come on Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 2b.
Schedule B (Form 1040).  Y ou must com-
plete Schedule B (Form 1040), Part I, if you file 
Form 1040 or 1040-SR and any of the following 
apply.
1. Y our taxable interest income is more than 
$1,500.
2. Y ou are claiming the interest exclusion un-
der the Education Savings Bond Program 
(discussed earlier).
3. Y ou received interest from a seller-fi-
nanced mortgage, and the buyer used the 
property as a home.
4. Y ou received a Form 1099-INT for U.S. 
savings bond interest that includes 
amounts you reported in a previous tax 
year.
5. Y ou received, as a nominee, interest that 
actually belongs to someone else.
Page 63 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17 (2023) Chapter 6 Interest Income 61

6. Y ou received a Form 1099-INT for interest 
on frozen deposits.
7. Y ou received a Form 1099-INT for interest 
on a bond you bought between interest 
payment dates.
8. Y ou are reporting OID in an amount less 
than the amount shown on Form 
1099-OID.
9. Y ou reduce interest income from bonds by 
amortizable bond premium.
In Part I, line 1, list each payer's name and the 
amount received from each. If you received a 
Form 1099 -INT or Form 1099 -OID from a bro-
kerage firm, list the brokerage firm as the payer.
The box references discussed below 
are from the January 2022 revisions of 
Form 1099 -INT and Form 1099 -DIV . 
Later revisions may have different box referen-
ces.
Reporting tax -exempt interest.  T otal your 
tax-exempt interest (such as interest or accrued 
OID on certain state and municipal bonds, in-
cluding zero coupon municipal bonds) reported 
on Form 1099 -INT , box 8; Form 1099 -OID, 
box 11; and exempt -interest dividends from a 
mutual fund or other regulated investment com-
pany reported on Form 1099 -DIV , box 12. Add 
these amounts to any other tax -exempt interest 
you received. Report the total on line 2a of Form 
1040 or 1040-SR.
Form 1099-INT , box 9, and Form 1099-DIV , 
box 13, show the tax -exempt interest subject to 
the AMT on Form 6251. These amounts are al-
ready included in the amounts on Form 
1099-INT , box 8, and Form 1099 -DIV , box 12. 
Don't add the amounts in Form 1099-INT , box 9, 
and Form 1099-DIV , box 13, to, or subtract them 
from, the amounts on Form 1099 -INT , box 8, 
and Form 1099-DIV , box 12.
Don't report interest from an IRA as 
tax-exempt interest.
Form 1099 -INT. Y our taxable interest income, 
except for interest from U.S. savings bonds and 
T reasury obligations, is shown in box 1 of Form 
1099-INT . Add this amount to any other taxable 
interest income you received. See the Form 
1099-INT Instructions for Recipient if you have 
interest from a security acquired at a premium. 
Y ou must report all of your taxable interest in-
come even if you don't receive a Form 
1099-INT . Contact your financial institution if 
you don't receive a Form 1099 -INT by February 
15. Y our identifying number may be truncated 
on any Form 1099-INT you receive.
If you forfeited interest income because of 
the early withdrawal of a time deposit, the de-
ductible amount will be shown on Form 
1099-INT in box 2. See Penalty on early with-
drawal of savings in Publication 550, chapter 1.
Box 3 of Form 1099 -INT shows the interest 
income you received from U.S. savings bonds, 
T reasury bills, T reasury notes, and T reasury 
bonds. Generally, add the amount shown in 
box 3 to any other taxable interest income you 
received. If part of the amount shown in box 3 
was previously included in your interest income, 
see U.S. savings bond interest previously repor-
ted, later. If you acquired the security at a 
CAUTION
!
CAUTION
!
premium, see the Form 1099 -INT Instructions 
for Recipient.
Box 4 of Form 1099 -INT will contain an 
amount if you were subject to backup withhold-
ing. Include the amount from box 4 on Form 
1040 or 1040 -SR, line 25b (federal income tax 
withheld).
Box 5 of Form 1099 -INT shows investment 
expenses. This amount is not deductible. See 
chapter 12  for more information about invest-
ment expenses.
Box 6 of Form 1099 -INT shows foreign tax 
paid. Y ou may be able to claim this tax as a de-
duction or a credit on your Form 1040 or 
1040-SR. See your tax return instructions.
Box 7 of Form 1099 -INT shows the country 
or U.S. territory to which the foreign tax was 
paid.
U.S. savings bond interest previously re-
ported. If you received a Form 1099 -INT for 
U.S. savings bond interest, the form may show 
interest you don't have to report. See Form 
1099-INT for U.S. savings bonds interest , ear-
lier.
On Schedule B (Form 1040), Part I, line 1, 
report all the interest shown on your Form 
1099-INT . Then follow these steps.
1. Several rows above line 2, enter a subtotal 
of all interest listed on line 1.
2. Below the subtotal, enter “U.S. Savings 
Bond Interest Previously Reported” and 
enter amounts previously reported or inter-
est accrued before you received the bond.
3. Subtract these amounts from the subtotal 
and enter the result on line 2.
More information. For more information about 
how to report interest income, see Publication 
550, chapter 1 or the instructions for the form 
you must file.
7.
Social Security 
and Equivalent 
Railroad 
Retirement 
Benefits
Reminders
Lines 1a through 1z on Forms 1040 and 
1040-SR. Line 1 was expanded and there are 
lines 1a through 1z. Some amounts that in prior 
years were reported on Form 1040, and some 
amounts reported on Form 1040 -SR, are now 
reported on Schedule 1.
• Scholarships and fellowship grants are 
now reported on Schedule 1, line 8r.
• Pension or annuity from a nonqualified de-
ferred compensation plan or a nongovern-
mental section 457 plan is now reported on 
Schedule 1, line 8t.
• Wages earned while incarcerated are now 
reported on Schedule 1, line 8u.
Line 6c on Forms 1040 and 1040 -SR.  A 
checkbox was added on line 6c. T axpayers who 
elect to use the lump -sum election method for 
their benefits will check this box. See 
Lump-Sum Election in Pub. 915, Social Security 
and Equivalent Railroad Retirement Benefits, 
for details.
Introduction
This chapter explains the federal income tax 
rules for social security benefits and equivalent 
tier 1 railroad retirement benefits. It explains the 
following topics.
• How to figure whether your benefits are 
taxable.
• How to report your taxable benefits.
• How to use the Social Security Benefits 
Worksheet (with examples).
• Deductions related to your benefits and 
how to treat repayments that are more than 
the benefits you received during the year.
Social security benefits include monthly re-
tirement, survivor, and disability benefits. They 
don’t include Supplemental Security Income 
(SSI) payments, which aren’t taxable.
Equivalent tier 1 railroad retirement benefits 
are the part of tier 1 benefits that a railroad em-
ployee or beneficiary would have been entitled 
to receive under the social security system. 
They are commonly called the social security 
equivalent benefit (SSEB) portion of tier 1 bene-
fits. 
If you received these benefits during 2023, 
you should have received a Form SSA -1099, 
Social Security Benefit Statement; or Form 
RRB-1099, Payments by the Railroad Retire-
ment Board. These forms show the amounts re-
ceived and repaid, and taxes withheld for the 
year. Y ou may receive more than one of these 
forms for the same year. Y ou should add the 
amounts shown on all the Forms SSA-1099 and 
Forms RRB-1099 you receive for the year to de-
termine the total amounts received and repaid, 
and taxes withheld for that year. See the Appen-
dix at the end of Pub. 915 for more information.
Note. When the term “benefits” is used in 
this chapter, it applies to both social security 
benefits and the SSEB portion of tier 1 railroad 
retirement benefits.
my Social Security  account. Social security 
beneficiaries may quickly and easily obtain in-
formation from the SSA's website with a my So-
cial Security account to:
• Keep track of your earnings and verify 
them every year,
• Get an estimate of your future benefits if 
you are still working,
Page 64 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
62 Chapter 7 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement 
Benefits
Publication 17 (2023)

• Get a letter with proof of your benefits if 
you currently receive them,
• Change your address,
• Start or change your direct deposit,
• Get a replacement Medicare card, and
• Get a replacement Form SSA-1099 for the 
tax season.
For more information and to set up an account, 
go to SSA.gov/myaccount.
What isn’t covered in this chapter.  This 
chapter doesn’t cover the tax rules for the fol-
lowing railroad retirement benefits.
• Non-social security equivalent benefit 
(NSSEB) portion of tier 1 benefits.
• Tier 2 benefits.
• Vested dual benefits.
• Supplemental annuity benefits.
For information on these benefits, see Pub. 575, 
Pension and Annuity Income.
This chapter doesn’t cover the tax rules for 
social security benefits reported on Form 
SSA-1042S, Social Security Benefit Statement; 
or Form RRB -1042S, Statement for Nonresi-
dent Alien Recipients of Payments by the Rail-
road Retirement Board. For information about 
these benefits, see Pub. 519, U.S. T ax Guide for 
Aliens; and Pub. 915.
This chapter also doesn’t cover the tax rules 
for foreign social security benefits. These bene-
fits are taxable as annuities, unless they are ex-
empt from U.S. tax or treated as a U.S. social 
security benefit under a tax treaty.
Useful Items
Y ou may want to see:
Publication
501 Dependents, Standard Deduction, 
and Filing Information
505 T ax Withholding and Estimated T ax
519 U.S. T ax Guide for Aliens
575 Pension and Annuity Income
590-A Contributions to Individual 
Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)
915 Social Security and Equivalent 
Railroad Retirement Benefits
Form (and Instructions)
1040-ES Estimated T ax for Individuals
SSA-1099 Social Security Benefit 
Statement
RRB-1099 Payments by the Railroad 
Retirement Board
W-4V Voluntary Withholding Request
For these and other useful items, go to IRS.gov/
Forms.
Are Any of Your 
Benefits Taxable?
T o find out whether any of your benefits may be 
taxable, compare the base amount  (explained 
later) for your filing status with the total of:
  501
  505
  519
  575 
  590-A 
  915 
  1040-ES
  SSA-1099
  RRB-1099
  W-4V
1. One-half of your benefits; plus
2. All your other income, including tax-ex-
empt interest.
Exclusions. When making this comparison, 
don’t reduce your other income by any exclu-
sions for:
• Interest from qualified U.S. savings bonds,
• Employer-provided adoption benefits,
• Interest on education loans,
• Foreign earned income or foreign housing, 
or
• Income earned by bona fide residents of 
American Samoa or Puerto Rico.
Children's benefits. The rules in this chapter 
apply to benefits received by children. See Who 
is taxed, later.
Figuring total income.  T o figure the total of 
one-half of your benefits plus your other in-
come, use Worksheet 7 -1, discussed later. If 
the total is more than your base amount, part of 
your benefits may be taxable.
If you are married and file a joint return for 
2023, you and your spouse must combine your 
incomes and your benefits to figure whether any 
of your combined benefits are taxable. Even if 
your spouse didn’t receive any benefits, you 
must add your spouse's income to yours to fig-
ure whether any of your benefits are taxable.
If the only income you received during 
2023 was your social security or the 
SSEB portion of tier 1 railroad retire-
ment benefits, your benefits generally aren’t tax-
able and you probably don’t have to file a return. 
If you have income in addition to your benefits, 
you may have to file a return even if none of 
your benefits are taxable. See Do I Have T o File 
a Return? in chapter 1, earlier; Pub. 501; or your 
tax return instructions to find out if you have to 
file a return.
Base amount. Y our base amount is:
• $25,000 if you are single, head of house-
hold, or qualifying surviving spouse;
• $25,000 if you are married filing separately 
and lived apart from your spouse for all of 
2023;
• $32,000 if you are married filing jointly; or
• $0 if you are married filing separately and 
lived with your spouse at any time during 
2023.
Worksheet 7-1. Y ou can use Worksheet 7-1 to 
figure the amount of income to compare with 
your base amount. This is a quick way to check 
whether some of your benefits may be taxable.
TIP
Worksheet 7-1. A Quick Way To Check if Your 
Benefits May Be Taxable
Note. If you plan to file a joint income tax return, 
include your spouse's amounts, if any, on lines 
A, C, and D.
A. Enter the total amount from 
box 5 of all your Forms 
SSA-1099 and RRB-1099. 
Include the full amount of 
any lump-sum benefit 
payments received in 2023, 
for 2023 and earlier years. 
(If you received more than 
one form, combine the 
amounts from box 5 and 
enter the total.) ....... A. 
Note. If the amount on line A is zero or less, 
stop here; none of your benefits are taxable this 
year.
B. Multiply line A by 50% 
(0.50) ............. B. 
C. Enter your total income that 
is taxable (excluding line A), 
such as pensions, wages, 
interest, ordinary dividends, 
and capital gain 
distributions. Don’t reduce 
your income by any 
deductions, exclusions 
(listed earlier), or 
exemptions .......... C. 
D. Enter any tax-exempt 
interest income, such as 
interest on municipal 
bonds ............. D. 
E. Add lines B, C, and D .... E. 
Note. Compare the amount on line E to your 
base amount for your filing status. If the 
amount on line E equals or is less than the base 
amount for your filing status, none of your 
benefits are taxable this year. If the amount on 
line E is more than your base amount, some of 
your benefits may be taxable and you will need 
to complete Worksheet 1 in Pub. 915 (or the 
Social Security Benefits Worksheet in your tax 
form instructions). If none of your benefits are 
taxable, but you must otherwise file a tax return, 
see Benefits not taxable, later, under How T o 
Report Y our Benefits.
Example. Y ou and your spouse (both over 
65) are filing a joint return for 2023 and you both 
received social security benefits during the year. 
In January 2024, you received a Form 
SSA-1099 showing net benefits of $1,500 in 
box 5. Y our spouse received a Form SSA-1099 
showing net benefits of $700 in box 5. Y ou also 
received a taxable pension of $30,100 and in-
terest income of $700. Y ou didn’t have any 
tax-exempt interest income. Y our benefits aren’t 
taxable for 2023 because your income, as fig-
ured in Worksheet 7 -1, isn’t more than your 
base amount ($32,000) for married filing jointly.
Even though none of your benefits are taxa-
ble, you must file a return for 2023 because your 
taxable gross income ($30,800) exceeds the 
minimum filing requirement amount for your fil-
ing status.
Page 65 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17 (2023) Chapter 7 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement 
Benefits
63

Filled-in Worksheet 7-1. A Quick Way To 
Check if Your Benefits May Be Taxable
Note. If you plan to file a joint income tax return, 
include your spouse's amounts, if any, on lines 
A, C, and D.
A. Enter the total amount from 
box 5 of all your Forms 
SSA-1099 and RRB-1099. 
Include the full amount of 
any lump-sum benefit 
payments received in 2023, 
for 2023 and earlier years. 
(If you received more than 
one form, combine the 
amounts from box 5 and 
enter the total.) ....... A. $2,200
Note. If the amount on line A is zero or less, 
stop here; none of your benefits are taxable this 
year.
B. Multiply line A by 50% 
(0.50) ............. B. 1,100
C. Enter your total income that 
is taxable (excluding line A), 
such as pensions, wages, 
interest, ordinary dividends, 
and capital gain 
distributions. Don’t reduce 
your income by any 
deductions, exclusions 
(listed earlier), or 
exemptions .......... C. 30,800
D. Enter any tax-exempt 
interest income, such as 
interest on municipal 
bonds ............ D. -0-
E. Add lines B, C, and D ... E. $31,900
Note. Compare the amount on line E to your 
base amount for your filing status. If the 
amount on line E equals or is less than the base 
amount for your filing status, none of your 
benefits are taxable this year. If the amount on 
line E is more than your base amount, some of 
your benefits may be taxable and you will need 
to complete Worksheet 1 in Pub. 915 (or the 
Social Security Benefits Worksheet in your tax 
form instructions). If none of your benefits are 
taxable, but you otherwise must file a tax return, 
see Benefits not taxable, later, under How T o 
Report Y our Benefits.
Who is taxed. Benefits are included in the tax-
able income (to the extent they are taxable) of 
the person who has the legal right to receive the 
benefits. For example, if you and your child re-
ceive benefits, but the check for your child is 
made out in your name, you must use only your 
part of the benefits to see whether any benefits 
are taxable to you. One -half of the part that be-
longs to your child must be added to your child's 
other income to see whether any of those bene-
fits are taxable to your child.
Repayment of benefits.  Any repayment of 
benefits you made during 2023 must be sub-
tracted from the gross benefits you received in 
2023. It doesn’t matter whether the repayment 
was for a benefit you received in 2023 or in an 
earlier year. If you repaid more than the gross 
benefits you received in 2023, see Repayments 
More Than Gross Benefits, later.
Y our gross benefits are shown in box 3 of 
Form SSA-1099 or RRB-1099. Y our repayments 
are shown in box 4. The amount in box 5 shows 
your net benefits for 2023 (box 3 minus box 4). 
Use the amount in box 5 to figure whether any 
of your benefits are taxable.
Tax withholding and estimated tax.  Y ou can 
choose to have federal income tax withheld 
from your social security benefits and/or the 
SSEB portion of your tier 1 railroad retirement 
benefits. If you choose to do this, you must 
complete a Form W-4V .
If you don’t choose to have income tax with-
held, you may have to request additional with-
holding from other income or pay estimated tax 
during the year. For details, see chapter 4, ear-
lier; Pub. 505; or the Instructions for Form 
1040-ES.
How To Report Your 
Benefits
If part of your benefits are taxable, you must use 
Form 1040 or 1040-SR.
Reporting on Form 1040 or 1040-SR. Report 
your net benefits (the total amount from box 5 of 
all your Forms SSA -1099 and Forms 
RRB-1099) on line 6a and the taxable part on 
line 6b. If you are married filing separately and 
you lived apart from your spouse for all of 2023, 
also enter “D” to the right of the word “benefits” 
on line 6a.
Benefits not taxable. Report your net benefits 
(the total amount from box 5 of all your Forms 
SSA-1099 and Forms RRB -1099) on Form 
1040 or 1040 -SR, line 6a. Enter -0- on Form 
1040 or 1040 -SR, line 6b. If you are married fil-
ing separately and you lived apart from your 
spouse for all of 2023, also enter “D” to the right 
of the word “benefits” on Form 1040 or 
1040-SR, line 6a.
How Much Is Taxable?
If part of your benefits are taxable, how much is 
taxable depends on the total amount of your 
benefits and other income. Generally, the higher 
that total amount, the greater the taxable part of 
your benefits.
Maximum taxable part.  Generally, up to 50% 
of your benefits will be taxable. However, up to 
85% of your benefits can be taxable if either of 
the following situations applies to you.
• The total of one-half of your benefits and all 
your other income is more than $34,000 
($44,000 if you are married filing jointly).
• Y ou are married filing separately and lived 
with your spouse at any time during 2023.
Which worksheet to use.  A worksheet you 
can use to figure your taxable benefits is in the 
Instructions for Form 1040. Y ou can use either 
that worksheet or Worksheet 1 in Pub. 915, un-
less any of the following situations applies to 
you.
1. Y ou contributed to a traditional individual 
retirement arrangement (IRA) and you or 
your spouse is covered by a retirement 
plan at work. In this situation, you must 
use the special worksheets in Appendix B 
of Pub. 590-A to figure both your IRA de-
duction and your taxable benefits.
2. Situation 1 doesn’t apply and you take an 
exclusion for interest from qualified U.S. 
savings bonds (Form 8815), for adoption 
benefits (Form 8839), for foreign earned 
income or housing (Form 2555), or for in-
come earned in American Samoa (Form 
4563) or Puerto Rico by bona fide resi-
dents. In this situation, you must use 
Worksheet 1 in Pub. 915 to figure your tax-
able benefits.
3. Y ou received a lump-sum payment for an 
earlier year. In this situation, also complete 
Worksheet 2 or 3 and Worksheet 4 in Pub. 
915. See Lump-sum election next.
Lump-sum election. Y ou must include the tax-
able part of a lump -sum (retroactive) payment 
of benefits received in 2023 in your 2023 in-
come, even if the payment includes benefits for 
an earlier year.
Line 6c: Check the box on line 6c if you 
elect to use the lump -sum election 
method for your benefits. If any of your 
benefits are taxable for 2023 and they include a 
lump-sum benefit payment that was for an ear-
lier year, you may be able to reduce the taxable 
amount with the lump -sum election. See 
Lump-Sum Election in Pub. 915 for details.
This type of lump -sum benefit payment 
shouldn’t be confused with the 
lump-sum death benefit that both the 
SSA and RRB pay to many of their beneficia-
ries. No part of the lump -sum death benefit is 
subject to tax.
Generally, you use your 2023 income to fig-
ure the taxable part of the total benefits re-
ceived in 2023. However, you may be able to 
figure the taxable part of a lump -sum payment 
for an earlier year separately, using your income 
for the earlier year. Y ou can elect this method if 
it lowers your taxable benefits.
Making the election.  If you received a 
lump-sum benefit payment in 2023 that includes 
benefits for one or more earlier years, follow the 
instructions in Pub. 915 under Lump-Sum Elec-
tion to see whether making the election will 
lower your taxable benefits. That discussion 
also explains how to make the election.
Because the earlier year's taxable ben-
efits are included in your 2023 income, 
no adjustment is made to the earlier 
year's return. Don’t file an amended return for 
the earlier year.
Examples
The following are a few examples you can use 
as a guide to figure the taxable part of your ben-
efits.
Example 1.  George White is single and 
files Form 1040 for 2023. He received the fol-
lowing income in 2023.
TIP
TIP
CAUTION
!
Page 66 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
64 Chapter 7 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement 
Benefits
Publication 17 (2023)

Fully taxable pension ........ $18,600
Wages from part-time job .....  9,400
T axable interest income ...... 990
T otal .................. $28,990
George also received social security bene-
fits during 2023. The Form SSA -1099 he re-
ceived in January 2024 shows $5,980 in box 5. 
T o figure his taxable benefits, George com-
pletes the worksheet shown here.
Filled-in Worksheet 1.
Figuring Your Taxable Benefits
1. Enter the total amount from 
box 5 of all your Forms 
SSA-1099 and RRB-1099. Also 
enter this amount on Form 1040 
or 1040-SR, line 6a ....... $5,980
2. Multiply line 1 by 50% (0.50) ....... 2,990
3. Combine the amounts from Form 1040 
or 1040-SR, lines 1z, 2b, 3b, 4b, 5b, 7, 
and 8 ................... 28,990
4. Enter the amount, if any, from Form 
1040 or 1040-SR, line 2a ........ -0-
5. Enter the total of any exclusions/
adjustments for:
• Adoption benefits (Form 8839, 
line 28),
• Foreign earned income or housing 
(Form 2555, lines 45 and 50), and
• Certain income of bona fide 
residents of American Samoa 
(Form 4563, line 15) or Puerto 
Rico ........ ........ -0-
6. Combine lines 2, 3, 4, and 5 above ... 31,980
7. Enter the total of the amounts from 
Schedule 1 (Form 1040), lines 11 
through 20, and 23 and 25 ........ -0-
8. Is the amount on line 7 less than the 
amount on line 6? 
No.
STOP None of your social security 
benefits are taxable. Enter -0- on Form 
1040 or 1040-SR, line 6b.
Yes. Subtract line 7 from line 6 ..... 31,980
9. If you are:
• Married filing jointly, enter 
$32,000; or 
• Single, head of household, 
qualifying surviving spouse, or 
married filing separately and you 
lived apart from your spouse for 
all of 2023, enter $25,000 .. .. 25,000
Note. If you are married filing separately 
and you lived with your spouse at any 
time in 2023, skip lines 9 through 16, 
multiply line 8 by 85% (0.85), and enter 
the result on line 17. Then, go to line 18. 
10. Is the amount on line 9 less than the 
amount on line 8? 
No.
STOP None of your benefits are 
taxable. Enter -0- on Form 1040 or 
1040-SR, line 6b. If you are married 
filing separately and you lived apart 
from your spouse for all of 2023, be sure 
you entered “D” to the right of the word 
“benefits” on Form 1040 or 1040-SR, 
line 6a.
Yes. Subtract line 9 from line 8 ..... 6,980
11. Enter $12,000 if married filing jointly; or 
$9,000 if single, head of household, 
qualifying surviving spouse, or married 
filing separately and you lived apart 
from your spouse for all of 2023 ..... 9,000
12. Subtract line 11 from line 10. If zero or 
less, enter -0- ............... -0- 
13. Enter the smaller of line 10 
or line 11 ................. 6,980
14. Multiply line 13 by 50% (0.50) ...... 3,490
15. Enter the smaller of line 2 or line 14 .. 2,990
16. Multiply line 12 by 85% (0.85). If line 12 
is zero, enter -0- ............. -0- 
17. Add lines 15 and 16 ........... 2,990
18. Multiply line 1 by 85% (0.85) ....... 5,083
19. Taxable benefits. Enter the smaller of 
line 17 or line 18. Also enter this amount 
on Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 6b ... $2,990
The amount on line 19 of George's work-
sheet shows that $2,990 of his social security 
benefits is taxable. On line 6a of his Form 1040, 
George enters his net benefits of $5,980. On 
line 6b, he enters his taxable benefits of $2,990.
Example 2.  Ray and Alice Hopkins file a 
joint return on Form 1040 for 2023. Ray is re-
tired and received a fully taxable pension of 
$15,500. He also received social security bene-
fits, and his Form SSA-1099 for 2023 shows net 
benefits of $5,600 in box 5. Alice worked during 
the year and had wages of $14,000. She made 
a deductible payment to her IRA account of 
$1,000 and isn’t covered by a retirement plan at 
work. Ray and Alice have two savings accounts 
with a total of $250 in taxable interest income. 
They complete Worksheet 1, shown below, en-
tering $29,750 ($15,500 + $14,000 + $250) on 
line 3. They find none of Ray's social security 
benefits are taxable. On Form 1040, they enter 
$5,600 on line 6a and -0- on line 6b.
Filled-in Worksheet 1.
Figuring Your Taxable Benefits
1. Enter the total amount from 
box 5 of all your Forms 
SSA-1099 and RRB-1099. Also 
enter this amount on Form 1040 
or 1040-SR, line 6a ....... $5,600
2. Multiply line 1 by 50% (0.50) ... 2,800
3. Combine the amounts from Form 
1040 or 1040-SR, lines 1z, 2b, 
3b, 4b, 5b, 7, and 8 ........ 29,750
4. Enter the amount, if any, from 
Form 1040 or 1040-SR, 
line 2a ............... -0-
5. Enter the total of any exclusions/
adjustments for:
• Adoption benefits (Form 8839, 
line 28),
• Foreign earned income or housing 
(Form 2555, lines 45 and 50), and
• Certain income of bona fide 
residents of American Samoa 
(Form 4563, line 15) or Puerto 
Rico ........ ........ -0-
6. Combine lines 2, 3, 4, and 5 
above ............... 32,550
7. Enter the total of the amounts 
from Schedule 1 (Form 1040), 
lines 11 through 20, and 23 and 
25 ................. 1,000
8. Is the amount on line 7 less than the 
amount on line 6? 
No.
STOP None of your social security 
benefits are taxable. Enter -0- on Form 
1040 or 1040-SR, line 6b.
Yes. Subtract line 7 from 
line 6 ............... 31,550
9. If you are:
• Married filing jointly, enter 
$32,000; or 
• Single, head of household, 
qualifying surviving spouse, or 
married filing separately and you 
lived apart from your spouse for 
all of 2023, enter $25,000 .. .. 32,000
Note. If you are married filing separately 
and you lived with your spouse at any 
time in 2023, skip lines 9 through 16, 
multiply line 8 by 85% (0.85), and enter 
the result on line 17. Then, go to line 18. 
10. Is the amount on line 9 less than the 
amount on line 8? 
No.
STOP None of your benefits are 
taxable. Enter -0- on Form 1040 or 
1040-SR, line 6b. If you are married 
filing separately and you lived apart 
from your spouse for all of 2023, be sure 
you entered “D” to the right of the word 
“benefits” on Form 1040 or 1040-SR, 
line 6a.
Yes. Subtract line 9 from line 8 .....  
Page 67 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17 (2023) Chapter 7 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement 
Benefits
65

11. Enter $12,000 if married filing jointly; or 
$9,000 if single, head of household, 
qualifying surviving spouse, or married 
filing separately and you lived apart 
from your spouse for all of 2023 .....  
12. Subtract line 11 from line 10. If zero or 
less, enter -0- ...............  
13. Enter the smaller of line 10 
or line 11 .................  
14. Multiply line 13 by 50% (0.50) ......  
15. Enter the smaller of line 2 or line 14 ..  
16. Multiply line 12 by 85% (0.85). If line 12 
is zero, enter -0- .............  
17. Add lines 15 and 16 ...........  
18. Multiply line 1 by 85% (0.85) .......  
19. Taxable benefits. Enter the smaller of 
line 17 or line 18. Also enter this amount 
on Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 6b ...
Example 3.  Joe and Betty Johnson file a 
joint return on Form 1040 for 2023. Joe is a re-
tired railroad worker and in 2023 received the 
SSEB portion of tier 1 railroad retirement bene-
fits. Joe's Form RRB -1099 shows $10,000 in 
box 5. Betty is a retired government worker and 
received a fully taxable pension of $38,000. 
They had $2,300 in taxable interest income plus 
interest of $200 on a qualified U.S. savings 
bond. The savings bond interest qualified for 
the exclusion. They figure their taxable benefits 
by completing Worksheet 1, shown below. Be-
cause they have qualified U.S. savings bond in-
terest, they follow the note at the beginning of 
the worksheet and use the amount from line 2 of 
their Schedule B (Form 1040) on line 3 of the 
worksheet instead of the amount from line 2b of 
their Form 1040. On line 3 of the worksheet, 
they enter $40,500 ($38,000 + $2,500).
Filled-in Worksheet 1.
Figuring Your Taxable Benefits
Before you begin:
• If you are married filing separately and you lived 
apart from your spouse for all of 2023, enter “D” 
to the right of the word “benefits” on Form 1040 
or 1040-SR, line 6a.
• Don’t use this worksheet if you repaid benefits 
in 2023 and your total repayments (box 4 of 
Forms SSA-1099 and RRB-1099) were more 
than your gross benefits for 2023 (box 3 of 
Forms SSA-1099 and RRB-1099). None of your 
benefits are taxable for 2023. For more 
information, see Repayments More Than Gross 
Benefits, later.
• If you are filing Form 8815, Exclusion of Interest 
From Series EE and I U.S. Savings Bonds 
Issued After 1989, don’t include the amount 
from line 2b of Form 1040 or 1040-SR on line 3 
of this worksheet. Instead, include the amount 
from Schedule B (Form 1040), line 2.
1. Enter the total amount from 
box 5 of all your Forms 
SSA-1099 and RRB-1099. Also 
enter this amount on Form 1040 
or 1040-SR, line 6a ....... $10,000
2. Multiply line 1 by 50% (0.50) ....... 5,000
3. Combine the amounts from Form 1040 
or 1040-SR, lines 1z, 2b, 3b, 4b, 5b, 7, 
and 8 ................... 40,500
4. Enter the amount, if any, from Form 
1040 or 1040-SR, line 2a ........ -0-
5. Enter the total of any exclusions/
adjustments for:
• Adoption benefits (Form 8839, 
line 28),
• Foreign earned income or housing 
(Form 2555, lines 45 and 50), and
• Certain income of bona fide 
residents of American Samoa 
(Form 4563, line 15) or Puerto 
Rico ........ ........ -0-
6. Combine lines 2, 3, 4, and 5 above ... 45,500
7. Enter the total of the amounts from 
Schedule 1 (Form 1040), lines 11 
through 20, and 23 and 25 ........ -0-
8. Is the amount on line 7 less than the 
amount on line 6? 
No.
STOP None of your social security 
benefits are taxable. Enter -0- on Form 
1040 or 1040-SR, line 6b.
Yes. Subtract line 7 from line 6 ..... 45,500
9. If you are:
• Married filing jointly, enter 
$32,000; or 
• Single, head of household, 
qualifying surviving spouse, or 
married filing separately and you 
lived apart from your spouse for 
all of 2023, enter $25,000 .. .. 32,000
Note. If you are married filing separately 
and you lived with your spouse at any 
time in 2023, skip lines 9 through 16, 
multiply line 8 by 85% (0.85), and enter 
the result on line 17. Then, go to line 18. 
10. Is the amount on line 9 less than the 
amount on line 8? 
No.
STOP None of your benefits are 
taxable. Enter -0- on Form 1040 or 
1040-SR, line 6b. If you are married 
filing separately and you lived apart 
from your spouse for all of 2023, be sure 
you entered “D” to the right of the word 
“benefits” on Form 1040 or 1040-SR, 
line 6a.
Yes. Subtract line 9 from line 8 ..... 13,500
11. Enter $12,000 if married filing jointly; or 
$9,000 if single, head of household, 
qualifying surviving spouse, or married 
filing separately and you lived apart 
from your spouse for all of 2023 ..... 12,000
12. Subtract line 11 from line 10. If zero or 
less, enter -0- ...............  1,500
13. Enter the smaller of line 10 
or line 11 ................. 12,000
14. Multiply line 13 by 50% (0.50) ...... 6,000
15. Enter the smaller of line 2 or line 14 .. 5,000
16. Multiply line 12 by 85% (0.85). If line 12 
is zero, enter -0- ............. 1,275
17. Add lines 15 and 16 ........... 6,275
18. Multiply line 1 by 85% (0.85) ....... 8,500
19. Taxable benefits. Enter the smaller of 
line 17 or line 18. Also enter this amount 
on Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 6b ... $6,275
More than 50% of Joe's net benefits are tax-
able because the income on line 8 of the work-
sheet ($45,500) is more than $44,000. (See 
Maximum taxable part under How Much Is T ax-
able, earlier.) Joe and Betty enter $10,000 on 
Form 1040, line 6a; and $6,275 on Form 1040, 
line 6b.
Deductions Related to 
Your Benefits
Y ou may be entitled to deduct certain amounts 
related to the benefits you receive.
Disability payments.  Y ou may have received 
disability payments from your employer or an in-
surance company that you included as income 
on your tax return in an earlier year. If you re-
ceived a lump -sum payment from the SSA or 
RRB, and you had to repay the employer or in-
surance company for the disability payments, 
you can take an itemized deduction for the part 
of the payments you included in gross income 
in the earlier year. If the amount you repay is 
more than $3,000, you may be able to claim a 
tax credit instead. Claim the deduction or credit 
in the same way explained under Repayment of 
benefits received in an earlier year  under Re-
payments More Than Gross Benefits next.
Repayments More Than 
Gross Benefits
In some situations, your Form SSA -1099 or 
RRB-1099 will show that the total benefits you 
repaid (box 4) are more than the gross benefits 
(box 3) you received. If this occurred, your net 
Page 68 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
66 Chapter 7 Social Security and Equivalent Railroad Retirement 
Benefits
Publication 17 (2023)

benefits in box 5 will be a negative figure (a fig-
ure in parentheses) and none of your benefits 
will be taxable. Don’t use a worksheet in this 
case. If you receive more than one form, a neg-
ative figure in box 5 of one form is used to offset 
a positive figure in box 5 of another form for that 
same year.
If you have any questions about this nega-
tive figure, contact your local SSA office or your 
local RRB field office.
Joint return. If you and your spouse file a joint 
return, and your Form SSA -1099 or RRB -1099 
has a negative figure in box 5, but your spouse's 
doesn’t, subtract the amount in box 5 of your 
form from the amount in box 5 of your spouse's 
form. Y ou do this to get your net benefits when 
figuring if your combined benefits are taxable.
Example. John and Mary file a joint return 
for 2023. John received Form SSA -1099 show-
ing $3,000 in box 5. Mary also received Form 
SSA-1099 and the amount in box 5 was ($500). 
John and Mary will use $2,500 ($3,000 minus 
$500) as the amount of their net benefits when 
figuring if any of their combined benefits are tax-
able.
Repayment of benefits received in an ear-
lier year. If the total amount shown in box 5 of 
all of your Forms SSA -1099 and RRB-1099 is a 
negative figure, you may be able to deduct part 
of this negative figure that represents benefits 
you included in gross income in an earlier year if 
the figure is more than $3,000. If the figure is 
$3,000 or less, it is a miscellaneous itemized 
deduction and can no longer be deducted.
Deduction more than $3,000.  If this de-
duction is more than $3,000, you should figure 
your tax two ways.
1. Figure your tax for 2023 with the itemized 
deduction included on Schedule A (Form 
1040), line 16.
2. Figure your tax for 2023 in the following 
steps.
a. Figure the tax without the itemized de-
duction included on Schedule A 
(Form 1040), line 16.
b. For each year after 1983 for which 
part of the negative figure represents 
a repayment of benefits, refigure your 
taxable benefits as if your total bene-
fits for the year were reduced by that 
part of the negative figure. Then refig-
ure the tax for that year.
c. Subtract the total of the refigured tax 
amounts in (b) from the total of your 
actual tax amounts.
d. Subtract the result in (c) from the re-
sult in (a).
Compare the tax figured in methods 1 and 2. 
Y our tax for 2023 is the smaller of the two 
amounts. If method 1 results in less tax, take 
the itemized deduction on Schedule A (Form 
1040), line 16. If method 2 results in less tax, 
claim a credit for the amount from step 2c 
above on Schedule 3 (Form 1040), line 13z. En-
ter “I.R.C. 1341” on the entry line. If both meth-
ods produce the same tax, deduct the repay-
ment on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 16.
8.
Other Income
What’s New
Temporary allowance of 100% business 
meal deduction has expired.  Section 210 of 
the T axpayer Certainty and Disaster T ax Relief 
Act of 2020 provided for the temporary allow-
ance of a 100% business meal deduction for 
food or beverages provided by a restaurant and 
paid or incurred after December 31, 2020, and 
before January 1, 2023.
Reminders
Unemployment compensation.  If you re-
ceived unemployment compensation but did not 
receive Form 1099-G, Certain Government Pay-
ments, through the mail, you may need to ac-
cess your information through your state’s web-
site to get your electronic Form 1099-G.
Introduction
Y ou must include on your return all items of in-
come you receive in the form of money, prop-
erty, and services unless the tax law states that 
you don’t include them. Some items, however, 
are only partly excluded from income. This 
chapter discusses many kinds of income and 
explains whether they’re taxable or nontaxable.
• Income that’s taxable must be reported on 
your tax return and is subject to tax.
• Income that’s nontaxable may have to be 
shown on your tax return but isn’t taxable.
This chapter begins with discussions of the 
following income items.
• Bartering.
• Canceled debts.
• Sales parties at which you’re the host or 
hostess.
• Life insurance proceeds.
• Partnership income.
• S corporation income.
• Recoveries (including state income tax re-
funds).
• Rents from personal property.
• Repayments.
• Royalties.
• Unemployment benefits.
• Welfare and other public assistance bene-
fits.
These discussions are followed by brief discus-
sions of other income items.
Useful Items
Y ou may want to see:
Publication
502 Medical and Dental Expenses
504 Divorced or Separated Individuals
523 Selling Y our Home
525 T axable and Nontaxable Income
544 Sales and Other Dispositions of 
Assets
547 Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
550 Investment Income and Expenses
4681 Canceled Debts, Foreclosures, 
Repossessions, and Abandonments
For these and other useful items, go to IRS.gov/
Forms.
Bartering
Bartering is an exchange of property or serv-
ices. Y ou must include in your income, at the 
time received, the fair market value of property 
or services you receive in bartering. If you ex-
change services with another person and you 
both have agreed ahead of time on the value of 
the services, that value will be accepted as fair 
market value unless the value can be shown to 
be otherwise.
Generally, you report this income on Sched-
ule C (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From Busi-
ness. However, if the barter involves an ex-
change of something other than services, such 
as in Example 3 below, you may have to use an-
other form or schedule instead.
Example 1.  Y ou’re a self-employed attor-
ney who performs legal services for a client, a 
small corporation. The corporation gives you 
shares of its stock as payment for your services. 
Y ou must include the fair market value of the 
shares in your income on Schedule C (Form 
1040) in the year you receive them.
Example 2.  Y ou’re self-employed and a 
member of a barter club. The club uses “credit 
units” as a means of exchange. It adds credit 
units to your account for goods or services you 
provide to members, which you can use to pur-
chase goods or services offered by other mem-
bers of the barter club. The club subtracts credit 
units from your account when you receive 
goods or services from other members. Y ou 
must include in your income the value of the 
credit units that are added to your account, 
even though you may not actually receive goods 
or services from other members until a later tax 
year.
Example 3.  Y ou own a small apartment 
building. In return for 6 months rent -free use of 
an apartment, an artist gives you a work of art 
she created. Y ou must report as rental income 
on Schedule E (Form 1040), Supplemental In-
come and Loss, the fair market value of the art-
work, and the artist must report as income on 
Schedule C (Form 1040) the fair rental value of 
the apartment.
  502 
  504 
  523 
  525 
  544 
  547 
  550 
  4681 
Page 69 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17 (2023) Chapter 8 Other Income 67

Form 1099 -B from barter exchange.  If you 
exchanged property or services through a bar-
ter exchange, Form 1099 -B, Proceeds From 
Broker and Barter Exchange T ransactions, or a 
similar statement from the barter exchange 
should be sent to you by February 15, 2024. It 
should show the value of cash, property, serv-
ices, credits, or scrip you received from ex-
changes during 2023. The IRS will also receive 
a copy of Form 1099-B.
Canceled Debts
In most cases, if a debt you owe is canceled or 
forgiven, other than as a gift or bequest, you 
must include the canceled amount in your in-
come. Y ou have no income from the canceled 
debt if it’s intended as a gift to you. A debt in-
cludes any indebtedness for which you’re liable 
or which attaches to property you hold.
If the debt is a nonbusiness debt, report the 
canceled amount on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), 
line 8c. If it’s a business debt, report the amount 
on Schedule C (Form 1040) (or on Schedule F 
(Form 1040), Profit or Loss From Farming, if the 
debt is farm debt and you’re a farmer).
Form 1099-C. If a federal government agency, 
financial institution, or credit union cancels or 
forgives a debt you owe of $600 or more, you 
will receive a Form 1099 -C, Cancellation of 
Debt. The amount of the canceled debt is 
shown in box 2.
Interest included in canceled debt.  If any 
interest is forgiven and included in the amount 
of canceled debt in box 2, the amount of inter-
est will also be shown in box 3. Whether or not 
you must include the interest portion of the can-
celed debt in your income depends on whether 
the interest would be deductible when you paid 
it. See Deductible debt under Exceptions, later.
If the interest wouldn’t be deductible (such 
as interest on a personal loan), include in your 
income the amount from box 2 of Form 1099 -C. 
If the interest would be deductible (such as on a 
business loan), include in your income the net 
amount of the canceled debt (the amount 
shown in box 2 less the interest amount shown 
in box 3).
Discounted mortgage loan.  If your financial 
institution offers a discount for the early pay-
ment of your mortgage loan, the amount of the 
discount is canceled debt. Y ou must include the 
canceled amount in your income.
Mortgage relief upon sale or other disposi-
tion. If you’re personally liable for a mortgage 
(recourse debt), and you’re relieved of the mort-
gage when you dispose of the property, you 
may realize gain or loss up to the fair market 
value of the property. Also, to the extent the 
mortgage discharge exceeds the fair market 
value of the property, it’s income from discharge 
of indebtedness unless it qualifies for exclusion 
under Excluded debt, later. Report any income 
from discharge of indebtedness on nonbusi-
ness debt that doesn’t qualify for exclusion as 
other income on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), 
line 8c.
If you aren’t personally liable for a mortgage 
(nonrecourse debt), and you’re relieved of the 
mortgage when you dispose of the property 
(such as through foreclosure), that relief is 
included in the amount you realize. Y ou may 
have a taxable gain if the amount you realize ex-
ceeds your adjusted basis in the property. Re-
port any gain on nonbusiness property as a 
capital gain.
See Pub. 4681 for more information.
Stockholder debt. If you’re a stockholder in a 
corporation and the corporation cancels or for-
gives your debt to it, the canceled debt is a con-
structive distribution that’s generally dividend in-
come to you. For more information, see Pub. 
542, Corporations.
If you’re a stockholder in a corporation and 
you cancel a debt owed to you by the corpora-
tion, you generally don’t realize income. This is 
because the canceled debt is considered as a 
contribution to the capital of the corporation 
equal to the amount of debt principal that you 
canceled.
Repayment of canceled debt. If you included 
a canceled amount in your income and later pay 
the debt, you may be able to file a claim for re-
fund for the year the amount was included in in-
come. Y ou can file a claim on Form 1040 -X, 
Amended U.S. Individual Income T ax Return, if 
the statute of limitations for filing a claim is still 
open. The statute of limitations generally 
doesn’t end until 3 years after the due date of 
your original return.
Exceptions
There are several exceptions to the inclusion of 
canceled debt in income. These are explained 
next.
Student loans. Generally, if you are responsi-
ble for making loan payments, and the loan is 
canceled or repaid by someone else, you must 
include the amount that was canceled or paid 
on your behalf in your gross income for tax pur-
poses. However, in certain circumstances, you 
may be able to exclude amounts from gross in-
come as a result of the cancellation or repay-
ment of certain student loans. These exclusions 
are for:
• Student loan cancellation due to meeting 
certain work requirements;
• Cancellation of certain loans after Decem-
ber 31, 2020, and before January 1, 2026 
(see Special rule for student loan dis-
charges for 2021 through 2025); or
• Certain student loan repayment assistance 
programs.
Exclusion for student loan cancellation due 
to meeting certain work requirements.  If 
your student loan is canceled in part or in whole 
in 2023 due to meeting certain work require-
ments, you may not have to include the can-
celed debt in your income. T o qualify for this 
work-related exclusion, your loan must have 
been made by a qualified lender to assist you in 
attending an eligible educational organization 
described in section 170(b)(1)(A)(ii). In addition, 
the cancellation must be pursuant to a provision 
in the student loan that all or part of the debt will 
be canceled if you work:
• For a certain period of time,
• In certain professions, and
• For any of a broad class of employers.
The cancellation of your loan won’t 
qualify for tax -free treatment if it was 
made by an educational organization or 
tax-exempt section 501(c)(3) organization and 
was canceled because of the services you per-
formed for either organization. See Exception, 
later.
Educational organization described in 
section 170(b)(1)(A)(ii).  This is an educa-
tional organization that maintains a regular fac-
ulty and curriculum and normally has a regularly 
enrolled body of students in attendance at the 
place where it carries on its educational activi-
ties.
Qualified lenders.  These include the fol-
lowing.
1. The United States, or an instrumentality or 
agency thereof.
2. A state or territory of the United States; or 
the District of Columbia; or any political 
subdivision thereof.
3. A public benefit corporation that is tax-ex-
empt under section 501(c)(3); and that 
has assumed control of a state, county, or 
municipal hospital; and whose employees 
are considered public employees under 
state law.
4. An educational organization described in 
section 170(b)(1)(A)(ii), if the loan is 
made:
a. As part of an agreement with an entity 
described in (1), (2), or (3) under 
which the funds to make the loan were 
provided to the educational organiza-
tion; or
b. Under a program of the educational 
organization that is designed to en-
courage its students to serve in occu-
pations with unmet needs or in areas 
with unmet needs where services pro-
vided by the students (or former stu-
dents) are for or under the direction of 
a governmental unit or a tax-exempt 
section 501(c)(3) organization.
Special rule for student loan discharges for 
2021 through 2025.  The American Rescue 
Plan Act of 2021 modified the treatment of stu-
dent loan forgiveness for discharges in 2021 
through 2025. Generally, if you are responsible 
for making loan payments, and the loan is can-
celed or repaid by someone else, you must in-
clude the amount that was canceled or paid on 
your behalf in your gross income for tax purpo-
ses. However, in certain circumstances, you 
may be able to exclude this amount from gross 
income if the loan was one of the following.
• A loan for postsecondary educational ex-
penses.
• A private education loan.
• A loan from an educational organization 
described in section 170(b)(1)(A)(ii).
• A loan from an organization exempt from 
tax under section 501(a) to refinance a stu-
dent loan.
See Pub. 4681 and Pub. 970 for more informa-
tion.
CAUTION
!
Page 70 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
68 Chapter 8 Other Income Publication 17 (2023)

Loan for postsecondary educational expen-
ses.  This is any loan provided expressly for 
postsecondary education, regardless of 
whether provided through the educational or-
ganization or directly to the borrower, if such 
loan was made, insured, or guaranteed by one 
of the following.
• The United States, or an instrumentality or 
agency thereof.
• A state or territory of the United States; or 
the District of Columbia; or any political 
subdivision thereof.
• An eligible educational organization.
Eligible educational organization.  An eligi-
ble educational organization is generally any 
accredited public, nonprofit, or proprietary (pri-
vately owned profit -making) college, university, 
vocational school, or other postsecondary edu-
cational organization. Also, the organization 
must be eligible to participate in a student aid 
program administered by the U.S. Department 
of Education.
An eligible educational organization also in-
cludes certain educational organizations loca-
ted outside the United States that are eligible to 
participate in a student aid program adminis-
tered by the U.S. Department of Education.
The educational organization should 
be able to tell you if it is an eligible edu-
cational organization.
Private education loan.  A private education 
loan is a loan provided by a private educational 
lender that:
• Is not made, insured, or guaranteed under 
Title IV of the Higher Education Act of 
1965; and
• Is issued expressly for postsecondary edu-
cational expenses to a borrower, regard-
less of whether the loan is provided 
through the educational organization that 
the student attends or directly to the bor-
rower from the private educational lender. 
A private education loan does not include 
an extension of credit under an open end 
consumer credit plan, a reverse mortgage 
transaction, a residential mortgage trans-
action, or any other loan that is secured by 
real property or a dwelling.
Private educational lender.  A private educa-
tional lender is one of the following.
• A financial institution that solicits, makes, 
or extends private education loans.
• A federal credit union that solicits, makes 
or extends private education loans.
• Any other person engaged in the business 
of soliciting, making, or extending private 
education loans.
The cancellation of your loan won’t 
qualify for tax-free treatment if it is can-
celed because of services you per-
formed for the private educational lender that 
made the loan or other organization that provi-
ded the funds.
Loan from an educational organization de-
scribed in section 170(b)(1)(A)(ii).  This is 
TIP
CAUTION
!
any loan made by the organization if the loan is 
made:
• As part of an agreement with an entity de-
scribed earlier under which the funds to 
make the loan were provided to the educa-
tional organization; or
• Under a program of the educational organi-
zation that is designed to encourage its 
students to serve in occupations with un-
met needs or in areas with unmet needs 
where the services provided by the stu-
dents (or former students) are for or under 
the direction of a governmental unit or 
tax-exempt section 501(c)(3) organization.
Educational organization described in sec-
tion 170(b)(1)(A)(ii).  This is an educational 
organization that maintains a regular faculty and 
curriculum and normally has a regularly enrolled 
body of students in attendance at the place 
where it carries on its educational activities.
The cancellation of your loan won’t 
qualify for tax -free treatment if it was 
made by an educational organization, a 
tax-exempt section 501(c)(3) organization, or a 
private education lender (as defined in section 
140(a)(7) of the T ruth in Lending Act) and was 
canceled because of the services you per-
formed for either such organization or private 
education lender. See Exception, later.
Section 501(c)(3) organization.  This is 
any corporation, community chest, fund, or 
foundation organized and operated exclusively 
for one or more of the following purposes.
• Charitable.
• Religious.
• Educational.
• Scientific.
• Literary.
• T esting for public safety.
• Fostering national or international amateur 
sports competition (but only if none of its 
activities involve providing athletic facilities 
or equipment).
• The prevention of cruelty to children or ani-
mals.
Exception.  In most cases, the cancellation 
of a student loan made by an educational or-
ganization because of services you performed 
for that organization or another organization that 
provided the funds for the loan must be inclu-
ded in gross income on your tax return.
Refinanced loan.  If you refinanced a stu-
dent loan with another loan from an eligible ed-
ucational organization or a tax -exempt organi-
zation, that loan may also be considered as 
made by a qualified lender. The refinanced loan 
is considered made by a qualified lender if it’s 
made under a program of the refinancing organ-
ization that is designed to encourage students 
to serve in occupations with unmet needs or in 
areas with unmet needs where the services re-
quired of the students are for or under the direc-
tion of a governmental unit or a tax -exempt sec-
tion 501(c)(3) organization.
CAUTION
!
Student loan repayment assistance.  Stu-
dent loan repayments made to you are tax free 
if you received them for any of the following.
• The National Health Service Corps 
(NHSC) Loan Repayment Program.
• A state education loan repayment program 
eligible for funds under the Public Health 
Service Act.
• Any other state loan repayment or loan for-
giveness program that is intended to pro-
vide for the increased availability of health 
services in underserved or health profes-
sional shortage areas (as determined by 
such a state).
Y ou can’t deduct the interest you paid 
on a student loan to the extent pay-
ments were made through your partici-
pation in any of the above programs.
Deductible debt.  Y ou don’t have income from 
the cancellation of a debt if your payment of the 
debt would be deductible. This exception ap-
plies only if you use the cash method of ac-
counting. For more information, see chapter 5 of 
Pub. 334, T ax Guide for Small Business.
Price reduced after purchase.  In most ca-
ses, if the seller reduces the amount of debt you 
owe for property you purchased, you don’t have 
income from the reduction. The reduction of the 
debt is treated as a purchase price adjustment 
and reduces your basis in the property.
Excluded debt. Don’t include a canceled debt 
in your gross income in the following situations.
• The debt is canceled in a bankruptcy case 
under title 11 of the U.S. Code. See Pub. 
908, Bankruptcy T ax Guide. 
• The debt is canceled when you’re insol-
vent. However, you can’t exclude any 
amount of canceled debt that’s more than 
the amount by which you’re insolvent. See 
Pub. 908. 
• The debt is qualified farm debt and is can-
celed by a qualified person. See chapter 3 
of Pub. 225, Farmer's T ax Guide. 
• The debt is qualified real property business 
debt. See chapter 5 of Pub. 334. 
• The cancellation is intended as a gift.
• The debt is qualified principal residence in-
debtedness.
Forgiveness of Paycheck Protection Pro-
gram (PPP) loans.  The forgiveness of a PPP 
loan creates tax -exempt income, so although 
you don't need to report the income from the 
forgiveness of your PPP loan on Form 1040 or 
1040-SR, you do need to report certain informa-
tion related to your PPP loan.
Rev. Proc. 2021-48, 2021-49 I.R.B. 835, per-
mits taxpayers to treat tax -exempt income re-
sulting from the forgiveness of a PPP loan as re-
ceived or accrued (1) as, and to the extent that, 
eligible expenses are paid or incurred; (2) when 
you apply for forgiveness of the PPP loan; or (3) 
when forgiveness of the PPP loan is granted. If 
you have tax -exempt income resulting from the 
forgiveness of a PPP loan, attach a statement to 
your return reporting each tax year for which 
you are applying Rev. Proc. 2021-48, and which 
section of Rev. Proc. 2021-48 you are applying–
CAUTION
!
Page 71 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17 (2023) Chapter 8 Other Income 69

either section 3.01(1), (2), or (3). Any statement 
should include the following information for 
each PPP loan.
1. Y our name, address, and ITIN or SSN;
2. A statement that you are applying or ap-
plied section 3.01(1), (2), or (3) of Rev. 
Proc. 2021-48, and for what tax year;
3. The amount of tax-exempt income from 
forgiveness of the PPP loan that you are 
treating as received or accrued and for 
what tax year; and
4. Whether forgiveness of the PPP loan has 
been granted as of the date you file your 
return.
Write “RP 2021 -48” at the top of your at-
tached statement.
Host
If you host a party or event at which sales are 
made, any gift or gratuity you receive for giving 
the event is a payment for helping a direct seller 
make sales. Y ou must report this item as in-
come at its fair market value.
Y our out-of-pocket party expenses are sub-
ject to the 50% limit for meal expenses. For tax 
years 2018 and after, no deduction is allowed 
for any expenses related to activities generally 
considered entertainment, amusement, or rec-
reation. T axpayers may continue to deduct 50% 
of the cost of business meals if the taxpayer (or 
an employee of the taxpayer) is present and the 
food or beverages are not considered lavish or 
extravagant. The meals may be provided to a 
current or potential business customer, client, 
consultant, or similar business contact. Food 
and beverages that are provided during enter-
tainment events will not be considered enter-
tainment if purchased separately from the 
event.
For more information about the limit for meal 
expenses, see Pub. 463, T ravel, Gift, and Car 
Expenses.
Life Insurance 
Proceeds
Life insurance proceeds paid to you because of 
the death of the insured person aren’t taxable 
unless the policy was turned over to you for a 
price. This is true even if the proceeds were 
paid under an accident or health insurance pol-
icy or an endowment contract. However, inter-
est income received as a result of life insurance 
proceeds may be taxable.
Proceeds not received in installments.  If 
death benefits are paid to you in a lump sum or 
other than at regular intervals, include in your in-
come only the benefits that are more than the 
amount payable to you at the time of the insured 
person's death. If the benefit payable at death 
isn’t specified, you include in your income the 
benefit payments that are more than the present 
value of the payments at the time of death.
Proceeds received in installments.  If you 
receive life insurance proceeds in installments, 
you can exclude part of each installment from 
your income.
T o determine the excluded part, divide the 
amount held by the insurance company (gener-
ally, the total lump sum payable at the death of 
the insured person) by the number of install-
ments to be paid. Include anything over this ex-
cluded part in your income as interest.
Surviving spouse.  If your spouse died be-
fore October 23, 1986, and insurance proceeds 
paid to you because of the death of your spouse 
are received in installments, you can exclude up 
to $1,000 a year of the interest included in the 
installments. If you remarry, you can continue to 
take the exclusion.
Surrender of policy for cash.  If you surren-
der a life insurance policy for cash, you must in-
clude in income any proceeds that are more 
than the cost of the life insurance policy. In most 
cases, your cost (or investment in the contract) 
is the total of premiums that you paid for the life 
insurance policy, less any refunded premiums, 
rebates, dividends, or unrepaid loans that 
weren’t included in your income.
Y ou should receive a Form 1099-R showing 
the total proceeds and the taxable part. Report 
these amounts on lines 5a and 5b of Form 1040 
or 1040-SR.
More information.  For more information, see 
Life Insurance Proceeds in Pub. 525.
Endowment Contract 
Proceeds
An endowment contract is a policy under which 
you’re paid a specified amount of money on a 
certain date unless you die before that date, in 
which case the money is paid to your designa-
ted beneficiary. Endowment proceeds paid in a 
lump sum to you at maturity are taxable only if 
the proceeds are more than the cost of the pol-
icy. T o determine your cost, subtract any 
amount that you previously received under the 
contract and excluded from your income from 
the total premiums (or other consideration) paid 
for the contract. Include in your income the part 
of the lump -sum payment that’s more than your 
cost.
Accelerated Death 
Benefits
Certain amounts paid as accelerated death 
benefits under a life insurance contract or viati-
cal settlement before the insured's death are ex-
cluded from income if the insured is terminally 
or chronically ill.
Viatical settlement. This is the sale or assign-
ment of any part of the death benefit under a life 
insurance contract to a viatical settlement pro-
vider. A viatical settlement provider is a person 
who regularly engages in the business of buy-
ing or taking assignment of life insurance con-
tracts on the lives of insured individuals who are 
terminally or chronically ill and who meets the 
requirements of section 101(g)(2)(B) of the In-
ternal Revenue Code.
Exclusion for terminal illness.  Accelerated 
death benefits are fully excludable if the insured 
is a terminally ill individual. This is a person who 
has been certified by a physician as having an 
illness or physical condition that can reasonably 
be expected to result in death within 24 months 
from the date of the certification.
Exclusion for chronic illness. If the insured is 
a chronically ill individual who’s not terminally ill, 
accelerated death benefits paid on the basis of 
costs incurred for qualified long -term care serv-
ices are fully excludable. Accelerated death 
benefits paid on a per diem or other periodic ba-
sis are excludable up to a limit. For 2023, this 
limit is $420. It applies to the total of the accel-
erated death benefits and any periodic pay-
ments received from long -term care insurance 
contracts. For information on the limit and the 
definitions of chronically ill individual, qualified 
long-term care services, and long -term care in-
surance contracts, see Long-T erm Care Insur-
ance Contracts under Sickness and Injury Ben-
efits in Pub. 525.
Exception.  The exclusion doesn’t apply to any 
amount paid to a person (other than the in-
sured) who has an insurable interest in the life 
of the insured because the insured:
• Is a director, officer, or employee of the 
person; or
• Has a financial interest in the person's 
business.
Form 8853. T o claim an exclusion for acceler-
ated death benefits made on a per diem or 
other periodic basis, you must file Form 8853, 
Archer MSAs and Long -T erm Care Insurance 
Contracts, with your return. Y ou don’t have to 
file Form 8853 to exclude accelerated death 
benefits paid on the basis of actual expenses 
incurred.
Public Safety Officer Killed 
or Injured in the Line of 
Duty
A spouse, former spouse, and child of a public 
safety officer killed in the line of duty can ex-
clude from gross income survivor benefits re-
ceived from a governmental section 401(a) plan 
attributable to the officer’s service. See section 
101(h).
A public safety officer who’s permanently 
and totally disabled or killed in the line of duty 
and a surviving spouse or child can exclude 
from income death or disability benefits re-
ceived from the federal Bureau of Justice Assis-
tance or death benefits paid by a state program. 
See section 104(a)(6).
For this purpose, the term “public safety offi-
cer” includes law enforcement officers, firefight-
ers, chaplains, and rescue squad and ambu-
lance crew members. For more information, see 
Pub. 559, Survivors, Executors, and Administra-
tors.
Partnership Income
A partnership generally isn’t a taxable entity. 
The income, gains, losses, deductions, and 
credits of a partnership are passed through to 
the partners based on each partner's distribu-
tive share of these items.
Schedule K -1 (Form 1065).  Although a part-
nership generally pays no tax, it must file an in-
formation return on Form 1065, U.S. Return of 
Page 72 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
70 Chapter 8 Other Income Publication 17 (2023)

Partnership Income, and send Schedule K -1 
(Form 1065) to each partner. In addition, the 
partnership will send each partner a copy of the 
Partner's Instructions for Schedule K -1 (Form 
1065) to help each partner report his or her 
share of the partnership's income, deductions, 
credits, and tax preference items.
Keep Schedule K -1 (Form 1065) for 
your records. Don’t attach it to your 
Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, unless you’re 
specifically required to do so.
For more information on partnerships, see 
Pub. 541, Partnerships.
Qualified joint venture.  If you and your 
spouse each materially participate as the only 
members of a jointly owned and operated busi-
ness, and you file a joint return for the tax year, 
you can make a joint election to be treated as a 
qualified joint venture instead of a partnership. 
T o make this election, you must divide all items 
of income, gain, loss, deduction, and credit at-
tributable to the business between you and your 
spouse in accordance with your respective in-
terests in the venture. For further information on 
how to make the election and which sched-
ule(s) to file, see the instructions for your indi-
vidual tax return.
S Corporation Income
In most cases, an S corporation doesn’t pay tax 
on its income. Instead, the income, losses, de-
ductions, and credits of the corporation are 
passed through to the shareholders based on 
each shareholder's pro rata share.
Schedule K -1 (Form 1120 -S). An S corpora-
tion must file a return on Form 1120 -S, U.S. In-
come T ax Return for an S Corporation, and 
send Schedule K -1 (Form 1120 -S) to each 
shareholder. In addition, the S corporation will 
send each shareholder a copy of the Share-
holder's Instructions for Schedule K -1 (Form 
1120-S) to help each shareholder report her or 
his share of the S corporation's income, losses, 
credits, and deductions.
Keep Schedule K -1 (Form 1120 -S) for 
your records. Don’t attach it to your 
Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, unless you’re 
specifically required to do so.
For more information on S corporations and 
their shareholders, see the Instructions for Form 
1120-S.
Recoveries
A recovery is a return of an amount you deduc-
ted or took a credit for in an earlier year. The 
most common recoveries are refunds, reim-
bursements, and rebates of deductions item-
ized on Schedule A (Form 1040). Y ou may also 
have recoveries of nonitemized deductions 
(such as payments on previously deducted bad 
debts) and recoveries of items for which you 
previously claimed a tax credit.
Tax benefit rule.  Y ou must include a recovery 
in your income in the year you receive it up to 
the amount by which the deduction or credit you 
took for the recovered amount reduced your tax 
in the earlier year. For this purpose, any in-
RECORDS
RECORDS
crease to an amount carried over to the current 
year that resulted from the deduction or credit is 
considered to have reduced your tax in the ear-
lier year. For more information, see Pub. 525.
Federal income tax refund.  Refunds of fed-
eral income taxes aren’t included in your in-
come because they’re never allowed as a de-
duction from income.
State tax refund. If you received a state or lo-
cal income tax refund (or credit or offset) in 
2023, you must generally include it in income if 
you deducted the tax in an earlier year. The 
payer should send Form 1099 -G to you by Jan-
uary 31, 2024. The IRS will also receive a copy 
of the Form 1099 -G. If you file Form 1040 or 
1040-SR, use the State and Local Income T ax 
Refund Worksheet in the 2023 instructions for 
Schedule 1 (Form 1040) to figure the amount (if 
any) to include in your income. See Pub. 525 for 
when you must use another worksheet.
If you could choose to deduct for a tax year 
either:
• State and local income taxes, or
• State and local general sales taxes, then
the maximum refund that you may have to in-
clude in income is limited to the excess of the 
tax you chose to deduct for that year over the 
tax you didn’t choose to deduct for that year. 
For examples, see Pub. 525.
Mortgage interest refund.  If you received a 
refund or credit in 2023 of mortgage interest 
paid in an earlier year, the amount should be 
shown in Form 1098, box 4, Mortgage Interest 
Statement. Don’t subtract the refund amount 
from the interest you paid in 2023. Y ou may 
have to include it in your income under the rules 
explained in the following discussions.
Interest on recovery.  Interest on any of the 
amounts you recover must be reported as inter-
est income in the year received. For example, 
report any interest you received on state or local 
income tax refunds on Form 1040, 1040 -SR, or 
1040-NR, line 2b.
Recovery and expense in same year.  If the 
refund or other recovery and the expense occur 
in the same year, the recovery reduces the de-
duction or credit and isn’t reported as income.
Recovery for 2 or more years.  If you receive 
a refund or other recovery that’s for amounts 
you paid in 2 or more separate years, you must 
allocate, on a pro rata basis, the recovered 
amount between the years in which you paid it. 
This allocation is necessary to determine the 
amount of recovery from any earlier years and 
to determine the amount, if any, of your allowa-
ble deduction for this item for the current year. 
For information on how to figure the allocation, 
see Recoveries in Pub. 525.
Itemized Deduction 
Recoveries
If you recover any amount that you deducted in 
an earlier year on Schedule A (Form 1040), you 
must generally include the full amount of the re-
covery in your income in the year you receive it.
Where to report.  Enter your state or local in-
come tax refund on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), 
line 1, and the total of all other recoveries as 
other income on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), 
line 8z.
Standard deduction limit.  Y ou are generally 
allowed to claim the standard deduction if you 
don’t itemize your deductions. Only your item-
ized deductions that are more than your stand-
ard deduction are subject to the recovery rule 
(unless you’re required to itemize your deduc-
tions). If your total deductions on the earlier 
year return weren’t more than your income for 
that year, include in your income this year the 
lesser of:
• Y our recoveries, or
• The amount by which your itemized deduc-
tions exceeded the standard deduction.
Example.  For 2022, you filed a joint return. 
Y our taxable income was $60,000 and you 
weren’t entitled to any tax credits. Y our standard 
deduction was $25,900, and you had itemized 
deductions of $27,400. In 2023, you received 
the following recoveries for amounts deducted 
on your 2022 return.
Medical expenses ............... $200
State and local income tax refund ....... 400
Refund of mortgage interest .......... 325
T otal recoveries................ $925
None of the recoveries were more than the de-
ductions taken for 2022. The difference be-
tween the state and local income tax you de-
ducted and your local general sales tax was 
more than $400.
Y our total recoveries are less than the 
amount by which your itemized deductions ex-
ceeded the standard deduction ($27,400 − 
$25,900 = $1,500), so you must include your to-
tal recoveries in your income for 2023. Report 
the state and local income tax refund of $400 
on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 1, and the bal-
ance of your recoveries, $525, on Schedule 1 
(Form 1040), line 8z.
Standard deduction for earlier years.  T o 
determine if amounts recovered in the current 
year must be included in your income, you must 
know the standard deduction for your filing sta-
tus for the year the deduction was claimed. 
Look in the instructions for your tax return from 
prior years to locate the standard deduction for 
the filing status for that prior year. If you filed 
Form 1040-NR, you couldn’t claim the standard 
deduction except for certain nonresident aliens 
from India (see Pub. 519).
Example.  Y ou filed a joint return on Form 
1040 for 2022 with taxable income of $45,000. 
Y our itemized deductions were $26,150. The 
standard deduction that you could have claimed 
was $25,900. In 2023, you recovered $2,100 of 
your 2022 itemized deductions. None of the re-
coveries were more than the actual deductions 
for 2022. Include $250 of the recoveries in your 
2023 income. This is the smaller of your recov-
eries ($2,100) or the amount by which your 
itemized deductions were more than the stand-
ard deduction ($26,150 − $25,900 = $250).
Recovery limited to deduction.  Y ou don’t in-
clude in your income any amount of your recov-
ery that’s more than the amount you deducted 
Page 73 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17 (2023) Chapter 8 Other Income 71

in the earlier year. The amount you include in 
your income is limited to the smaller of:
• The amount deducted on Schedule A 
(Form 1040), or
• The amount recovered.
Example.  During 2022, you paid $1,700 for 
medical expenses. Of this amount, you deduc-
ted $200 on your 2022 Schedule A (Form 
1040). In 2023, you received a $500 reimburse-
ment from your medical insurance for your 2022 
expenses. The only amount of the $500 reim-
bursement that must be included in your income 
for 2023 is $200 —the amount actually deduc-
ted.
Other recoveries.  See Recoveries in Pub. 
525 if:
• Y ou have recoveries of items other than 
itemized deductions, or
• Y ou received a recovery for an item for 
which you claimed a tax credit (other than 
investment credit or foreign tax credit) in a 
prior year.
Rents From Personal 
Property
If you rent out personal property, such as equip-
ment or vehicles, how you report your income 
and expenses is in most cases determined by:
• Whether or not the rental activity is a busi-
ness, and
• Whether or not the rental activity is con-
ducted for profit.
In most cases, if your primary purpose is in-
come or profit and you’re involved in the rental 
activity with continuity and regularity, your rental 
activity is a business.
Reporting business income and expenses. 
If you’re in the business of renting personal 
property, report your income and expenses on 
Schedule C (Form 1040). The form instructions 
have information on how to complete them.
Reporting nonbusiness income.  If you 
aren’t in the business of renting personal prop-
erty, report your rental income on Schedule 1 
(Form 1040), line 8l.
Reporting nonbusiness expenses.  If you 
rent personal property for profit, include your 
rental expenses in the total amount you enter on 
Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 24b, and see the 
instructions there.
If you don’t rent personal property for profit, 
your deductions are limited and you can’t report 
a loss to offset other income. See Activity not 
for profit under Other Income, later.
Repayments
If you had to repay an amount that you included 
in your income in an earlier year, you may be 
able to deduct the amount repaid from your in-
come for the year in which you repaid it. Or, if 
the amount you repaid is more than $3,000, you 
may be able to take a credit against your tax for 
the year in which you repaid it. Generally, you 
can claim a deduction or credit only if the 
repayment qualifies as an expense or loss in-
curred in your trade or business or in a for -profit 
transaction.
Type of deduction.  The type of deduction 
you’re allowed in the year of repayment de-
pends on the type of income you included in the 
earlier year. Y ou generally deduct the repay-
ment on the same form or schedule on which 
you previously reported it as income. For exam-
ple, if you reported it as self -employment in-
come, deduct it as a business expense on 
Schedule C (Form 1040) or Schedule F (Form 
1040). If you reported it as a capital gain, de-
duct it as a capital loss as explained in the In-
structions for Schedule D (Form 1040). If you 
reported it as wages, unemployment compen-
sation, or other nonbusiness income, you may 
be able to deduct it as an other itemized deduc-
tion if the amount repaid is over $3,000.
Beginning in 2018, you can no longer 
claim any miscellaneous itemized de-
ductions, so if the amount repaid was 
$3,000 or less, you are not able to deduct it 
from your income in the year you repaid it.
Repaid social security benefits. If you repaid 
social security benefits or equivalent railroad re-
tirement benefits, see Repayment of benefits. in 
chapter 7.
Repayment over $3,000.  If the amount you 
repaid was more than $3,000, you can deduct 
the repayment as an other itemized deduction 
on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 16, if you in-
cluded the income under a claim of right. This 
means that at the time you included the income, 
it appeared that you had an unrestricted right to 
it. However, you can choose to take a credit for 
the year of repayment. Figure your tax under 
both methods and compare the results. Use the 
method (deduction or credit) that results in less 
tax.
When determining whether the amount 
you repaid was more or less than 
$3,000, consider the total amount be-
ing repaid on the return. Each instance of re-
payment isn’t considered separately.
Method 1.  Figure your tax for 2023 claiming 
a deduction for the repaid amount. If you deduct 
it as an other itemized deduction, enter it on 
Schedule A (Form 1040), line 16.
Method 2.  Figure your tax for 2023 claiming 
a credit for the repaid amount. Follow these 
steps.
1. Figure your tax for 2023 without deducting 
the repaid amount.
2. Refigure your tax from the earlier year 
without including in income the amount 
you repaid in 2023.
3. Subtract the tax in (2) from the tax shown 
on your return for the earlier year. This is 
the credit.
4. Subtract the answer in (3) from the tax for 
2023 figured without the deduction (step 
1).
If method 1 results in less tax, deduct the 
amount repaid. If method 2 results in less tax, 
claim the credit figured in (3) above on Sched-
ule 3 (Form 1040), line 13b, by adding the 
CAUTION
!
CAUTION
!
amount of the credit to any other credits on this 
line, and see the instructions there.
An example of this computation can be 
found in Pub. 525.
Repaid wages subject to social security 
and Medicare taxes.  If you had to repay an 
amount that you included in your wages or com-
pensation in an earlier year on which social se-
curity, Medicare, or tier 1 RRTA taxes were paid, 
ask your employer to refund the excess amount 
to you. If the employer refuses to refund the 
taxes, ask for a statement indicating the amount 
of the overcollection to support your claim. File 
a claim for refund using Form 843, Claim for Re-
fund and Request for Abatement.
Repaid wages subject to Additional Medi-
care Tax.  Employers can’t make an adjust-
ment or file a claim for refund for Additional 
Medicare T ax withholding when there is a re-
payment of wages received by an employee in a 
prior year because the employee determines li-
ability for Additional Medicare T ax on the em-
ployee's income tax return for the prior year. If 
you had to repay an amount that you included in 
your wages or compensation in an earlier year, 
and on which Additional Medicare T ax was 
paid, you may be able to recover the Additional 
Medicare T ax paid on the amount. T o recover 
Additional Medicare T ax on the repaid wages or 
compensation, you must file Form 1040 -X for 
the prior year in which the wages or compensa-
tion was originally received. See the Instruc-
tions for Form 1040-X.
Royalties
Royalties from copyrights, patents, and oil, gas, 
and mineral properties are taxable as ordinary 
income. 
In most cases, you report royalties in Part I 
of Schedule E (Form 1040). However, if you 
hold an operating oil, gas, or mineral interest or 
are in business as a self-employed writer, inven-
tor, artist, etc., report your income and expen-
ses on Schedule C (Form 1040).
Copyrights and patents. Royalties from copy-
rights on literary, musical, or artistic works, and 
similar property, or from patents on inventions, 
are amounts paid to you for the right to use your 
work over a specified period of time. Royalties 
are generally based on the number of units 
sold, such as the number of books, tickets to a 
performance, or machines sold.
Oil, gas, and minerals.  Royalty income from 
oil, gas, and mineral properties is the amount 
you receive when natural resources are extrac-
ted from your property. The royalties are based 
on units, such as barrels, tons, etc., and are 
paid to you by a person or company that leases 
the property from you.
Depletion. If you’re the owner of an eco-
nomic interest in mineral deposits or oil and gas 
wells, you can recover your investment through 
the depletion allowance.
Coal and iron ore.  Under certain circum-
stances, you can treat amounts you receive 
from the disposal of coal and iron ore as pay-
ments from the sale of a capital asset, rather 
than as royalty income. For information about 
Page 74 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
72 Chapter 8 Other Income Publication 17 (2023)

gain or loss from the sale of coal and iron ore, 
see chapter 2 of Pub. 544.
Sale of property interest.  If you sell your 
complete interest in oil, gas, or mineral rights, 
the amount you receive is considered payment 
for the sale of property used in a trade or busi-
ness under section 1231, not royalty income. 
Under certain circumstances, the sale is subject 
to capital gain or loss treatment as explained in 
the Instructions for Schedule D (Form 1040). 
For more information on selling section 1231 
property, see chapter 3 of Pub. 544.
If you retain a royalty, an overriding royalty, 
or a net profit interest in a mineral property for 
the life of the property, you have made a lease 
or a sublease, and any cash you receive for the 
assignment of other interests in the property is 
ordinary income subject to a depletion allow-
ance.
Part of future production sold.  If you own 
mineral property but sell part of the future pro-
duction, in most cases you treat the money you 
receive from the buyer at the time of the sale as 
a loan from the buyer. Don’t include it in your in-
come or take depletion based on it.
When production begins, you include all the 
proceeds in your income, deduct all the produc-
tion expenses, and deduct depletion from that 
amount to arrive at your taxable income from 
the property.
Unemployment 
Benefits
The tax treatment of unemployment benefits 
you receive depends on the type of program 
paying the benefits.
Unemployment compensation.  Y ou must in-
clude in income all unemployment compensa-
tion you receive. Y ou should receive a Form 
1099-G showing in box 1 the total unemploy-
ment compensation paid to you. In most cases, 
you enter unemployment compensation on 
Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 7.
If you received unemployment com-
pensation but did not receive Form 
1099-G through the mail, you may 
need to access your information through your 
state’s website to get your electronic Form 
1099-G.
Types of unemployment compensation. 
Unemployment compensation generally in-
cludes any amount received under an unem-
ployment compensation law of the United 
States or of a state. It includes the following 
benefits.
• Benefits paid by a state or the District of 
Columbia from the Federal Unemployment 
T rust Fund.
• State unemployment insurance benefits.
• Railroad unemployment compensation 
benefits.
• Disability payments from a government 
program paid as a substitute for unemploy-
ment compensation. (Amounts received as 
workers' compensation for injuries or ill-
ness aren’t unemployment compensation. 
See chapter 5 for more information.)
CAUTION
!
• T rade readjustment allowances under the 
T rade Act of 1974.
• Unemployment assistance under the Dis-
aster Relief and Emergency Assistance 
Act.
• Unemployment assistance under the Air-
line Deregulation Act of 1978 Program.
Governmental program.  If you contribute 
to a governmental unemployment compensa-
tion program and your contributions aren’t de-
ductible, amounts you receive under the pro-
gram aren’t included as unemployment 
compensation until you recover your contribu-
tions. If you deducted all of your contributions to 
the program, the entire amount you receive un-
der the program is included in your income.
Repayment of unemployment compensa-
tion. If you repaid in 2023 unemployment com-
pensation you received in 2023, subtract the 
amount you repaid from the total amount you re-
ceived and enter the difference on Schedule 1 
(Form 1040), line 7. On the dotted line next to 
your entry, enter “Repaid” and the amount you 
repaid. If you repaid unemployment compensa-
tion in 2023 that you included in income in an 
earlier year, you can deduct the amount repaid 
on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 16, if you item-
ize deductions and the amount is more than 
$3,000. See Repayments, earlier.
Tax withholding. Y ou can choose to have 
federal income tax withheld from your unem-
ployment compensation. T o make this choice, 
complete Form W -4V , Voluntary Withholding 
Request, and give it to the paying office. T ax will 
be withheld at 10% of your payment.
If you don’t choose to have tax withheld 
from your unemployment compensa-
tion, you may be liable for estimated 
tax. If you don’t pay enough tax, either through 
withholding or estimated tax, or a combination 
of both, you may have to pay a penalty. For 
more information on estimated tax, see chap-
ter 4.
Supplemental unemployment benefits. 
Benefits received from an employer -financed 
fund (to which the employees didn’t contribute) 
aren’t unemployment compensation. They are 
taxable as wages. For more information, see 
Supplemental Unemployment Benefits  in sec-
tion 5 of Pub. 15 -A, Employer's Supplemental 
T ax Guide. Report these payments on line 1a of 
Form 1040 or 1040-SR.
Repayment of benefits.  Y ou may have to 
repay some of your supplemental unemploy-
ment benefits to qualify for trade readjustment 
allowances under the T rade Act of 1974. If you 
repay supplemental unemployment benefits in 
the same year you receive them, reduce the to-
tal benefits by the amount you repay. If you re-
pay the benefits in a later year, you must include 
the full amount of the benefits received in your 
income for the year you received them.
Deduct the repayment in the later year as an 
adjustment to gross income on Form 1040 or 
1040-SR. Include the repayment on Schedule 1 
(Form 1040), line 24e, and see the instructions 
there. If the amount you repay in a later year is 
more than $3,000, you may be able to take a 
CAUTION
!
credit against your tax for the later year instead 
of deducting the amount repaid. For more infor-
mation on this, see Repayments, earlier.
Private unemployment fund.  Unemployment 
benefit payments from a private (nonunion) fund 
to which you voluntarily contribute are taxable 
only if the amounts you receive are more than 
your total payments into the fund. Report the 
taxable amount on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), 
line 8z.
Payments by a union. Benefits paid to you as 
an unemployed member of a union from regular 
union dues are included in your income on 
Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 8z. However, if 
you contribute to a special union fund and your 
payments to the fund aren’t deductible, the un-
employment benefits you receive from the fund 
are includible in your income only to the extent 
they’re more than your contributions.
Guaranteed annual wage.  Payments you re-
ceive from your employer during periods of un-
employment, under a union agreement that 
guarantees you full pay during the year, are tax-
able as wages. Include them on line 1a of Form 
1040 or 1040-SR.
State employees.  Payments similar to a 
state's unemployment compensation may be 
made by the state to its employees who aren’t 
covered by the state's unemployment compen-
sation law. Although the payments are fully tax-
able, don’t report them as unemployment com-
pensation. Report these payments on Schedule 
1 (Form 1040), line 8z.
Welfare and Other 
Public Assistance 
Benefits
Don’t include in your income governmental ben-
efit payments from a public welfare fund based 
upon need, such as payments to blind individu-
als under a state public assistance law. Pay-
ments from a state fund for the victims of crime 
shouldn’t be included in the victims' incomes if 
they’re in the nature of welfare payments. Don’t 
deduct medical expenses that are reimbursed 
by such a fund. Y ou must include in your income 
any welfare payments that are compensation for 
services or that are obtained fraudulently.
Reemployment Trade Adjustment Assis-
tance (RTAA) payments.  RTAA payments re-
ceived from a state must be included in your in-
come. The state must send you Form 1099-G to 
advise you of the amount you should include in 
income. The amount should be reported on 
Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 8z.
Persons with disabilities.  If you have a disa-
bility, you must include in income compensation 
you receive for services you perform unless the 
compensation is otherwise excluded. However, 
you don’t include in income the value of goods, 
services, and cash that you receive, not in re-
turn for your services, but for your training and 
rehabilitation because you have a disability. Ex-
cludable amounts include payments for trans-
portation and attendant care, such as inter-
preter services for the deaf, reader services for 
the blind, and services to help individuals with 
an intellectual disability do their work.
Page 75 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17 (2023) Chapter 8 Other Income 73

Disaster relief grants.  Don’t include post -dis-
aster grants received under the Robert T . Staf-
ford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance 
Act in your income if the grant payments are 
made to help you meet necessary expenses or 
serious needs for medical, dental, housing, per-
sonal property, transportation, childcare, or fu-
neral expenses. Don’t deduct casualty losses or 
medical expenses that are specifically reim-
bursed by these disaster relief grants. If you 
have deducted a casualty loss for the loss of 
your personal residence and you later receive a 
disaster relief grant for the loss of the same resi-
dence, you may have to include part or all of the 
grant in your taxable income. See Recoveries, 
earlier. Unemployment assistance payments 
under the Act are taxable unemployment com-
pensation. See Unemployment compensation 
under Unemployment Benefits, earlier.
Disaster relief payments.  Y ou can exclude 
from income any amount you receive that’s a 
qualified disaster relief payment. A qualified dis-
aster relief payment is an amount paid to you:
1. T o reimburse or pay reasonable and nec-
essary personal, family, living, or funeral 
expenses that result from a qualified dis-
aster;
2. T o reimburse or pay reasonable and nec-
essary expenses incurred for the repair or 
rehabilitation of your home or repair or re-
placement of its contents to the extent it’s 
due to a qualified disaster;
3. By a person engaged in the furnishing or 
sale of transportation as a common carrier 
because of the death or personal physical 
injuries incurred as a result of a qualified 
disaster; or
4. By a federal, state, or local government; 
agency; or instrumentality in connection 
with a qualified disaster in order to pro-
mote the general welfare.
Y ou can exclude this amount only to the extent 
any expense it pays for isn’t paid for by insur-
ance or otherwise. The exclusion doesn’t apply 
if you were a participant or conspirator in a ter-
rorist action or a representative of one.
A qualified disaster is:
• A disaster which results from a terrorist or 
military action;
• A federally declared disaster; or
• A disaster which results from an accident 
involving a common carrier, or from any 
other event, which is determined to be 
catastrophic by the Secretary of the T reas-
ury or his or her delegate.
For amounts paid under item (4) above, a 
disaster is qualified if it’s determined by an ap-
plicable federal, state, or local authority to war-
rant assistance from the federal, state, or local 
government, agency, or instrumentality.
Disaster mitigation payments.  Y ou can ex-
clude from income any amount you receive 
that’s a qualified disaster mitigation payment. 
Qualified disaster mitigation payments are most 
commonly paid to you in the period immediately 
following damage to property as a result of a 
natural disaster. However, disaster mitigation 
payments are used to mitigate (reduce the se-
verity of) potential damage from future natural 
disasters. They’re paid to you through state and 
local governments based on the provisions of 
the Robert T . Stafford Disaster Relief and Emer-
gency Assistance Act or the National Flood In-
surance Act.
Y ou can’t increase the basis or adjusted ba-
sis of your property for improvements made with 
nontaxable disaster mitigation payments.
Home Affordable Modification Program 
(HAMP). If you benefit from Pay -for-Perform-
ance Success Payments under HAMP , the pay-
ments aren’t taxable.
Mortgage assistance payments under sec-
tion 235 of the National Housing Act.  Pay-
ments made under section 235 of the National 
Housing Act for mortgage assistance aren’t in-
cluded in the homeowner's income. Interest 
paid for the homeowner under the mortgage as-
sistance program can’t be deducted.
Medicare. Medicare benefits received under ti-
tle XVIII of the Social Security Act aren’t includi-
ble in the gross income of the individuals for 
whom they’re paid. This includes basic (Part A 
(Hospital Insurance Benefits for the Aged)) and 
supplementary (Part B (Supplementary Medical 
Insurance Benefits for the Aged)).
Social security benefits (including 
lump-sum payments attributable to prior 
years), Supplemental Security Income (SSI) 
benefits, and lump-sum death benefits. The 
Social Security Administration (SSA) provides 
benefits such as old -age benefits, benefits to 
disabled workers, and benefits to spouses and 
dependents. These benefits may be subject to 
federal income tax depending on your filing sta-
tus and other income. See chapter 7 in this pub-
lication and Pub. 915, Social Security and 
Equivalent Railroad Retirement Benefits, for 
more information. An individual originally denied 
benefits, but later approved, may receive a 
lump-sum payment for the period when benefits 
were denied (which may be prior years). See 
Pub. 915 for information on how to make a 
lump-sum election, which may reduce your tax 
liability. There are also other types of benefits 
paid by the SSA. However, SSI benefits and 
lump-sum death benefits (one -time payment to 
spouse and children of deceased) aren’t sub-
ject to federal income tax. For more information 
on these benefits, go to SSA.gov.
Nutrition Program for the Elderly. Food ben-
efits you receive under the Nutrition Program for 
the Elderly aren’t taxable. If you prepare and 
serve free meals for the program, include in 
your income as wages the cash pay you re-
ceive, even if you’re also eligible for food bene-
fits.
Payments to reduce cost of winter energy. 
Payments made by a state to qualified people to 
reduce their cost of winter energy use aren’t 
taxable.
Other Income
The following brief discussions are arranged in 
alphabetical order. Other income items briefly 
discussed below are referenced to publications 
which provide more topical information.
Activity not for profit.  Y ou must include on 
your return income from an activity from which 
you don’t expect to make a profit. An example of 
this type of activity is a hobby or a farm you op-
erate mostly for recreation and pleasure. Enter 
this income on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 8j. 
Deductions for expenses related to the activity 
are limited. They can’t total more than the in-
come you report and can be taken only if you 
itemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040).
Alaska Permanent Fund dividend.  If you re-
ceived a payment from Alaska's mineral income 
fund (Alaska Permanent Fund dividend), report 
it as income on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), 
line 8g. The state of Alaska sends each recipi-
ent a document that shows the amount of the 
payment with the check. The amount is also re-
ported to the IRS.
Alimony. Include in your income on Schedule 
1 (Form 1040), line 2a, any taxable alimony pay-
ments you receive. Amounts you receive for 
child support aren’t income to you. Alimony and 
child support payments are discussed in Pub. 
504.
Don’t include alimony payments you re-
ceive under a divorce or separation 
agreement (1) executed after 2018, or 
(2) executed before 2019 but later modified if 
the modification expressly states the repeal of 
the deduction for alimony payments applies to 
the modification.
Bribes. If you receive a bribe, include it in your 
income.
Campaign contributions. These contributions 
aren’t income to a candidate unless they’re di-
verted to her or his personal use. T o be nontax-
able, the contributions must be spent for cam-
paign purposes or kept in a fund for use in 
future campaigns. However, interest earned on 
bank deposits, dividends received on contrib-
uted securities, and net gains realized on sales 
of contributed securities are taxable and must 
be reported on Form 1120 -POL, U.S. Income 
T ax Return for Certain Political Organizations. 
Excess campaign funds transferred to an office 
account must be included in the officeholder's 
income on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 8z, in 
the year transferred.
Carpools. Don’t include in your income 
amounts you receive from the passengers for 
driving a car in a carpool to and from work. 
These amounts are considered reimbursement 
for your expenses. However, this rule doesn’t 
apply if you have developed carpool arrange-
ments into a profit -making business of trans-
porting workers for hire.
Cash rebates. A cash rebate you receive from 
a dealer or manufacturer of an item you buy 
isn’t income, but you must reduce your basis by 
the amount of the rebate.
Example. Y ou buy a new car for $24,000 
cash and receive a $2,000 rebate check from 
the manufacturer. The $2,000 isn’t income to 
you. Y our basis in the car is $22,000. This is the 
basis on which you figure gain or loss if you sell 
the car and depreciation if you use it for busi-
ness.
Casualty insurance and other reimburse-
ments. Y ou generally shouldn’t report these re-
imbursements on your return unless you’re 
CAUTION
!
Page 76 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
74 Chapter 8 Other Income Publication 17 (2023)

figuring gain or loss from the casualty or theft. 
See Pub. 547 for more information.
Child support payments.  Y ou shouldn’t re-
port these payments on your return. See Pub. 
504 for more information.
Court awards and damages.  T o determine if 
settlement amounts you receive by compromise 
or judgment must be included in your income, 
you must consider the item that the settlement 
replaces. The character of the income as ordi-
nary income or capital gain depends on the na-
ture of the underlying claim. Include the follow-
ing as ordinary income.
1. Interest on any award.
2. Compensation for lost wages or lost profits 
in most cases.
3. Punitive damages, in most cases. It 
doesn’t matter if they relate to a physical 
injury or physical sickness.
4. Amounts received in settlement of pension 
rights (if you didn’t contribute to the plan).
5. Damages for:
a. Patent or copyright infringement,
b. Breach of contract, or
c. Interference with business operations.
6. Back pay and damages for emotional dis-
tress received to satisfy a claim under title 
VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
7. Attorney fees and costs (including contin-
gent fees) where the underlying recovery 
is included in gross income.
8. Attorney fees and costs relating to whistle-
blower awards where the underlying re-
covery is included in gross income.
Don’t include in your income compensatory 
damages for personal physical injury or physical 
sickness (whether received in a lump sum or in-
stallments).
Emotional distress.  Emotional distress it-
self isn’t a physical injury or physical sickness, 
but damages you receive for emotional distress 
due to a physical injury or sickness are treated 
as received for the physical injury or sickness. 
Don’t include them in your income.
If the emotional distress is due to a personal 
injury that isn’t due to a physical injury or sick-
ness (for example, employment discrimination 
or injury to reputation), you must include the 
damages in your income, except for any dam-
ages that aren’t more than amounts paid for 
medical care due to that emotional distress. 
Emotional distress includes physical symptoms 
that result from emotional distress, such as 
headaches, insomnia, and stomach disorders.
Credit card insurance.  In most cases, if you 
receive benefits under a credit card disability or 
unemployment insurance plan, the benefits are 
taxable to you. These plans make the minimum 
monthly payment on your credit card account if 
you can’t make the payment due to injury, ill-
ness, disability, or unemployment. Report on 
Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 8z, the amount of 
benefits you received during the year that’s 
more than the amount of the premiums you paid 
during the year.
Down payment assistance. If you purchase a 
home and receive assistance from a nonprofit 
corporation to make the down payment, that as-
sistance isn’t included in your income. If the cor-
poration qualifies as a tax -exempt charitable or-
ganization, the assistance is treated as a gift 
and is included in your basis of the house. If the 
corporation doesn’t qualify, the assistance is 
treated as a rebate or reduction of the purchase 
price and isn’t included in your basis.
Employment agency fees.  If you get a job 
through an employment agency, and the fee is 
paid by your employer, the fee isn’t includible in 
your income if you aren’t liable for it. However, if 
you pay it and your employer reimburses you for 
it, it’s includible in your income.
Energy conservation subsidies. Y ou can ex-
clude from gross income any subsidy provided, 
either directly or indirectly, by public utilities for 
the purchase or installation of an energy con-
servation measure for a dwelling unit.
Energy conservation measure.  This in-
cludes installations or modifications that are pri-
marily designed to reduce consumption of elec-
tricity or natural gas, or improve the 
management of energy demand.
Dwelling unit.  This includes a house, 
apartment, condominium, mobile home, boat, 
or similar property. If a building or structure con-
tains both dwelling and other units, any subsidy 
must be properly allocated.
Estate and trust income.  An estate or trust, 
unlike a partnership, may have to pay federal in-
come tax. If you’re a beneficiary of an estate or 
trust, you may be taxed on your share of its in-
come distributed or required to be distributed to 
you. However, there is never a double tax. Es-
tates and trusts file their returns on Form 1041, 
U.S. Income T ax Return for Estates and T rusts, 
and your share of the income is reported to you 
on Schedule K-1 (Form 1041).
Current income required to be distrib-
uted. If you’re the beneficiary of an estate or 
trust that must distribute all of its current in-
come, you must report your share of the distrib-
utable net income, whether or not you actually 
received it.
Current income not required to be dis-
tributed. If you’re the beneficiary of an estate 
or trust and the fiduciary has the choice of 
whether to distribute all or part of the current in-
come, you must report:
• All income that’s required to be distributed 
to you, whether or not it’s actually distrib-
uted, plus
• All other amounts actually paid or credited 
to you,
up to the amount of your share of distributable 
net income.
How to report.  T reat each item of income 
the same way that the estate or trust would treat 
it. For example, if a trust's dividend income is 
distributed to you, you report the distribution as 
dividend income on your return. The same rule 
applies to distributions of tax -exempt interest 
and capital gains.
The fiduciary of the estate or trust must tell 
you the type of items making up your share of 
the estate or trust income and any credits you’re 
allowed on your individual income tax return.
Losses. Losses of estates and trusts gener-
ally aren’t deductible by the beneficiaries.
Grantor trust.  Income earned by a grantor 
trust is taxable to the grantor, not the benefi-
ciary, if the grantor keeps certain control over 
the trust. (The grantor is the one who transfer-
red property to the trust.) This rule applies if the 
property (or income from the property) put into 
the trust will or may revert (be returned) to the 
grantor or the grantor's spouse.
Generally, a trust is a grantor trust if the 
grantor has a reversionary interest valued (at 
the date of transfer) at more than 5% of the 
value of the transferred property.
Expenses paid by another.  If your personal 
expenses are paid for by another person, such 
as a corporation, the payment may be taxable 
to you depending upon your relationship with 
that person and the nature of the payment. But 
if the payment makes up for a loss caused by 
that person, and only restores you to the posi-
tion you were in before the loss, the payment 
isn’t includible in your income.
Fees for services.  Include all fees for your 
services in your income. Examples of these 
fees are amounts you receive for services you 
perform as:
• A corporate director;
• An executor, administrator, or personal 
representative of an estate;
• A manager of a trade or business you op-
erated before declaring chapter 11 bank-
ruptcy;
• A notary public; or
• An election precinct official.
Nonemployee compensation. If you aren’t 
an employee and the fees for your services from 
a single payer in the course of the payer's trade 
or business total $600 or more for the year, the 
payer should send you a Form 1099 -NEC. Y ou 
may need to report your fees as self -employ-
ment income. See Self-Employed Persons  in 
chapter 1 for a discussion of when you’re con-
sidered self-employed.
Corporate director. Corporate director fees 
are self-employment income. Report these pay-
ments on Schedule C (Form 1040).
Personal representatives.  All personal 
representatives must include in their gross in-
come fees paid to them from an estate. If you 
aren’t in the trade or business of being an exec-
utor (for instance, you’re the executor of a 
friend's or relative's estate), report these fees on 
Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 8z. If you’re in the 
trade or business of being an executor, report 
these fees as self -employment income on 
Schedule C (Form 1040). The fee isn’t includi-
ble in income if it’s waived.
Manager of trade or business for bank-
ruptcy estate.  Include in your income all pay-
ments received from your bankruptcy estate for 
managing or operating a trade or business that 
you operated before you filed for bankruptcy. 
Report this income on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), 
line 8z.
Page 77 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17 (2023) Chapter 8 Other Income 75

Notary public.  Report payments for these 
services on Schedule C (Form 1040). These 
payments aren’t subject to self-employment tax. 
See the separate Instructions for Schedule SE 
(Form 1040) for details.
Election precinct official.  Y ou should re-
ceive a Form W -2 showing payments for serv-
ices performed as an election official or election 
worker. Report these payments on line 1a of 
Form 1040 or 1040-SR.
Foster care providers.  Generally, payment 
you receive from a state, a political subdivision, 
or a qualified foster care placement agency for 
caring for a qualified foster individual in your 
home is excluded from your income. However, 
you must include in your income payment to the 
extent it’s received for the care of more than five 
qualified foster individuals age 19 years or 
older.
A qualified foster individual is a person who:
1. Is living in a foster family home; and
2. Was placed there by:
a. An agency of a state or one of its polit-
ical subdivisions, or
b. A qualified foster care placement 
agency.
Difficulty-of-care payments.  These are 
payments that are designated by the payer as 
compensation for providing the additional care 
that’s required for physically, mentally, or emo-
tionally handicapped qualified foster individuals. 
A state must determine that this compensation 
is needed, and the care for which the payments 
are made must be provided in the foster care 
provider's home in which the qualified foster in-
dividual was placed.
Certain Medicaid waiver payments are trea-
ted as difficulty -of-care payments when re-
ceived by an individual care provider for caring 
for an eligible individual living in the provider's 
home. See Notice 2014 -7, available at 
IRS.gov/irb/2014-04_IRB#NOT -2014-7, and re-
lated questions and answers, available at 
IRS.gov/Individuals/Certain-Medicaid-Waiver-
Payments-May-Be-Excludable-From-Income, 
for more information.
Y ou must include in your income diffi-
culty-of-care payments to the extent they’re re-
ceived for more than:
• 10 qualified foster individuals under age 
19, or
• 5 qualified foster individuals age 19 or 
older.
Maintaining space in home.  If you’re paid 
to maintain space in your home for emergency 
foster care, you must include the payment in 
your income.
Reporting taxable payments.  If you re-
ceive payments that you must include in your in-
come and you’re in business as a foster care 
provider, report the payments on Schedule C 
(Form 1040). See Pub. 587, Business Use of 
Y our Home, to help you determine the amount 
you can deduct for the use of your home.
Found property. If you find and keep property 
that doesn’t belong to you that has been lost or 
abandoned (treasure trove), it’s taxable to you 
at its fair market value in the first year it’s your 
undisputed possession.
Free tour.  If you received a free tour from a 
travel agency for organizing a group of tourists, 
you must include its value in your income. Re-
port the fair market value of the tour on Sched-
ule 1 (Form 1040), line 8z, if you aren’t in the 
trade or business of organizing tours. Y ou can’t 
deduct your expenses in serving as the volun-
tary leader of the group at the group's request. If 
you organize tours as a trade or business, re-
port the tour's value on Schedule C (Form 
1040).
Gambling winnings.  Y ou must include your 
gambling winnings in income on Schedule 1 
(Form 1040), line 8b. Winnings from fantasy 
sports leagues are gambling winnings. If you 
itemize your deductions on Schedule A (Form 
1040), you can deduct gambling losses you had 
during the year, but only up to the amount of 
your winnings. If you’re in the trade or business 
of gambling, use Schedule C (Form 1040).
Lotteries and raffles.  Winnings from lotter-
ies and raffles are gambling winnings. In addi-
tion to cash winnings, you must include in your 
income the fair market value of bonds, cars, 
houses, and other noncash prizes.
If you win a state lottery prize payable 
in installments, see Pub. 525 for more 
information.
Form W-2G. Y ou may have received a Form 
W-2G, Certain Gambling Winnings, showing the 
amount of your gambling winnings and any tax 
taken out of them. Include the amount from 
box 1 on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 8b. In-
clude the amount shown in box 4 on Form 1040 
or 1040 -SR, line 25c, as federal income tax 
withheld.
Reporting winnings and recordkeeping. 
For more information on reporting gambling 
winnings and recordkeeping, see Gambling 
Losses up to the Amount of Gambling Winnings 
in chapter 12.
Gifts and inheritances.  In most cases, prop-
erty you receive as a gift, bequest, or inheri-
tance isn’t included in your income. However, if 
property you receive this way later produces in-
come such as interest, dividends, or rents, that 
income is taxable to you. If property is given to a 
trust and the income from it is paid, credited, or 
distributed to you, that income is also taxable to 
you. If the gift, bequest, or inheritance is the in-
come from the property, that income is taxable 
to you.
Inherited pension or individual retire-
ment arrangement (IRA).  If you inherited a 
pension or an IRA, you may have to include part 
of the inherited amount in your income. See 
Survivors and Beneficiaries  in Pub. 575 if you 
inherited a pension. See What if Y ou Inherit an 
IRA? in Pubs. 590 -A and 590 -B if you inherited 
an IRA.
Hobby losses. Losses from a hobby aren’t de-
ductible from other income. A hobby is an activ-
ity from which you don’t expect to make a profit. 
See Activity not for profit, earlier.
TIP
If you collect stamps, coins, or other 
items as a hobby for recreation and 
pleasure, and you sell any of the items, 
your gain is taxable as a capital gain. (See Pub. 
550.) However, if you sell items from your col-
lection at a loss, you can’t deduct the loss.
Illegal activities. Income from illegal activities, 
such as money from dealing illegal drugs, must 
be included in your income on Schedule 1 
(Form 1040), line 8z, or on Schedule C (Form 
1040) if from your self-employment activity.
Indian fishing rights.  If you’re a member of a 
qualified Indian tribe that has fishing rights se-
cured by treaty, Executive order, or an Act of 
Congress as of March 17, 1988, don’t include in 
your income amounts you receive from activities 
related to those fishing rights. The income isn’t 
subject to income tax, self -employment tax, or 
employment taxes.
Interest on frozen deposits.  In general, you 
exclude from your income the amount of inter-
est earned on a frozen deposit. See Interest in-
come on frozen deposits in chapter 6.
Interest on qualified savings bonds.  Y ou 
may be able to exclude from income the interest 
from qualified U.S. savings bonds you redeem if 
you pay qualified higher education expenses in 
the same year. For more information on this ex-
clusion, see Education Savings Bond Program 
under U.S. Savings Bonds in chapter 6.
Job interview expenses. If a prospective em-
ployer asks you to appear for an interview and 
either pays you an allowance or reimburses you 
for your transportation and other travel expen-
ses, the amount you receive is generally not 
taxable. Y ou include in income only the amount 
you receive that’s more than your actual expen-
ses.
Jury duty. Jury duty pay you receive must be 
included in your income on Schedule 1 (Form 
1040), line 8h. If you gave any of your jury duty 
pay to your employer because your employer 
continued to pay you while you served jury duty, 
include the amount you gave your employer as 
an income adjustment on Schedule 1 (Form 
1040), line 24a, and see the instructions there.
Kickbacks. Y ou must include kickbacks, side 
commissions, push money, or similar payments 
you receive in your income on Schedule 1 
(Form 1040), line 8z, or on Schedule C (Form 
1040) if from your self-employment activity.
Example. Y ou sell cars and help arrange 
car insurance for buyers. Insurance brokers pay 
back part of their commissions to you for refer-
ring customers to them. Y ou must include the 
kickbacks in your income.
Medical savings accounts (Archer MSAs 
and Medicare Advantage MSAs). In most ca-
ses, you don’t include in income amounts you 
withdraw from your Archer MSA or Medicare 
Advantage MSA if you use the money to pay for 
qualified medical expenses. Generally, qualified 
medical expenses are those you can deduct on 
Schedule A (Form 1040). For more information 
about qualified medical expenses, see Pub. 
502. For more information about Archer MSAs 
or Medicare Advantage MSAs, see Pub. 969, 
CAUTION
!
Page 78 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
76 Chapter 8 Other Income Publication 17 (2023)

Health Savings Accounts and Other T ax -Fa-
vored Health Plans.
Prizes and awards.  If you win a prize in a 
lucky number drawing, television or radio quiz 
program, beauty contest, or other event, you 
must include it in your income. For example, if 
you win a $50 prize in a photography contest, 
you must report this income on Schedule 1 
(Form 1040), line 8i. If you refuse to accept a 
prize, don’t include its value in your income.
Prizes and awards in goods or services 
must be included in your income at their fair 
market value.
Employee awards or bonuses.  Cash 
awards or bonuses given to you by your em-
ployer for good work or suggestions must gen-
erally be included in your income as wages. 
However, certain noncash employee achieve-
ment awards can be excluded from income. 
See Bonuses and awards in chapter 5.
Pulitzer, Nobel, and similar prizes.  If you 
were awarded a prize in recognition of accom-
plishments in religious, charitable, scientific, ar-
tistic, educational, literary, or civic fields, you 
must generally include the value of the prize in 
your income. However, you don’t include this 
prize in your income if you meet all of the follow-
ing requirements.
• Y ou were selected without any action on 
your part to enter the contest or proceed-
ing.
• Y ou aren’t required to perform substantial 
future services as a condition to receiving 
the prize or award.
• The prize or award is transferred by the 
payer directly to a governmental unit or 
tax-exempt charitable organization as des-
ignated by you.
See Pub. 525 for more information about the 
conditions that apply to the transfer.
Qualified Opportunity Fund (QOF).  Effective 
December 22, 2017, Code section 1400Z -2 
provides a temporary deferral on inclusion in 
gross income for capital gains invested in 
QOFs, and permanent exclusion of capital 
gains from the sale or exchange of an invest-
ment in the QOF if the investment is held for at 
least 10 years. See the Instructions for Form 
8949 on how to report your election to defer eli-
gible gains invested in a QOF . See the instruc-
tions for Form 8997, Initial and Annual State-
ment of Qualified Opportunity Fund (QOF) 
Investments, for reporting information. For addi-
tional information, see Opportunity Zones Fre-
quently Asked Questions at IRS.gov/
Newsroom/Opportunity-Zones-Frequently-
Asked-Questions.
Qualified tuition programs (QTPs).  A QTP 
(also known as a 529 program) is a program set 
up to allow you to either prepay or contribute to 
an account established for paying a student's 
qualified higher education expenses at an eligi-
ble educational institution. A program can be 
established and maintained by a state, an 
agency or instrumentality of a state, or an eligi-
ble educational institution.
The part of a distribution representing the 
amount paid or contributed to a QTP isn’t inclu-
ded in income. This is a return of the investment 
in the program.
In most cases, the beneficiary doesn’t in-
clude in income any earnings distributed from a 
QTP if the total distribution is less than or equal 
to adjusted qualified higher education expen-
ses. See Pub. 970 for more information.
Railroad retirement annuities.  The following 
types of payments are treated as pension or an-
nuity income and are taxable under the rules 
explained in Pub. 575, Pension and Annuity In-
come.
• Tier 1 railroad retirement benefits that are 
more than the social security equivalent 
benefit.
• Tier 2 benefits.
• Vested dual benefits.
Rewards. If you receive a reward for providing 
information, include it in your income.
Sale of home.  Y ou may be able to exclude 
from income all or part of any gain from the sale 
or exchange of your main home. See Pub. 523.
Sale of personal items.  If you sold an item 
you owned for personal use, such as a car, re-
frigerator, furniture, stereo, jewelry, or silver-
ware, your gain is taxable as a capital gain. Re-
port it as explained in the Instructions for 
Schedule D (Form 1040). Y ou can’t deduct a 
loss.
However, if you sold an item you held for in-
vestment, such as gold or silver bullion, coins, 
or gems, any gain is taxable as a capital gain 
and any loss is deductible as a capital loss.
Example. Y ou sold a painting on an online 
auction website for $100. Y ou bought the paint-
ing for $20 at a garage sale years ago. Report 
your gain as a capital gain as explained in the 
Instructions for Schedule D (Form 1040).
Scholarships and fellowships.  A candidate 
for a degree can exclude amounts received as a 
qualified scholarship or fellowship. A qualified 
scholarship or fellowship is any amount you re-
ceive that’s for:
• T uition and fees to enroll at or attend an 
educational institution; or
• Fees, books, supplies, and equipment re-
quired for courses at the educational insti-
tution.
Amounts used for room and board don’t qualify 
for the exclusion. See Pub. 970 for more infor-
mation on qualified scholarships and fellowship 
grants.
Payment for services.  In most cases, you 
must include in income the part of any scholar-
ship or fellowship that represents payment for 
past, present, or future teaching, research, or 
other services. This applies even if all candi-
dates for a degree must perform the services to 
receive the degree.
For information about the rules that apply to 
a tax-free qualified tuition reduction provided to 
employees and their families by an educational 
institution, see Pub. 970.
Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) pay-
ments. Allowances paid by the VA aren’t inclu-
ded in your income. These allowances aren’t 
considered scholarship or fellowship grants.
Prizes. Scholarship prizes won in a contest 
aren’t scholarships or fellowships if you don’t 
have to use the prizes for educational purposes. 
Y ou must include these amounts in your income 
on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 8i, whether or 
not you use the amounts for educational purpo-
ses.
Sharing/gig economy. A sharing economy is 
one in which assets are shared between individ-
uals for a fee, usually through the internet. For 
example, you rent out your car when you don’t 
need it, or you share your wi-fi account for a fee.
A gig economy is one in which a short -term 
contract or freelance work is the norm, as op-
posed to a permanent job. For example, you 
drive for a ride -sharing service, or work as a fit-
ness trainer, babysitter, or tutor.
Generally, if you have income from sharing 
economy transactions, or you did gig work, you 
must include all income received whether you 
received a Form 1099 -K, Payment Card and 
Third-Party Network T ransactions, or not. See 
the Instructions for Schedule C (Form 1040) 
and the Instructions for Schedule SE (Form 
1040).
State tax payments.  Do not include pay-
ments on your tax return made by states under 
legislatively provided social benefit programs 
for the promotion of the general welfare. T o 
qualify for the general welfare exclusion, state 
payments must be paid from a governmental 
fund, be for the promotion of general welfare 
(that is, based on the need of the individual or 
family receiving such payments), and not repre-
sent compensation for services.
Spillover payments under certain 2022 
state tax payment programs.  In 2022, some 
states implemented programs to provide state 
payments to certain individuals residing in their 
states. Many of these programs were related to 
the various consequences of the COVID -19 
pandemic. Some of those 2022 programs provi-
ded for payments to be made in early 2023. For 
special tax refunds or payments that were ex-
cluded from federal income in 2022, the same 
tax treatment applies to the special tax refund or 
payments received in 2023. This means taxpay-
ers who didn’t get a payment under the program 
during 2022 may exclude from federal income a 
state payment provided under the 2022 pro-
gram even if they actually received the payment 
in 2023. See IRS News Release IR-2023-158 at 
IRS.gov/Newsroom/IRS-Issues-Guidance-On-
State- T ax-Payments for more information.
Stolen property.  If you steal property, you 
must report its fair market value in your income 
in the year you steal it unless you return it to its 
rightful owner in the same year.
Transporting school children.  Don’t include 
in your income a school board mileage allow-
ance for taking children to and from school if 
you aren’t in the business of taking children to 
school. Y ou can’t deduct expenses for providing 
this transportation.
Union benefits and dues.  Amounts deducted 
from your pay for union dues, assessments, 
contributions, or other payments to a union 
can’t be excluded from your income.
Strike and lockout benefits.  Benefits paid 
to you by a union as strike or lockout benefits, 
Page 79 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17 (2023) Chapter 8 Other Income 77

including both cash and the fair market value of 
other property, are usually included in your in-
come as compensation. Y ou can exclude these 
benefits from your income only when the facts 
clearly show that the union intended them as 
gifts to you.
Utility rebates. If you’re a customer of an elec-
tric utility company and you participate in the 
utility's energy conservation program, you may 
receive on your monthly electric bill either:
• A reduction in the purchase price of elec-
tricity furnished to you (rate reduction), or
• A nonrefundable credit against the pur-
chase price of the electricity.
The amount of the rate reduction or nonrefunda-
ble credit isn’t included in your income.
9.
Individual 
Retirement 
Arrangements 
(IRAs)
What’s New
IRA contribution limit increased.  Beginning 
in 2023, the IRA contribution limit is increased 
to $6,500 ($7,500 for individuals age 50 or 
older) from $6,000 ($7,000 for individuals age 
50 or older).
Increase in required minimum distribution 
age. Individuals who reach age 72 after De-
cember 31, 2022, may delay receiving their re-
quired minimum distributions until April 1 of the 
year following the year in which they turn age 
73.
Disaster tax relief. The special rules that pro-
vide for tax -favored withdrawals and repay-
ments now apply to disasters that occur on or 
after January 26, 2021. See Disaster-Related 
Relief in Pub. 590-B for more information.
Distributions to terminally ill individuals. 
The exception to the 10% additional tax for 
early distributions is expanded to apply to distri-
butions made after December 29, 2022, to an 
individual who has been certified by a physician 
as having a terminal illness. See Pub. 590 -B for 
more information.
Certain corrective distributions not subject 
to 10% early distribution tax.  Beginning with 
distributions made on December 29, 2022, and 
after, the 10% additional tax on early distribu-
tions will not apply to the income attributed to a 
corrective IRA distribution, as long as the cor-
rective distribution is made on or before the due 
date (including extensions) of the income tax re-
turn.
Modified adjusted gross income (AGI) limit 
for traditional IRA contributions. For 2023, if 
you are covered by a retirement plan at work, 
your deduction for contributions to a traditional 
IRA is reduced (phased out) if your modified 
AGI is:
• More than $116,000 but less than 
$136,000 for a married couple filing a joint 
return or a qualifying surviving spouse,
• More than $73,000 but less than $83,000 
for a single individual or head of house-
hold, or
• Less than $10,000 for a married individual 
filing a separate return.
If you either live with your spouse or file a joint 
return, and your spouse is covered by a retire-
ment plan at work but you aren’t, your deduction 
is phased out if your modified AGI is more than 
$218,000 but less than $228,000. If your modi-
fied AGI is $228,000 or more, you can’t take a 
deduction for contributions to a traditional IRA. 
See How Much Can Y ou Deduct, later.
Modified AGI limit for Roth IRA contribu-
tions. For 2023, your Roth IRA contribution 
limit is reduced (phased out) in the following sit-
uations.
• Y our filing status is married filing jointly or 
qualifying surviving spouse and your modi-
fied AGI is at least $218,000. Y ou can’t 
make a Roth IRA contribution if your modi-
fied AGI is $228,000 or more.
• Y our filing status is single, head of house-
hold, or married filing separately and you 
didn’t live with your spouse at any time in 
2023 and your modified AGI is at least 
$138,000. Y ou can’t make a Roth IRA con-
tribution if your modified AGI is $153,000 
or more.
• Y our filing status is married filing sepa-
rately, you lived with your spouse at any 
time during the year, and your modified 
AGI is more than zero. Y ou can’t make a 
Roth IRA contribution if your modified AGI 
is $10,000 or more.
See Can Y ou Contribute to a Roth IRA, later.
2024 modified AGI limits.  Y ou can find infor-
mation about the 2024 contribution and AGI lim-
its in Pub. 590-A.
Reminders
Maximum age for making traditional IRA 
contributions repealed.  For tax years begin-
ning after 2019, there is no age limit on making 
contributions to your traditional IRA. For more 
information, see Pub. 590-A.
Contributions to both traditional and Roth 
IRAs. For information on your combined contri-
bution limit if you contribute to both traditional 
and Roth IRAs, see Roth IRAs and traditional 
IRAs, later.
Statement of required minimum distribu-
tion. If a minimum distribution from your IRA is 
required, the trustee, custodian, or issuer that 
held the IRA at the end of the preceding year 
must either report the amount of the required 
minimum distribution to you, or offer to figure it 
for you. The report or offer must include the 
date by which the amount must be distributed. 
The report is due January 31 of the year in 
which the minimum distribution is required. It 
can be provided with the year -end fair market 
value statement that you normally get each 
year. No report is required for IRAs of owners 
who have died.
IRA interest.  Although interest earned from 
your IRA is generally not taxed in the year 
earned, it isn't tax -exempt interest. T ax on your 
traditional IRA is generally deferred until you 
take a distribution. Don't report this interest on 
your tax return as tax-exempt interest.
Net Investment Income Tax (NIIT).  For pur-
poses of the NIIT , net investment income 
doesn't include distributions from a qualified re-
tirement plan including IRAs (for example, 
401(a), 403(a), 403(b), 408, 408A, or 457(b) 
plans). However, these distributions are taken 
into account when determining the modified 
AGI threshold. Distributions from a nonqualified 
retirement plan are included in net investment 
income. See Form 8960, Net Investment In-
come T ax—Individuals, Estates, and T rusts, and 
its instructions for more information.
Form 8606. T o designate contributions as non-
deductible, you must file Form 8606.
The term “50 or older” is used several 
times in this chapter. It refers to an IRA 
owner who is age 50 or older by the 
end of the tax year.
Introduction
An IRA is a personal savings plan that gives you 
tax advantages for setting aside money for your 
retirement.
This chapter discusses the following topics.
• The rules for a traditional IRA (any IRA that 
isn't a Roth or SIMPLE IRA).
• The Roth IRA, which features nondeducti-
ble contributions and tax-free distributions.
Simplified Employee Pensions (SEPs) and 
Savings Incentive Match Plans for Employees 
(SIMPLE) plans aren't discussed in this chapter. 
For more information on these plans and em-
ployees' SEP IRAs and SIMPLE IRAs that are 
part of these plans, see Pub. 560.
For information about contributions, deduc-
tions, withdrawals, transfers, rollovers, and 
other transactions, see Pub. 590 -A and Pub. 
590-B.
Useful Items
Y ou may want to see:
Publication
560 Retirement Plans for Small Business
575 Pension and Annuity Income
590-A Contributions to Individual 
Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)
590-B Distributions from Individual 
Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)
TIP
  560
  575
  590-A
  590-B
Page 80 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
78 Chapter 9 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) Publication 17 (2023)

Form (and Instructions)
5329 Additional T axes on Qualified Plans 
(Including IRAs) and Other 
T ax-Favored Accounts
8606 Nondeductible IRAs
8915-F Qualified Disaster Retirement 
Plan Distributions and Repayments
For these and other useful items, go to IRS.gov/
Forms.
Traditional IRAs
In this chapter, the original IRA (sometimes 
called an ordinary or regular IRA) is referred to 
as a “traditional IRA.” A traditional IRA is any 
IRA that isn't a Roth IRA or a SIMPLE IRA. T wo 
advantages of a traditional IRA are:
• Y ou may be able to deduct some or all of 
your contributions to it, depending on your 
circumstances; and
• Generally, amounts in your IRA, including 
earnings and gains, aren't taxed until they 
are distributed.
Who Can Open a 
Traditional IRA?
Y ou can open and make contributions to a tradi-
tional IRA if you (or, if you file a joint return, your 
spouse) received taxable compensation during 
the year.
For tax years beginning after 2019, 
there is no age limit on making contri-
butions to your traditional IRA. For 
more information, see Pub. 590-A.
What is compensation?  Generally, compen-
sation is what you earn from working. Compen-
sation includes wages, salaries, tips, professio-
nal fees, bonuses, and other amounts you 
receive for providing personal services. The IRS 
treats as compensation any amount properly 
shown in box 1 (Wages, tips, other compensa-
tion) of Form W -2, Wage and T ax Statement, 
provided that this amount is reduced by any 
amount properly shown in box 11 (Nonqualified 
plans).
Scholarship or fellowship payments are gen-
erally compensation for this purpose only if re-
ported in box 1 of your Form W -2. However, for 
tax years beginning after 2019, certain non -tui-
tion fellowship and stipend payments not repor-
ted to you on Form W -2 are treated as taxable 
compensation for IRA purposes. These 
amounts include taxable non -tuition fellowship 
and stipend payments made to aid you in the 
pursuit of graduate or postdoctoral study and in-
cluded in your gross income under the rules dis-
cussed in chapter 1 of Pub. 970, T ax Benefits 
for Education.
Compensation also includes commissions 
and taxable alimony and separate maintenance 
payments.
Self-employment income.  If you are 
self-employed (a sole proprietor or a partner), 
compensation is the net earnings from your 
  5329
  8606
  8915-F
TIP
trade or business (provided your personal serv-
ices are a material income -producing factor) re-
duced by the total of:
• The deduction for contributions made on 
your behalf to retirement plans, and
• The deductible part of your self-employ-
ment tax.
Compensation includes earnings from 
self-employment even if they aren't subject to 
self-employment tax because of your religious 
beliefs.
Nontaxable combat pay.  For IRA purpo-
ses, if you were a member of the U.S. Armed 
Forces, your compensation includes any non-
taxable combat pay you receive.
What isn't compensation?  Compensation 
doesn't include any of the following items.
• Earnings and profits from property, such as 
rental income, interest income, and divi-
dend income.
• Pension or annuity income.
• Deferred compensation received (compen-
sation payments postponed from a past 
year).
• Income from a partnership for which you 
don't provide services that are a material 
income-producing factor.
• Conservation Reserve Program (CRP) 
payments reported on Schedule SE (Form 
1040), line 1b.
• Any amounts (other than combat pay) you 
exclude from income, such as foreign 
earned income and housing costs.
When and How Can a 
Traditional IRA Be 
Opened?
Y ou can open a traditional IRA at any time. 
However, the time for making contributions for 
any year is limited. See When Can Contribu-
tions Be Made, later.
Y ou can open different kinds of IRAs with a 
variety of organizations. Y ou can open an IRA at 
a bank or other financial institution or with a mu-
tual fund or life insurance company. Y ou can 
also open an IRA through your stockbroker. Any 
IRA must meet Internal Revenue Code require-
ments.
Kinds of traditional IRAs. Y our traditional IRA 
can be an individual retirement account or an-
nuity. It can be part of either a SEP or an em-
ployer or employee association trust account.
How Much Can Be
Contributed?
There are limits and other rules that affect the 
amount that can be contributed to a traditional 
IRA. These limits and other rules are explained 
below.
Community property laws.  Except as dis-
cussed later under Kay Bailey Hutchison 
Spousal IRA limit , each spouse figures their 
limit separately, using their own compensation. 
This is the rule even in states with community 
property laws.
Brokers' commissions.  Brokers' commis-
sions paid in connection with your traditional 
IRA are subject to the contribution limit.
Trustees' fees.  T rustees' administrative fees 
aren't subject to the contribution limit.
Qualified reservist repayments. If you are (or 
were) a member of a reserve component and 
you were ordered or called to active duty after 
September 11, 2001, you may be able to con-
tribute (repay) to an IRA amounts equal to any 
qualified reservist distributions you received. 
Y ou can make these repayment contributions 
even if they would cause your total contributions 
to the IRA to be more than the general limit on 
contributions. T o be eligible to make these re-
payment contributions, you must have received 
a qualified reservist distribution from an IRA or 
from a section 401(k) or 403(b) plan or similar 
arrangement.
For more information, see Qualified reservist 
repayments under How Much Can Be Contrib-
uted? in chapter 1 of Pub. 590-A.
Contributions on your behalf to a tradi-
tional IRA reduce your limit for contribu-
tions to a Roth IRA. (See Roth IRAs , 
later.)
General limit. For 2023, the most that can be 
contributed to your traditional IRA is generally 
the smaller of the following amounts.
• $6,500 ($7,500 if you are 50 or older).
• Y our taxable compensation (defined ear-
lier) for the year.
This is the most that can be contributed regard-
less of whether the contributions are to one or 
more traditional IRAs or whether all or part of 
the contributions are nondeductible. (See Non-
deductible Contributions , later.) Qualified re-
servist repayments don't affect this limit.
Example 1. Y ou are 34 years old and single 
and earned $24,000 in 2023. Y our IRA contribu-
tions for 2023 are limited to $6,500.
Example 2.  Y ou are an unmarried college 
student working part time and earned $3,500 in 
2023. Y our IRA contributions for 2023 are limi-
ted to $3,500, the amount of your compensa-
tion.
Kay Bailey Hutchison Spousal IRA limit. For 
2023, if you file a joint return and your taxable 
compensation is less than that of your spouse, 
the most that can be contributed for the year to 
your IRA is the smaller of the following amounts.
1. $6,500 ($7,500 if you are 50 or older).
2. The total compensation includible in the 
gross income of both you and your spouse 
for the year, reduced by the following two 
amounts.
a. Y our spouse's IRA contribution for the 
year to a traditional IRA.
b. Any contribution for the year to a Roth 
IRA on behalf of your spouse.
This means that the total combined contribu-
tions that can be made for the year to your IRA 
and your spouse's IRA can be as much as 
CAUTION
!
Page 81 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17 (2023) Chapter 9 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) 79

$13,000 ($14,000 if only one of you is 50 or 
older, or $15,000 if both of you are 50 or older).
When Can Contributions 
Be Made?
As soon as you open your traditional IRA, con-
tributions can be made to it through your 
chosen sponsor (trustee or other administrator). 
Contributions must be in the form of money 
(cash, check, or money order). Property can't 
be contributed.
Contributions must be made by due date. 
Contributions can be made to your traditional 
IRA for a year at any time during the year or by 
the due date for filing your return for that year, 
not including extensions.
Designating year for which contribution is 
made. If an amount is contributed to your tradi-
tional IRA between January 1 and April 15, you 
should tell the sponsor which year (the current 
year or the previous year) the contribution is for. 
If you don't tell the sponsor which year it is for, 
the sponsor can assume, and report to the IRS, 
that the contribution is for the current year (the 
year the sponsor received it).
Filing before a contribution is made.  Y ou 
can file your return claiming a traditional IRA 
contribution before the contribution is actually 
made. Generally, the contribution must be made 
by the due date of your return, not including ex-
tensions.
Contributions not required. Y ou don't have to 
contribute to your traditional IRA for every tax 
year, even if you can.
How Much Can You 
Deduct?
Generally, you can deduct the lesser of:
• The contributions to your traditional IRA for 
the year, or
• The general limit (or the Kay Bailey Hutchi-
son Spousal IRA limit, if it applies).
However, if you or your spouse was covered by 
an employer retirement plan, you may not be 
able to deduct this amount. See Limit if Covered 
by Employer Plan, later.
Y ou may be able to claim a credit for 
contributions to your traditional IRA. 
For more information, see chapter 3 of 
Pub. 590-A.
Trustees' fees.  T rustees' administrative fees 
that are billed separately and paid in connection 
with your traditional IRA aren't deductible as 
IRA contributions. Y ou are also not able to de-
duct these fees as an itemized deduction.
Brokers' commissions.  Brokers' commis-
sions are part of your IRA contribution and, as 
such, are deductible subject to the limits.
Full deduction. If neither you nor your spouse 
was covered for any part of the year by an em-
ployer retirement plan, you can take a deduction 
TIP
for total contributions to one or more traditional 
IRAs of up to the lesser of:
• $6,500 ($7,500 if you are 50 or older in 
2023), or
• 100% of your compensation.
This limit is reduced by any contributions made 
to a 501(c)(18) plan on your behalf.
Kay Bailey Hutchison Spousal IRA.  In the 
case of a married couple with unequal compen-
sation who file a joint return, the deduction for 
contributions to the traditional IRA of the spouse 
with less compensation is limited to the lesser 
of the following amounts.
1. $6,500 ($7,500 if the spouse with the 
lower compensation is 50 or older in 
2023).
2. The total compensation includible in the 
gross income of both spouses for the year 
reduced by the following three amounts.
a. The IRA deduction for the year of the 
spouse with the greater compensa-
tion.
b. Any designated nondeductible contri-
bution for the year made on behalf of 
the spouse with the greater compen-
sation.
c. Any contributions for the year to a 
Roth IRA on behalf of the spouse with 
the greater compensation.
This limit is reduced by any contributions to a 
501(c)(18) plan on behalf of the spouse with the 
lesser compensation.
Note. If you were divorced or legally sepa-
rated (and didn't remarry) before the end of the 
year, you can't deduct any contributions to your 
spouse's IRA. After a divorce or legal separa-
tion, you can deduct only contributions to your 
own IRA. Y our deductions are subject to the 
rules for single individuals.
Covered by an employer retirement plan.  If 
you or your spouse was covered by an em-
ployer retirement plan at any time during the 
year for which contributions were made, your 
deduction may be further limited. This is dis-
cussed later under Limit if Covered by Employer 
Plan. Limits on the amount you can deduct don't 
affect the amount that can be contributed. See 
Nondeductible Contributions, later.
Are You Covered by an Employer 
Plan?
The Form W -2 you receive from your employer 
has a box used to indicate whether you were 
covered for the year. The “Retirement plan” box 
should be checked if you were covered.
Reservists and volunteer firefighters should 
also see Situations in Which Y ou Aren’t Cov-
ered, later.
If you aren't certain whether you were cov-
ered by your employer's retirement plan, you 
should ask your employer.
Federal judges. For purposes of the IRA de-
duction, federal judges are covered by an em-
ployer retirement plan.
For Which Year(s) Are You 
Covered?
Special rules apply to determine the tax years 
for which you are covered by an employer plan. 
These rules differ depending on whether the 
plan is a defined contribution plan or a defined 
benefit plan.
Tax year. Y our tax year is the annual account-
ing period you use to keep records and report 
income and expenses on your income tax re-
turn. For almost all people, the tax year is the 
calendar year.
Defined contribution plan. Generally, you are 
covered by a defined contribution plan for a tax 
year if amounts are contributed or allocated to 
your account for the plan year that ends with or 
within that tax year.
A defined contribution plan is a plan that 
provides for a separate account for each person 
covered by the plan. T ypes of defined contribu-
tion plans include profit-sharing plans, stock bo-
nus plans, and money purchase pension plans. 
For additional information, see Pub. 590-A.
Defined benefit plan. If you are eligible to par-
ticipate in your employer's defined benefit plan 
for the plan year that ends within your tax year, 
you are covered by the plan. This rule applies 
even if you:
• Declined to participate in the plan,
• Didn't make a required contribution, or
• Didn't perform the minimum service re-
quired to accrue a benefit for the year.
A defined benefit plan is any plan that isn't a 
defined contribution plan. In a defined benefit 
plan, the level of benefits to be provided to each 
participant is spelled out in the plan. The plan 
administrator figures the amount needed to pro-
vide those benefits, and those amounts are 
contributed to the plan. Defined benefit plans in-
clude pension plans and annuity plans.
No vested interest. If you accrue a benefit for 
a plan year, you are covered by that plan even if 
you have no vested interest in (legal right to) the 
accrual.
Situations in Which You Aren’t 
Covered
Unless you are covered under another em-
ployer plan, you aren't covered by an employer 
plan if you are in one of the situations described 
below.
Social security or railroad retirement.  Cov-
erage under social security or railroad retire-
ment isn't coverage under an employer retire-
ment plan.
Benefits from a previous employer's plan. If 
you receive retirement benefits from a previous 
employer's plan, you aren't covered by that 
plan.
Reservists. If the only reason you participate 
in a plan is because you are a member of a re-
serve unit of the U.S. Armed Forces, you may 
not be covered by the plan. Y ou aren't covered 
by the plan if both of the following conditions are 
met.
1. The plan you participate in is established 
for its employees by:
Page 82 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
80 Chapter 9 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) Publication 17 (2023)

a. The United States,
b. A state or political subdivision of a 
state, or
c. An instrumentality of either (a) or (b) 
above.
2. Y ou didn't serve more than 90 days on ac-
tive duty during the year (not counting duty 
for training).
Volunteer firefighters. If the only reason you 
participate in a plan is because you are a volun-
teer firefighter, you may not be covered by the 
plan. Y ou aren't covered by the plan if both of 
the following conditions are met.
1. The plan you participate in is established 
for its employees by:
a. The United States,
b. A state or political subdivision of a 
state, or
c. An instrumentality of either (a) or (b) 
above.
2. Y our accrued retirement benefits at the be-
ginning of the year won't provide more 
than $1,800 per year at retirement.
Limit if Covered by Employer Plan
If either you or your spouse was covered by an 
employer retirement plan, you may be entitled 
to only a partial (reduced) deduction or no de-
duction at all, depending on your income and 
your filing status.
Y our deduction begins to decrease (phase 
out) when your income rises above a certain 
amount and is eliminated altogether when it 
reaches a higher amount. These amounts vary 
depending on your filing status.
T o determine if your deduction is subject to 
phaseout, you must determine your modified 
AGI and your filing status. See Filing status and 
Modified AGI, later. Then use T able 9-1 or T a-
ble 9-2 to determine if the phaseout applies.
Social security recipients.  Instead of using 
T able 9-1 or T able 9-2, use the worksheets in 
Appendix B of Pub. 590 -A if, for the year, all of 
the following apply.
• Y ou received social security benefits.
• Y ou received taxable compensation.
• Contributions were made to your traditional 
IRA.
• Y ou or your spouse was covered by an em-
ployer retirement plan.
Use those worksheets to figure your IRA deduc-
tion, your nondeductible contribution, and the 
taxable portion, if any, of your social security 
benefits.
Deduction phaseout. If you are covered by an 
employer retirement plan and you didn't receive 
any social security retirement benefits, your IRA 
deduction may be reduced or eliminated de-
pending on your filing status and modified AGI 
as shown in T able 9-1.
If your spouse is covered.  If you aren't 
covered by an employer retirement plan, but 
your spouse is, and you didn't receive any so-
cial security benefits, your IRA deduction may 
be reduced or eliminated entirely depending on 
your filing status and modified AGI as shown in 
T able 9-2.
Filing status.  Y our filing status depends pri-
marily on your marital status. For this purpose, 
you need to know if your filing status is single, 
head of household, married filing jointly, qualify-
ing surviving spouse, or married filing sepa-
rately. If you need more information on filing sta-
tus, see chapter 2.
Lived apart from spouse.  If you didn't live 
with your spouse at any time during the year 
and you file a separate return, your filing status, 
for this purpose, is single.
Modified AGI. Y ou may be able to use Work-
sheet 9-1 to figure your modified AGI. However, 
if you made contributions to your IRA for 2023 
and received a distribution from your IRA in 
2023, see Pub. 590-A.
Don't assume that your modified AGI is 
the same as your compensation. Y our 
modified AGI may include income in 
addition to your compensation (discussed ear-
lier), such as interest, dividends, and income 
from IRA distributions.
When filing Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, refigure 
the AGI amount on line 11 without taking into 
account any of the following amounts.
• IRA deduction.
• Student loan interest deduction.
CAUTION
!
T able 9-1.Effect of Modified AGI1 on Deduction if You Are Covered by 
Retirement Plan at Work
If you are covered by a retirement plan at work, use this table to determine if your modified AGI 
affects the amount of your deduction.
IF your filing status is... AND your modified AGI is... THEN you can take...
Single
 
or
 
Head of household
 $73,000 or less a full deduction.
more than $73,000
but less than $83,000
a partial deduction.
$83,000 or more no deduction.
Married filing jointly
 
 or
 
Qualifying surviving 
spouse
 $116,000 or less a full deduction.
more than $116,000
but less than $136,000
a partial deduction.
$136,000 or more no deduction.
Married filing 
separately2
less than $10,000 a partial deduction.
$10,000 or more no deduction.
1 Modified AGI (adjusted gross income). See Modified AGI, later.
2 If you didn't live with your spouse at any time during the year, your filing status is considered Single for this 
purpose (therefore, your IRA deduction is determined under the “Single” column).
T able 9-2.Effect of Modified AGI1 on Deduction if You Aren’t Covered by 
Retirement Plan at Work
If you aren't covered by a retirement plan at work, use this table to determine if your modified AGI 
affects the amount of your deduction.
IF your filing status is... AND your modified AGI is... THEN you can take...
Single,
Head of household, or
Qualifying surviving spouse
any amount a full deduction.
Married filing jointly or 
separately with a spouse who 
isn't covered by a plan at work
any amount a full deduction.
Married filing jointly with a 
spouse who is covered by a plan 
at work
$218,000 or less a full deduction.
more than $218,000
but less than $228,000
a partial deduction.
$228,000 or more no deduction.
Married filing separately with a 
spouse who is covered by a plan 
at work2
less than $10,000 a partial deduction.
$10,000 or more no deduction.
1 Modified AGI (adjusted gross income). See Modified AGI, later.
2 Y ou are entitled to the full deduction if you didn't live with your spouse at any time during the year.
Page 83 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17 (2023) Chapter 9 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) 81

• Foreign earned income exclusion.
• Foreign housing exclusion or deduction.
• Exclusion of qualified savings bond interest 
shown on Form 8815, Exclusion of Interest 
From Series EE and I U.S. Savings Bonds 
Issued After 1989.
• Exclusion of employer-provided adoption 
benefits shown on Form 8839, Qualified 
Adoption Expenses.
This is your modified AGI.
Page 84 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
82 Chapter 9 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) Publication 17 (2023)

Both contributions for 2023 and distribu-
tions in 2023. If all three of the following apply, 
any IRA distributions you received in 2023 may 
be partly tax free and partly taxable.
• Y ou received distributions in 2023 from one 
or more traditional IRAs.
• Y ou made contributions to a traditional IRA 
for 2023.
• Some of those contributions may be non-
deductible contributions.
If this is your situation, you must figure the taxa-
ble part of the traditional IRA distribution before 
you can figure your modified AGI. T o do this, 
you can use Worksheet 1-1 in Pub. 590-B.
If at least one of the above doesn't apply, fig-
ure your modified AGI using Worksheet 9-1.
How to figure your reduced IRA deduction. 
Y ou can figure your reduced IRA deduction for 
Form 1040 or 1040-SR by using the worksheets 
in chapter 1 of Pub. 590 -A. Also, the Instruc-
tions for Form 1040 include similar worksheets 
that you may be able to use instead.
Reporting Deductible 
Contributions
When filing Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, enter your 
IRA deduction on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), 
line 20.
Nondeductible 
Contributions
Although your deduction for IRA contributions 
may be reduced or eliminated, contributions 
can be made to your IRA up to the general limit 
or, if it applies, the Kay Bailey Hutchison 
Spousal IRA limit . The difference between your 
total permitted contributions and your IRA de-
duction, if any, is your nondeductible contribu-
tion.
Example. Y ou are 30 years old and single. 
In 2023, you were covered by a retirement plan 
at work. Y our salary was $67,000. Y our modified 
AGI was $85,000. Y ou made a $6,500 IRA con-
tribution for 2023. Because you were covered 
by a retirement plan and your modified AGI was 
over $83,000, you can't deduct the $6,500 IRA 
contribution. Y ou must designate this contribu-
tion as a nondeductible contribution by report-
ing it on Form 8606, as explained next.
Form 8606. T o designate contributions as non-
deductible, you must file Form 8606.
Y ou don't have to designate a contribution 
as nondeductible until you file your tax return. 
When you file, you can even designate other-
wise deductible contributions as nondeductible.
Y ou must file Form 8606 to report nondeduc-
tible contributions even if you don't have to file a 
tax return for the year.
A Form 8606 isn't used for the year that 
you make a rollover from a qualified re-
tirement plan to a traditional IRA and 
the rollover includes nontaxable amounts. In 
those situations, a Form 8606 is completed for 
the year you take a distribution from that IRA. 
See Form 8606  under Distributions Fully or 
Partly T axable, later.
Failure to report nondeductible contribu-
tions. If you don't report nondeductible contri-
butions, all of the contributions to your tradi-
tional IRA will be treated as deductible 
contributions when withdrawn. All distributions 
from your IRA will be taxed unless you can 
show, with satisfactory evidence, that nonde-
ductible contributions were made.
Penalty for overstatement. If you overstate 
the amount of nondeductible contributions on 
your Form 8606 for any tax year, you must pay a 
penalty of $100 for each overstatement, unless 
it was due to reasonable cause.
Penalty for failure to file Form 8606.  Y ou 
will have to pay a $50 penalty if you don't file a 
required Form 8606, unless you can prove that 
the failure was due to reasonable cause.
Tax on earnings on nondeductible contribu-
tions. As long as contributions are within the 
contribution limits, none of the earnings or gains 
on contributions (deductible or nondeductible) 
will be taxed until they are distributed. See 
When Can Y ou Withdraw or Use IRA Assets , 
later.
Cost basis. Y ou will have a cost basis in your 
traditional IRA if you made any nondeductible 
contributions. Y our cost basis is the sum of the 
nondeductible contributions to your IRA minus 
any withdrawals or distributions of nondeducti-
ble contributions.
CAUTION
!
Inherited IRAs
If you inherit a traditional IRA, you are called a 
beneficiary. A beneficiary can be any person or 
entity the owner chooses to receive the benefits 
of the IRA after the owner dies. Beneficiaries of 
a traditional IRA must include in their gross in-
come any taxable distributions they receive.
Inherited from spouse.  If you inherit a tradi-
tional IRA from your spouse, you generally have 
the following three choices.
1. T reat it as your own IRA by designating 
yourself as the account owner.
2. T reat it as your own by rolling it over into 
your IRA, or to the extent it is taxable, into 
a:
a. Qualified employer plan,
b. Qualified employee annuity plan (sec-
tion 403(a) plan),
c. T ax-sheltered annuity plan (section 
403(b) plan), or
d. Deferred compensation plan of a state 
or local government (section 457 
plan).
3. T reat yourself as the beneficiary rather 
than treating the IRA as your own.
Treating it as your own. Y ou will be consid-
ered to have chosen to treat the IRA as your 
own if:
• Contributions (including rollover contribu-
tions) are made to the inherited IRA, or
• Y ou don't take the required minimum distri-
bution for a year as a beneficiary of the 
IRA.
Y ou will only be considered to have chosen to 
treat the IRA as your own if:
• Y ou are the sole beneficiary of the IRA, and
• Y ou have an unlimited right to withdraw 
amounts from it.
However, if you receive a distribution from 
your deceased spouse's IRA, you can roll that 
distribution over into your own IRA within the 
60-day time limit, as long as the distribution isn't 
a required distribution, even if you aren't the 
sole beneficiary of your deceased spouse's 
IRA.
Inherited from someone other than spouse. 
If you inherit a traditional IRA from anyone other 
than your deceased spouse, you can't treat the 
Worksheet 9-1. Figuring Your Modified AGI
Keep for Y our Records
Use this worksheet to figure your modified AGI for traditional IRA purposes.
1. Enter your AGI from Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 11, figured without taking into account the amount from 
Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 20 ....................................................... 1.  
2. Enter any student loan interest deduction from Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 21 .................... 2.  
3. Enter any foreign earned income and/or housing exclusion from Form 2555, line 45 ................. 3.  
4. Enter any foreign housing deduction from Form 2555, line 50 .................................. 4.  
5. Enter any excludable savings bond interest from Form 8815, line 14 ............................. 5.  
6. Enter any excluded employer-provided adoption benefits from Form 8839, line 28 .................. 6.  
7. Add lines 1 through 6. This is your modified AGI for traditional IRA purposes ...................... 7.  
Page 85 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17 (2023) Chapter 9 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) 83

inherited IRA as your own. This means that you 
can't make any contributions to the IRA. It also 
means you can't roll over any amounts into or 
out of the inherited IRA. However, you can make 
a trustee-to-trustee transfer as long as the IRA 
into which amounts are being moved is set up 
and maintained in the name of the deceased 
IRA owner for the benefit of you as beneficiary.
For more information, see Inherited IRAs un-
der Rollover From One IRA Into Another, later.
Can You Move Retirement 
Plan Assets?
Y ou can transfer, tax free, assets (money or 
property) from other retirement plans (including 
traditional IRAs) to a traditional IRA. Y ou can 
make the following kinds of transfers.
• T ransfers from one trustee to another.
• Rollovers.
• T ransfers incident to a divorce.
Transfers to Roth IRAs.  Under certain condi-
tions, you can move assets from a traditional 
IRA or from a designated Roth account to a 
Roth IRA. Y ou can also move assets from a 
qualified retirement plan to a Roth IRA. See Can 
Y ou Move Amounts Into a Roth IRA?  under 
Roth IRAs, later.
Trustee-to-Trustee Transfer
A transfer of funds in your traditional IRA from 
one trustee directly to another, either at your re-
quest or at the trustee's request, isn't a rollover. 
This includes the situation where the current 
trustee issues a check to the new trustee, but 
gives it to you to deposit. Because there is no 
distribution to you, the transfer is tax free. Be-
cause it isn't a rollover, it isn't affected by the 
1-year waiting period required between roll-
overs, discussed later under Rollover From One 
IRA Into Another . For information about direct 
transfers to IRAs from retirement plans other 
than IRAs, see Can Y ou Move Retirement Plan 
Assets? in chapter 1 and Can Y ou Move 
Amounts Into a Roth IRA?  in chapter 2 of Pub. 
590-A.
Rollovers
Generally, a rollover is a tax -free distribution to 
you of cash or other assets from one retirement 
plan that you contribute (roll over) to another re-
tirement plan. The contribution to the second 
retirement plan is called a rollover contribution.
Note. An amount rolled over tax free from 
one retirement plan to another is generally in-
cludible in income when it is distributed from the 
second plan.
Kinds of rollovers to a traditional IRA.  Y ou 
can roll over amounts from the following plans 
into a traditional IRA.
• A traditional IRA.
• An employer's qualified retirement plan for 
its employees.
• A deferred compensation plan of a state or 
local government (section 457 plan).
• A tax-sheltered annuity plan (section 
403(b) plan).
Treatment of rollovers.  Y ou can't deduct a 
rollover contribution, but you must report the 
rollover distribution on your tax return as dis-
cussed later under Reporting rollovers from 
IRAs and Reporting rollovers from employer 
plans.
Rollover notice.  A written explanation of 
rollover treatment must be given to you by the 
plan (other than an IRA) making the distribution. 
See Written explanation to recipients  in Pub. 
590-A.
Kinds of rollovers from a traditional IRA. 
Y ou may be able to roll over, tax free, a distribu-
tion from your traditional IRA into a qualified 
plan. These plans include the federal Thrift Sav-
ings Plan (for federal employees), deferred 
compensation plans of state or local govern-
ments (section 457 plans), and tax -sheltered 
annuity plans (section 403(b) plans). The part of 
the distribution that you can roll over is the part 
that would otherwise be taxable (includible in 
your income). Qualified plans may, but aren't re-
quired to, accept such rollovers.
Time limit for making a rollover contribu-
tion. Y ou must generally make the rollover con-
tribution by the 60th day after the day you re-
ceive the distribution from your traditional IRA or 
your employer's plan.
The IRS may waive the 60 -day requirement 
where the failure to do so would be against 
equity or good conscience, such as in the event 
of a casualty, disaster, or other event beyond 
your reasonable control. For more information, 
see Can Y ou Move Retirement Plan Assets? in 
chapter 1 of Pub. 590-A.
Extension of rollover period.  If an amount 
distributed to you from a traditional IRA or a 
qualified employer retirement plan is a frozen 
deposit at any time during the 60 -day period al-
lowed for a rollover, special rules extend the roll-
over period. For more information, see Can Y ou 
Move Retirement Plan Assets?  in chapter 1 of 
Pub. 590-A.
Rollover From One IRA Into 
Another
Y ou can withdraw, tax free, all or part of the as-
sets from one traditional IRA if you reinvest 
them within 60 days in the same or another tra-
ditional IRA. Because this is a rollover, you can't 
deduct the amount that you reinvest in an IRA.
Waiting period between rollovers. Generally, 
if you make a tax -free rollover of any part of a 
distribution from a traditional IRA, you can't, 
within a 1 -year period, make a tax -free rollover 
of any later distribution from that same IRA. Y ou 
also can't make a tax -free rollover of any 
amount distributed, within the same 1 -year pe-
riod, from the IRA into which you made the 
tax-free rollover.
The 1-year period begins on the date you re-
ceive the IRA distribution, not on the date you 
roll it over into an IRA. Rules apply to the num-
ber of rollovers you can have with your tradi-
tional IRAs. See Application of one-rollover limi-
tation next.
Application of one -rollover limitation.  Y ou 
can make only one rollover from an IRA to an-
other (or the same) IRA in any 1-year period, re-
gardless of the number of IRAs you own. The 
limit applies by aggregating all of an individual's 
IRAs, including SEP and SIMPLE IRAs, as well 
as traditional and Roth IRAs, effectively treating 
them as one IRA for purposes of the limit. How-
ever, trustee-to-trustee transfers between IRAs 
aren't limited and rollovers from traditional IRAs 
to Roth IRAs (conversions) aren't limited.
Example. Y ou have three traditional IRAs: 
IRA-1, IRA -2, and IRA -3. Y ou didn't take any 
distributions from your IRAs in 2023. On Janu-
ary 1, 2024, you took a distribution from IRA -1 
and rolled it over into IRA -2 on the same day. 
For 2024, you can't roll over any other 2023 IRA 
distribution, including a rollover distribution in-
volving IRA -3. This wouldn’t apply to a 
trustee-to-trustee transfer or a Roth IRA conver-
sion.
Partial rollovers. If you withdraw assets from a 
traditional IRA, you can roll over part of the with-
drawal tax free and keep the rest of it. The 
amount you keep will generally be taxable (ex-
cept for the part that is a return of nondeductible 
contributions). The amount you keep may be 
subject to the 10% additional tax on early distri-
butions, discussed later under What Acts Result 
in Penalties or Additional T axes.
Required distributions.  Amounts that must 
be distributed during a particular year under the 
required minimum distribution  rules (discussed 
later) aren't eligible for rollover treatment.
Inherited IRAs. If you inherit a traditional IRA 
from your spouse, you can generally roll it over, 
or you can choose to make the inherited IRA 
your own. See T reating it as your own, earlier.
Not inherited from spouse.  If you inherit a 
traditional IRA from someone other than your 
spouse, you can't roll it over or allow it to receive 
a rollover contribution. Y ou must withdraw the 
IRA assets within a certain period. For more in-
formation, see When Must Y ou Withdraw As-
sets? (Required Minimum Distributions)  in 
chapter 1 of Pub. 590-B.
Reporting rollovers from IRAs.  Report any 
rollover from one traditional IRA to the same or 
another traditional IRA on Form 1040 or 
1040-SR as follows.
Enter the total amount of the distribution on 
Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, line 4a. If the total 
amount on Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, line 4a, was 
rolled over, enter zero on Form 1040 or 
1040-SR, line 4b. If the total distribution wasn't 
rolled over, enter the taxable portion of the part 
that wasn't rolled over on Form 1040 or 
1040-SR, line 4b. Enter “Rollover” next to Form 
1040 or 1040-SR, line 4b. For more information, 
see the Instructions for Form 1040.
If you rolled over the distribution into a quali-
fied plan (other than an IRA) or you make the 
rollover in 2024, attach a statement explaining 
what you did.
Page 86 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
84 Chapter 9 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) Publication 17 (2023)

Rollover From Employer's Plan 
Into an IRA
Y ou can roll over into a traditional IRA all or part 
of an eligible rollover distribution you receive 
from your (or your deceased spouse's):
• Employer's qualified pension, profit-shar-
ing, or stock bonus plan;
• Annuity plan;
• T ax-sheltered annuity plan (section 403(b) 
plan); or
• Governmental deferred compensation plan 
(section 457 plan).
A qualified plan is one that meets the re-
quirements of the Internal Revenue Code.
Eligible rollover distribution.  Generally, an 
eligible rollover distribution is any distribution of 
all or part of the balance to your credit in a quali-
fied retirement plan except the following.
1. A required minimum distribution (ex-
plained later under When Must Y ou With-
draw IRA Assets? (Required Minimum 
Distributions)).
2. A hardship distribution.
3. Any of a series of substantially equal peri-
odic distributions paid at least once a year 
over:
a. Y our lifetime or life expectancy,
b. The lifetimes or life expectancies of 
you and your beneficiary, or
c. A period of 10 years or more.
4. Corrective distributions of excess contribu-
tions or excess deferrals, and any income 
allocable to the excess, or of excess an-
nual additions and any allocable gains.
5. A loan treated as a distribution because it 
doesn't satisfy certain requirements either 
when made or later (such as upon de-
fault), unless the participant's accrued 
benefits are reduced (offset) to repay the 
loan. For more information, see Plan loan 
offsets under Time Limit for Making a Roll-
over Contribution in Pub. 590-A.
6. Dividends on employer securities.
7. The cost of life insurance coverage.
Y our rollover into a traditional IRA may in-
clude both amounts that would be taxable and 
amounts that wouldn’t be taxable if they were 
distributed to you but not rolled over. T o the ex-
tent the distribution is rolled over into a tradi-
tional IRA, it isn’t includible in your income.
Any nontaxable amounts that you roll 
over into your traditional IRA become 
part of your basis (cost) in your IRAs. 
T o recover your basis when you take distribu-
tions from your IRA, you must complete Form 
8606 for the year of the distribution. See Form 
8606 under Distributions Fully or Partly T axable, 
later.
Rollover by nonspouse beneficiary. A direct 
transfer from a deceased employee's qualified 
pension, profit-sharing, or stock bonus plan; an-
nuity plan; tax -sheltered annuity (section 
403(b)) plan; or governmental deferred com-
pensation (section 457) plan to an IRA set up to 
TIP
receive the distribution on your behalf can be 
treated as an eligible rollover distribution if you 
are the designated beneficiary of the plan and 
not the employee's spouse. The IRA is treated 
as an inherited IRA. For more information about 
inherited IRAs, see Inherited IRAs, earlier.
Reporting rollovers from employer plans. 
Enter the total distribution (before income tax or 
other deductions were withheld) on Form 1040 
or 1040 -SR, line 4a. This amount should be 
shown in box 1 of Form 1099 -R, Distributions 
From Pensions, Annuities, Retirement or 
Profit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insurance Con-
tracts, etc. From this amount, subtract any con-
tributions (usually shown in box 5 of Form 
1099-R) that were taxable to you when made. 
From that result, subtract the amount that was 
rolled over either directly or within 60 days of re-
ceiving the distribution. Enter the remaining 
amount, even if zero, on Form 1040 or 
1040-SR, line 4b. Also, enter "Rollover" next to 
Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 4b.
Transfers Incident to Divorce
If an interest in a traditional IRA is transferred 
from your spouse or former spouse to you by a 
divorce or separate maintenance decree or a 
written document related to such a decree, the 
interest in the IRA, starting from the date of the 
transfer, is treated as your IRA. The transfer is 
tax free. For detailed information, see Distribu-
tions under divorce or similar proceedings (al-
ternate payees) under Rollover From Employ-
er's Plan Into an IRA in Pub. 590-A.
Converting From Any Traditional 
IRA to a Roth IRA
Allowable conversions. Y ou can withdraw all 
or part of the assets from a traditional IRA and 
reinvest them (within 60 days) in a Roth IRA. 
The amount that you withdraw and timely con-
tribute (convert) to the Roth IRA is called a con-
version contribution. If properly (and timely) rol-
led over, the 10% additional tax on early 
distributions won't apply. However, a part or all 
of the conversion contribution from your tradi-
tional IRA is included in your gross income.
Required distributions.  Y ou can't convert 
amounts that must be distributed from your tra-
ditional IRA for a particular year (including the 
calendar year in which you reach age 72 under 
the required minimum distribution  rules (dis-
cussed later)).
Income. Y ou must include in your gross in-
come distributions from a traditional IRA that 
you would have had to include in income if you 
hadn't converted them into a Roth IRA. These 
amounts are normally included in income on 
your return for the year that you converted them 
from a traditional IRA to a Roth IRA.
Y ou don't include in gross income any part of 
a distribution from a traditional IRA that is a re-
turn of your basis, as discussed later.
Y ou must file Form 8606 to report 2023 con-
versions from traditional, SEP , or SIMPLE IRAs 
to a Roth IRA in 2023 (unless you recharacter-
ized the entire amount) and to figure the amount 
to include in income.
If you must include any amount in your gross 
income, you may have to increase your with-
holding or make estimated tax payments. See 
chapter 4.
Recharacterizations
Y ou may be able to treat a contribution made to 
one type of IRA as having been made to a dif-
ferent type of IRA. This is called recharacteriz-
ing the contribution. See Can Y ou Move Retire-
ment Plan Assets?  in chapter 1 of Pub. 590 -A 
for more detailed information.
How to recharacterize a contribution.  T o re-
characterize a contribution, you must generally 
have the contribution transferred from the first 
IRA (the one to which it was made) to the sec-
ond IRA in a trustee -to-trustee transfer. If the 
transfer is made by the due date (including ex-
tensions) for your tax return for the year during 
which the contribution was made, you can elect 
to treat the contribution as having been origi-
nally made to the second IRA instead of to the 
first IRA. If you recharacterize your contribution, 
you must do all three of the following.
• Include in the transfer any net income allo-
cable to the contribution. If there was a 
loss, the net income you must transfer may 
be a negative amount.
• Report the recharacterization on your tax 
return for the year during which the contri-
bution was made.
• T reat the contribution as having been 
made to the second IRA on the date that it 
was actually made to the first IRA.
No recharacterizations of conversions 
made in 2018 or later. A conversion of a tradi-
tional IRA to a Roth IRA, and a rollover from any 
other eligible retirement plan to a Roth IRA, 
made in tax years beginning after tax year 
2017, can’t be recharacterized as having been 
made to a traditional IRA. If you made a conver-
sion in the 2017 tax year, you had until the due 
date (including extensions) for filing the return 
for that tax year to recharacterize it.
No deduction allowed.  Y ou can't deduct the 
contribution to the first IRA. Any net income you 
transfer with the recharacterized contribution is 
treated as earned in the second IRA.
How do you recharacterize a contribution? 
T o recharacterize a contribution, you must notify 
both the trustee of the first IRA (the one to 
which the contribution was actually made) and 
the trustee of the second IRA (the one to which 
the contribution is being moved) that you have 
elected to treat the contribution as having been 
made to the second IRA rather than the first. 
Y ou must make the notifications by the date of 
the transfer. Only one notification is required if 
both IRAs are maintained by the same trustee. 
The notification(s) must include all of the follow-
ing information.
• The type and amount of the contribution to 
the first IRA that is to be recharacterized.
• The date on which the contribution was 
made to the first IRA and the year for which 
it was made.
• A direction to the trustee of the first IRA to 
transfer in a trustee-to-trustee transfer the 
Page 87 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17 (2023) Chapter 9 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) 85

amount of the contribution and any net in-
come (or loss) allocable to the contribution 
to the trustee of the second IRA.
• The name of the trustee of the first IRA and 
the name of the trustee of the second IRA.
• Any additional information needed to make 
the transfer.
Reporting a recharacterization.  If you elect 
to recharacterize a contribution to one IRA as a 
contribution to another IRA, you must report the 
recharacterization on your tax return as directed 
by Form 8606 and its instructions. Y ou must 
treat the contribution as having been made to 
the second IRA.
When Can You Withdraw 
or Use IRA Assets?
There are rules limiting use of your IRA assets 
and distributions from it. Violation of the rules 
generally results in additional taxes in the year 
of violation. See What Acts Result in Penalties 
or Additional T axes, later.
Contributions returned before the due date 
of return.  If you made IRA contributions in 
2023, you can withdraw them tax free by the 
due date of your return. If you have an extension 
of time to file your return, you can withdraw 
them tax free by the extended due date. Y ou 
can do this if, for each contribution you with-
draw, both of the following conditions apply.
• Y ou didn't take a deduction for the contri-
bution.
• Y ou withdraw any interest or other income 
earned on the contribution. Y ou can take 
into account any loss on the contribution 
while it was in the IRA when figuring the 
amount that must be withdrawn. If there 
was a loss, the net income earned on the 
contribution may be a negative amount.
Note. T o figure the amount you must with-
draw, see Worksheet 1-4 under When Can Y ou 
Withdraw or Use Assets?  in chapter 1 of Pub. 
590-A.
Earnings includible in income.  Y ou must 
include in income any earnings on the contribu-
tions you withdraw. Include the earnings in in-
come for the year in which you made the contri-
butions, not in the year in which you withdraw 
them.
Generally, except for any part of a with-
drawal that is a return of nondeductible 
contributions (basis), any withdrawal of 
your contributions after the due date (or exten-
ded due date) of your return will be treated as a 
taxable distribution. Excess contributions can 
also be recovered tax free as discussed under 
What Acts Result in Penalties or Additional 
T axes, later. 
Early distributions tax.  The 10% additional 
tax on distributions made before you reach age 
591/2 doesn't apply to these tax -free withdraw-
als of your contributions. However, the distribu-
tion of interest or other income must be repor-
ted on Form 5329 and, unless the distribution 
qualifies as an exception to the age 591/2 rule, it 
will be subject to this tax. See Early Distribu-
CAUTION
!
tions under What Acts Result in Penalties or Ad-
ditional T axes? in Pub. 590-B.
When Must You Withdraw 
IRA Assets? (Required 
Minimum Distributions)
Y ou can't keep funds in a traditional IRA indefi-
nitely. Eventually, they must be distributed. If 
there are no distributions, or if the distributions 
aren't large enough, you may have to pay a 25% 
excise tax on the amount not distributed as re-
quired. See Excess Accumulations (Insufficient 
Distributions), later. The requirements for dis-
tributing IRA funds differ depending on whether 
you are the IRA owner or the beneficiary of a 
decedent's IRA.
Required minimum distribution. The amount 
that must be distributed each year is referred to 
as the “required minimum distribution.”
Distributions not eligible for rollover. 
Amounts that must be distributed (required min-
imum distributions) during a particular year 
aren't eligible for rollover treatment.
IRA owners.  If you are the owner of a tradi-
tional IRA, you must generally start receiving 
distributions from your IRA by April 1 of the year 
following the year in which you reach age 72. 
April 1 of the year following the year in which 
you reach age 72 is referred to as the “required 
beginning date.”
Distributions by the required beginning 
date. Y ou must receive at least a minimum 
amount for each year starting with the year you 
reach age 72. If you don't (or didn't) receive that 
minimum amount in the year you become age 
72, then you must receive distributions for the 
year you become age 72 by April 1 of the next 
year.
If an IRA owner dies after reaching age 72 
but before April 1 of the next year, no minimum 
distribution is required because death occurred 
before the required beginning date.
Individuals who reach age 72 after De-
cember 31, 2022, may delay receiving 
their required minimum distributions 
until April 1 of the year following the year in 
which they reach age 73.
Even if you begin receiving distribu-
tions before you attain age 72, you 
must begin figuring and receiving re-
quired minimum distributions by your required 
beginning date.
Distributions after the required beginning 
date. The required minimum distribution for 
any year after the year you turn age 72 must be 
made by December 31 of that later year.
Beneficiaries. If you are the beneficiary of a 
decedent's traditional IRA, the requirements for 
distributions from that IRA generally depend on 
whether the IRA owner died before or after the 
required beginning date for distributions.
More information.  For more information, in-
cluding how to figure your required minimum 
distribution each year and how to figure your re-
quired distribution if you are a beneficiary of a 
TIP
CAUTION
!
decedent's IRA, see When Must Y ou Withdraw 
Assets? (Required Minimum Distributions)  in 
chapter 1 of Pub. 590-B.
Are Distributions Taxable?
In general, distributions from a traditional IRA 
are taxable in the year you receive them.
Exceptions. Exceptions to distributions from 
traditional IRAs being taxable in the year you re-
ceive them are:
• Rollovers;
• Qualified charitable distributions (QCDs), 
discussed later;
• T ax-free withdrawals of contributions, dis-
cussed earlier; and
• The return of nondeductible contributions, 
discussed later under Distributions Fully or 
Partly T axable.
Although a conversion of a traditional 
IRA is considered a rollover for Roth 
IRA purposes, it isn't an exception to 
the rule that distributions from a traditional IRA 
are taxable in the year you receive them. Con-
version distributions are includible in your gross 
income subject to this rule and the special rules 
for conversions explained in Converting From 
Any T raditional IRA Into a Roth IRA under Can 
Y ou Move Retirement Plan Assets? in chapter 1 
of Pub. 590-A.
Qualified charitable distributions (QCDs). A 
QCD is generally a nontaxable distribution 
made directly by the trustee of your IRA to an 
organization eligible to receive tax deductible 
contributions. See Qualified Charitable Distribu-
tions in Pub. 590-B for more information.
A QCD will count towards your required 
minimum distribution. See Qualified 
charitable distributions  under Are Dis-
tributions T axable? in chapter 1 of Pub. 590 -B 
for more information.
Ordinary income.  Distributions from tradi-
tional IRAs that you include in income are taxed 
as ordinary income.
No special treatment. In figuring your tax, you 
can't use the 10 -year tax option or capital gain 
treatment that applies to lump -sum distributions 
from qualified retirement plans.
Distributions Fully or Partly 
Taxable
Distributions from your traditional IRA may be 
fully or partly taxable, depending on whether 
your IRA includes any nondeductible contribu-
tions.
Fully taxable.  If only deductible contributions 
were made to your traditional IRA (or IRAs, if 
you have more than one), you have no basis in 
your IRA. Because you have no basis in your 
IRA, any distributions are fully taxable when re-
ceived. See Reporting taxable distributions on 
your return, later.
Partly taxable.  If you made nondeductible 
contributions or rolled over any after -tax 
amounts to any of your traditional IRAs, you 
have a cost basis (investment in the contract) 
CAUTION
!
TIP
Page 88 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
86 Chapter 9 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) Publication 17 (2023)

equal to the amount of those contributions. 
These nondeductible contributions aren't taxed 
when they are distributed to you. They are a re-
turn of your investment in your IRA.
Only the part of the distribution that repre-
sents nondeductible contributions and rolled 
over after -tax amounts (your cost basis) is tax 
free. If nondeductible contributions have been 
made or after -tax amounts have been rolled 
over to your IRA, distributions consist partly of 
nondeductible contributions (basis) and partly 
of deductible contributions, earnings, and gains 
(if there are any). Until all of your basis has 
been distributed, each distribution is partly non-
taxable and partly taxable.
Form 8606.  Y ou must complete Form 8606 
and attach it to your return if you receive a distri-
bution from a traditional IRA and have ever 
made nondeductible contributions or rolled over 
after-tax amounts to any of your traditional 
IRAs. Using the form, you will figure the nontax-
able distributions for 2023 and your total IRA 
basis for 2023 and earlier years.
Note. If you are required to file Form 8606 
but you aren't required to file an income tax re-
turn, you must still file Form 8606. Send it to the 
IRS at the time and place you would otherwise 
file an income tax return.
Distributions reported on Form 1099 -R. If 
you receive a distribution from your traditional 
IRA, you will receive Form 1099 -R, or a similar 
statement. IRA distributions are shown in boxes 
1 and 2a of Form 1099 -R. The number or letter 
codes in box 7 tell you what type of distribution 
you received from your IRA.
Withholding. Federal income tax is withheld 
from distributions from traditional IRAs unless 
you choose not to have tax withheld. See chap-
ter 4.
IRA distributions delivered outside the 
United States. In general, if you are a U.S. citi-
zen or resident alien and your home address is 
outside the United States or its territories, you 
can't choose exemption from withholding on 
distributions from your traditional IRA.
Reporting taxable distributions on your re-
turn. Report fully taxable distributions, includ-
ing early distributions, on Form 1040 or 
1040-SR, line 4b (no entry is required on Form 
1040 or 1040-SR, line 4a). If only part of the dis-
tribution is taxable, enter the total amount on 
Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 4a, and the taxable 
part on Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 4b.
What Acts Result in 
Penalties or Additional 
Taxes?
The tax advantages of using traditional IRAs for 
retirement savings can be offset by additional 
taxes and penalties if you don't follow the rules.
There are additions to the regular tax for us-
ing your IRA funds in prohibited transactions. 
There are also additional taxes for the following 
activities.
• Investing in collectibles.
• Having unrelated business income; see 
Pub. 590-B.
• Making excess contributions.
• T aking early distributions.
• Allowing excess amounts to accumulate 
(failing to take required distributions).
There are penalties for overstating the 
amount of nondeductible contributions and for 
failure to file a Form 8606, if required.
Prohibited Transactions
Generally, a prohibited transaction is any im-
proper use of your traditional IRA by you, your 
beneficiary, or any disqualified person.
Disqualified persons include your fiduciary 
and members of your family (spouse, ancestor, 
lineal descendent, and any spouse of a lineal 
descendent).
The following are examples of prohibited 
transactions with a traditional IRA.
• Borrowing money from it; see Pub. 590-B.
• Selling property to it.
• Using it as security for a loan.
• Buying property for personal use (present 
or future) with IRA funds.
Effect on an IRA account.  Generally, if you or 
your beneficiary engages in a prohibited trans-
action in connection with your traditional IRA 
account at any time during the year, the account 
stops being an IRA as of the first day of that 
year.
Effect on you or your beneficiary. If your ac-
count stops being an IRA because you or your 
beneficiary engaged in a prohibited transaction, 
the account is treated as distributing all its as-
sets to you at their fair market values on the first 
day of the year. If the total of those values is 
more than your basis in the IRA, you will have a 
taxable gain that is includible in your income. 
For information on figuring your gain and report-
ing it in income, see Are Distributions T axable, 
earlier. The distribution may be subject to addi-
tional taxes or penalties.
Taxes on prohibited transactions.  If some-
one other than the owner or beneficiary of a tra-
ditional IRA engages in a prohibited transaction, 
that person may be liable for certain taxes. In 
general, there is a 15% tax on the amount of the 
prohibited transaction and a 100% additional 
tax if the transaction isn't corrected.
More information.  For more information on 
prohibited transactions, see What Acts Result in 
Penalties or Additional T axes? in chapter 1 of 
Pub. 590-A.
Investment in Collectibles
If your traditional IRA invests in collectibles, the 
amount invested is considered distributed to 
you in the year invested. Y ou may have to pay 
the 10% additional tax on early distributions , 
discussed later.
Collectibles. These include:
• Artworks,
• Rugs,
• Antiques,
• Metals,
• Gems,
• Stamps,
• Coins,
• Alcoholic beverages, and
• Certain other tangible personal property.
Exception. Y our IRA can invest in one -, 
one-half-, one-quarter-, or one-tenth-ounce U.S. 
gold coins, or one -ounce silver coins minted by 
the T reasury Department. It can also invest in 
certain platinum coins and certain gold, silver, 
palladium, and platinum bullion.
Excess Contributions
Generally, an excess contribution is the amount 
contributed to your traditional IRA(s) for the year 
that is more than the smaller of:
• The maximum deductible amount for the 
year (for 2023, this is $6,500 ($7,500 if you 
are 50 or older)); or
• Y our taxable compensation for the year.
An excess contribution could be the result of 
your contribution, your spouse's contribution, 
your employer's contribution, or an improper 
rollover contribution. If your employer makes 
contributions on your behalf to a SEP IRA, see 
chapter 2 of Pub. 560.
Tax on excess contributions.  In general, if 
the excess contributions for a year aren't with-
drawn by the date your return for the year is due 
(including extensions), you are subject to a 6% 
tax. Y ou must pay the 6% tax each year on ex-
cess amounts that remain in your traditional IRA 
at the end of your tax year. The tax can't be 
more than 6% of the combined value of all your 
IRAs as of the end of your tax year. The addi-
tional tax is figured on Form 5329.
Excess contributions withdrawn by due 
date of return.  Y ou won't have to pay the 6% 
tax if you withdraw an excess contribution made 
during a tax year and you also withdraw interest 
or other income earned on the excess contribu-
tion. Y ou must complete your withdrawal by the 
date your tax return for that year is due, includ-
ing extensions.
How to treat withdrawn contributions. 
Don't include in your gross income an excess 
contribution that you withdraw from your tradi-
tional IRA before your tax return is due if both 
the following conditions are met.
• No deduction was allowed for the excess 
contribution.
• Y ou withdraw the interest or other income 
earned on the excess contribution.
Y ou can take into account any loss on the con-
tribution while it was in the IRA when figuring 
the amount that must be withdrawn. If there was 
a loss, the net income you must withdraw may 
be a negative amount.
How to treat withdrawn interest or other 
income. Y ou must include in your gross in-
come the interest or other income that was 
earned on the excess contribution. Report it on 
your return for the year in which the excess con-
tribution was made. Y our withdrawal of interest 
or other income may be subject to an additional 
10% tax on early distributions, discussed later.
Beginning on or after December 29, 2022, 
the 10% additional tax will not apply to your 
Page 89 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17 (2023) Chapter 9 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) 87

withdrawal of interest or other income, if with-
drawn on or before the due date (including ex-
tensions) of the income tax return. See Pub. 
590-B for more information.
Excess contributions withdrawn after due 
date of return. In general, you must include all 
distributions (withdrawals) from your traditional 
IRA in your gross income. However, if the fol-
lowing conditions are met, you can withdraw ex-
cess contributions from your IRA and not in-
clude the amount withdrawn in your gross 
income.
• T otal contributions (other than rollover con-
tributions) for 2023 to your IRA weren't 
more than $6,500 ($7,500 if you are 50 or 
older).
• Y ou didn't take a deduction for the excess 
contribution being withdrawn.
The withdrawal can take place at any time, even 
after the due date, including extensions, for fil-
ing your tax return for the year.
Excess contribution deducted in an earlier 
year. If you deducted an excess contribution in 
an earlier year for which the total contributions 
weren't more than the maximum deductible 
amount for that year (see the following table), 
you can still remove the excess from your tradi-
tional IRA and not include it in your gross in-
come. T o do this, file Form 1040-X for that year 
and don't deduct the excess contribution on the 
amended return. Generally, you can file an 
amended return within 3 years after you filed 
your return or 2 years from the time the tax was 
paid, whichever is later.
Year(s)
Contribution
 limit
Contribution 
limit if 50 or 
older at the 
end of the 
year
2023 $6,500 $7,500
2019 through 
2022 $6,000 $7,000
2013 through 
2018 $5,500 $6,500
2008 through 
2012 $5,000 $6,000
2006 or 2007 $4,000 $5,000
2005 $4,000 $4,500
2002 through 
2004 $3,000 $3,500
1997 through 
2001 $2,000 —
before 1997 $2,250 —
Excess due to incorrect rollover informa-
tion. If an excess contribution in your traditional 
IRA is the result of a rollover and the excess oc-
curred because the information the plan was re-
quired to give you was incorrect, you can with-
draw the excess contribution. The limits 
mentioned above are increased by the amount 
of the excess that is due to the incorrect infor-
mation. Y ou will have to amend your return for 
the year in which the excess occurred to correct 
the reporting of the rollover amounts in that 
year. Don't include in your gross income the 
part of the excess contribution caused by the in-
correct information. For more information, see 
Excess Contributions under What Acts Result in 
Penalties or Additional T axes? in Pub. 590-A.
Early Distributions
Y ou must include early distributions of taxable 
amounts from your traditional IRA in your gross 
income. Early distributions are also subject to 
an additional 10% tax. See the discussion of 
Form 5329 under Reporting Additional T axes, 
later, to figure and report the tax.
Early distributions defined.  Early distribu-
tions are generally amounts distributed from 
your traditional IRA account or annuity before 
you are age 591/2.
Age 591/2 rule. Generally, if you are under age 
591/2, you must pay a 10% additional tax on the 
distribution of any assets (money or other prop-
erty) from your traditional IRA. Distributions be-
fore you are age 59 1/2 are called early distribu-
tions.
The 10% additional tax applies to the part of 
the distribution that you have to include in gross 
income. It is in addition to any regular income 
tax on that amount.
After age 59 1/2 and before age 72.  After 
you reach age 59 1/2, you can receive distribu-
tions without having to pay the 10% additional 
tax. Even though you can receive distributions 
after you reach age 591/2, distributions aren't re-
quired until you reach age 72. See When Must 
Y ou Withdraw IRA Assets? (Required Minimum 
Distributions), earlier.
Exceptions. There are several exceptions to 
the age 591/2 rule. Even if you receive a distribu-
tion before you are age 59 1/2, you may not have 
to pay the 10% additional tax if you are in one of 
the following situations.
• Y ou have unreimbursed medical expenses 
that are more than 7.5% of your AGI.
• The distribution is for the cost of your medi-
cal insurance due to a period of unemploy-
ment.
• Y ou are totally and permanently disabled.
• Y ou have been certified as having a termi-
nal illness.
• Y ou are the beneficiary of a deceased IRA 
owner.
• Y ou are receiving distributions in the form 
of a series of substantially equal periodic 
payments.
• The distribution is income on a corrective 
distribution.
• The distribution is for your qualified higher 
education expenses.
• Y ou use the distributions to buy, build, or 
rebuild a first home.
• The distribution is due to an IRS levy of the 
IRA or retirement plan.
• The distribution is a qualified reservist dis-
tribution.
Most of these exceptions are explained under 
Early Distributions  under What Acts Result in 
Penalties or Additional T axes? in chapter 1 of 
Pub. 590-B.
Note. Distributions that are timely and prop-
erly rolled over, as discussed earlier, aren't sub-
ject to either regular income tax or the 10% ad-
ditional tax. Certain withdrawals of excess 
contributions after the due date of your return 
are also tax free and therefore not subject to the 
10% additional tax. (See Excess contributions 
withdrawn after due date of return , earlier.) This 
also applies to transfers incident to divorce , as 
discussed earlier.
Receivership distributions.  Early distribu-
tions (with or without your consent) from sav-
ings institutions placed in receivership are sub-
ject to this tax unless one of the exceptions 
listed earlier applies. This is true even if the dis-
tribution is from a receiver that is a state agency.
Additional 10% tax.  The additional tax on 
early distributions is 10% of the amount of the 
early distribution that you must include in your 
gross income. This tax is in addition to any reg-
ular income tax resulting from including the dis-
tribution in income.
Nondeductible contributions.  The tax on 
early distributions doesn't apply to the part of a 
distribution that represents a return of your non-
deductible contributions (basis).
More information.  For more information on 
early distributions, see What Acts Result in Pen-
alties or Additional T axes? in chapter 1 of Pub. 
590-B.
Excess Accumulations
(Insufficient Distributions)
Y ou can't keep amounts in your traditional IRA 
indefinitely. Generally, you must begin receiving 
distributions by April 1 of the year following the 
year in which you reach age 72. The required 
minimum distribution for any year after the year 
in which you reach age 72 must be made by 
December 31 of that later year.
Individuals who reach age 72 after De-
cember 31, 2022, may delay receiving 
their required minimum distributions 
until April 1 of the year following the year in 
which they reach age 73.
Tax on excess.  If distributions are less than 
the required minimum distribution for the year, 
you may have to pay a 25% excise tax for that 
year on the amount not distributed as required.
The excise tax on distributions that are 
less than the required minimum distri-
bution amount is reduced to 25% for 
tax years beginning after December 29, 2022. 
Also, there is an additional reduction to 10% for 
taxpayers meeting additional requirements. See 
Pub. 590-B for more information.
Request to waive the tax.  If the excess accu-
mulation is due to reasonable error, and you 
have taken, or are taking, steps to remedy the 
insufficient distribution, you can request that the 
tax be waived. If you believe you qualify for this 
relief, attach a statement of explanation and 
complete Form 5329 as instructed under 
Waiver of tax for reasonable cause  in the In-
structions for Form 5329.
Exemption from tax. If you are unable to take 
required distributions because you have a 
TIP
TIP
Page 90 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
88 Chapter 9 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) Publication 17 (2023)

traditional IRA invested in a contract issued by 
an insurance company that is in state insurer 
delinquency proceedings, the 25% excise tax 
doesn't apply if the conditions and requirements 
of Revenue Procedure 92-10 are satisfied.
More information.  For more information on 
excess accumulations, see What Acts Result in 
Penalties or Additional T axes? in chapter 1 of 
Pub. 590-B.
Reporting Additional Taxes
Generally, you must use Form 5329 to report 
the tax on excess contributions, early distribu-
tions, and excess accumulations.
Filing a tax return.  If you must file an individ-
ual income tax return, complete Form 5329 and 
attach it to your Form 1040 or 1040 -SR. Enter 
the total additional taxes due on Schedule 2 
(Form 1040), line 8.
Not filing a tax return.  If you don't have to file 
a tax return but do have to pay one of the addi-
tional taxes mentioned earlier, file the comple-
ted Form 5329 with the IRS at the time and 
place you would have filed your Form 1040 or 
1040-SR. Be sure to include your address on 
page 1 and your signature and date on page 2. 
Enclose, but don't attach, a check or money or-
der made payable to “United States T reasury” 
for the tax you owe, as shown on Form 5329. 
Enter your social security number and “2023 
Form 5329” on your check or money order.
Form 5329 not required.  Y ou don't have to 
use Form 5329 if any of the following situations 
exists.
• Distribution code 1 (early distribution) is 
correctly shown in box 7 of all your Forms 
1099-R. If you don't owe any other addi-
tional tax on a distribution, multiply the tax-
able part of the early distribution by 10% 
(0.10) and enter the result on Schedule 2 
(Form 1040), line 8. Enter “No” to the left of 
the line to indicate that you don't have to 
file Form 5329. However, if you owe this tax 
and also owe any other additional tax on a 
distribution, don't enter this 10% additional 
tax directly on your Form 1040 or 1040-SR. 
Y ou must file Form 5329 to report your ad-
ditional taxes. 
• If you rolled over part or all of a distribution 
from a qualified retirement plan, the part 
rolled over isn't subject to the tax on early 
distributions.
• If you have a qualified disaster distribution.
Roth IRAs
Regardless of your age, you may be able to es-
tablish and make nondeductible contributions to 
a retirement plan called a Roth IRA.
Contributions not reported.  Y ou don't report 
Roth IRA contributions on your return.
What Is a Roth IRA?
A Roth IRA is an individual retirement plan that, 
except as explained in this chapter, is subject to 
the rules that apply to a traditional IRA (defined 
earlier). It can be either an account or an annu-
ity. Individual retirement accounts and annuities 
are described under How Can a T raditional IRA 
Be Opened? in chapter 1 of Pub. 590-A.
T o be a Roth IRA, the account or annuity 
must be designated as a Roth IRA when it is 
opened. A deemed IRA can be a Roth IRA. Be-
ginning in tax year 2023, both a SEP or SIMPLE 
IRA can be designated as a Roth IRA.
Unlike a traditional IRA, you can't deduct 
contributions to a Roth IRA. But, if you satisfy 
the requirements, qualified distributions  (dis-
cussed later) are tax free. Y ou can leave 
amounts in your Roth IRA as long as you live.
When Can a Roth IRA Be 
Opened?
Y ou can open a Roth IRA at any time. However, 
the time for making contributions for any year is 
limited. See When Can Y ou Make Contributions 
under Can Y ou Contribute to a Roth IRA? next.
Can You Contribute to a 
Roth IRA?
Generally, you can contribute to a Roth IRA if 
you have taxable compensation  (defined later) 
and your modified AGI  (defined later) is less 
than:
• $228,000 for married filing jointly or qualify-
ing surviving spouse;
• $153,000 for single, head of household, or 
married filing separately and you didn't live 
with your spouse at any time during the 
year; or
• $10,000 for married filing separately and 
you lived with your spouse at any time dur-
ing the year.
Y ou may be eligible to claim a credit for 
contributions to your Roth IRA. For 
more information, see chapter 3 of Pub. 
590-A.
Is there an age limit for contributions? Con-
tributions can be made to your Roth IRA regard-
less of your age.
Can you contribute to a Roth IRA for your 
spouse? Y ou can contribute to a Roth IRA for 
your spouse provided the contributions satisfy 
the Kay Bailey Hutchison Spousal IRA limit (dis-
cussed under How Much Can Be Contributed , 
earlier, under T raditional IRAs), you file jointly, 
and your modified AGI is less than $228,000.
Compensation. Compensation includes wa-
ges, salaries, tips, professional fees, bonuses, 
and other amounts received for providing per-
sonal services. It also includes commissions, 
self-employment income, nontaxable combat 
pay, military differential pay, taxable alimony and 
separate maintenance payments, and taxable 
non-tuition fellowship and stipend payments.
See What is compensation, earlier, for more 
information.
Modified AGI. Y our modified AGI for Roth IRA 
purposes is your AGI as shown on your return 
with some adjustments. Use Worksheet 9-2 to 
determine your modified AGI.
TIP
Page 91 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17 (2023) Chapter 9 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) 89

Worksheet 9-2. Modified AGI for Roth IRA Purposes Keep for Y our Records
Use this worksheet to figure your modified AGI for Roth IRA purposes.
 1. Enter your AGI from Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 11 ............................... 1.  
 2. Enter any income resulting from the conversion of an IRA (other than a Roth IRA) to a Roth 
IRA (included on Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 4b) and a rollover from a qualified retirement 
plan to a Roth IRA (included on Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 5b) ...................... 2.  
 3. Subtract line 2 from line 1 .................................................... 3.  
 4. Enter any traditional IRA deduction from Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 20 .............. 4.  
 5. Enter any student loan interest deduction from Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 21 ......... 5.  
 6. Enter any foreign earned income and/or housing exclusion from Form 2555, line 45 ...... 6.  
 7. Enter any foreign housing deduction from Form 2555, line 50 ........................ 7.  
 8. Enter any excludable savings bond interest from Form 8815, line 14 .................. 8.  
9. Enter any excluded employer-provided adoption benefits from Form 8839, line 28 ........ 9.  
10. Add the amounts on lines 3 through 9 .......................................... 10.  
11. Enter:
• $228,000 if married filing jointly or qualifying surviving spouse,
• $10,000 if married filing separately and you lived with your 
spouse at any time during the year, or
• $153,000 for all others .................................................... 11.  
Is the amount on line 10 more than the amount on line 11?
If yes, then see the Note below.
If no, then the amount on line 10 is your modified AGI for Roth IRA purposes.
Note. If the amount on line 10 is more than the amount on line 11 and you have other income or loss items, such as social 
security income or passive activity losses, that are subject to AGI-based phaseouts, you can refigure your AGI solely for the 
purpose of figuring your modified AGI for Roth IRA purposes. (If you receive social security benefits, use Worksheet 1 in 
Appendix B of Pub. 590-A to refigure your AGI.) Then, go to line 3 above in this Worksheet 9-2 to refigure your modified AGI. If 
you don't have other income or loss items subject to AGI-based phaseouts, your modified AGI for Roth IRA purposes is the 
amount on line 10.
How Much Can Be Contributed?
The contribution limit for Roth IRAs generally 
depends on whether contributions are made 
only to Roth IRAs or to both traditional IRAs and 
Roth IRAs.
Roth IRAs only. If contributions are made only 
to Roth IRAs, your contribution limit is generally 
the lesser of the following amounts.
• $6,500 ($7,500 if you are 50 or older in 
2023).
• Y our taxable compensation.
However, if your modified AGI is above a certain 
amount, your contribution limit may be reduced, 
as explained later under Contribution limit re-
duced.
Roth IRAs and traditional IRAs.  If contribu-
tions are made to both Roth IRAs and traditional 
IRAs established for your benefit, your contribu-
tion limit for Roth IRAs is generally the same as 
your limit would be if contributions were made 
only to Roth IRAs, but then reduced by all con-
tributions for the year to all IRAs other than Roth 
IRAs. Employer contributions under a SEP or 
SIMPLE IRA plan don't affect this limit.
This means that your contribution limit is 
generally the lesser of the following amounts.
• $6,500 ($7,500 if you are 50 or older in 
2023) minus all contributions (other than 
employer contributions under a SEP or 
SIMPLE IRA plan) for the year to all IRAs 
other than Roth IRAs.
• Y our taxable compensation minus all con-
tributions (other than employer contribu-
tions under a SEP or SIMPLE IRA plan) for 
the year to all IRAs other than Roth IRAs.
However, if your modified AGI is above a certain 
amount, your contribution limit may be reduced, 
as explained next under Contribution limit re-
duced.
Contribution limit reduced.  If your modified 
AGI is above a certain amount, your contribu-
tion limit is gradually reduced. Use T able 9-3 to 
determine if this reduction applies to you.
Page 92 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
90 Chapter 9 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) Publication 17 (2023)

T able 9-3.Effect of Modified AGI on Roth IRA Contribution
This table shows whether your contribution to a Roth IRA is affected by the amount of your modified AGI.
IF you have taxable compensation and 
your filing status is...
AND your modified 
AGI is... THEN...
Married filing jointly or 
Qualifying surviving spouse
less than $218,000 you can contribute up to $6,500 ($7,500 if you are 50 or 
older in 2023). 
at least $218,000
but less than $228,000
the amount you can contribute is reduced as explained 
under Contribution limit reduced in chapter 2 of Pub. 
590-A.
$228,000 or more you can't contribute to a Roth IRA.
Married filing separately and you lived 
with your spouse at any time during the year
zero (-0-) you can contribute up to $6,500 ($7,500 if you are 50 or 
older in 2023). 
more than zero (-0-)
but less than $10,000
the amount you can contribute is reduced as explained 
under Contribution limit reduced in chapter 2 of Pub. 
590-A.
$10,000 or more you can't contribute to a Roth IRA.
Single, Head of household, or Married 
filing separately and you didn't live with 
your spouse at any time during the year
less than $138,000 you can contribute up to $6,500 ($7,500 if you are 50 or 
older in 2023).
at least $138,000
but less than $153,000
the amount you can contribute is reduced as explained 
under Contribution limit reduced in chapter 2 of Pub. 
590-A.
$153,000 or more you can't contribute to a Roth IRA.
Figuring the reduction.  If the amount you 
can contribute to your Roth IRA is reduced, see 
Worksheet 2-2 under Can Y ou Contribute to a 
Roth IRA? in chapter 2 of Pub. 590-A for how to 
figure the reduction.
When Can You Make 
Contributions?
Y ou can make contributions to a Roth IRA for a 
year at any time during the year or by the due 
date of your return for that year (not including 
extensions).
Y ou can make contributions for 2023 by 
the due date (not including extensions) 
for filing your 2023 tax return.
What if You Contribute Too Much?
A 6% excise tax applies to any excess contribu-
tion to a Roth IRA.
Excess contributions.  These are the contri-
butions to your Roth IRAs for a year that equal 
the total of:
1. Amounts contributed for the tax year to 
your Roth IRAs (other than amounts prop-
erly and timely rolled over from a Roth IRA 
or properly converted from a traditional 
IRA or rolled over from a qualified retire-
ment plan, as described later) that are 
more than your contribution limit for the 
year; plus
2. Any excess contributions for the preceding 
year, reduced by the total of:
a. Any distributions out of your Roth 
IRAs for the year, plus
b. Y our contribution limit for the year mi-
nus your contributions to all your IRAs 
for the year.
TIP
Withdrawal of excess contributions.  For 
purposes of determining excess contributions, 
any contribution that is withdrawn on or before 
the due date (including extensions) for filing 
your tax return for the year is treated as an 
amount not contributed. This treatment applies 
only if any earnings on the contributions are 
also withdrawn. The earnings are considered to 
have been earned and received in the year the 
excess contribution was made.
Applying excess contributions.  If contribu-
tions to your Roth IRA for a year were more than 
the limit, you can apply the excess contribution 
in one year to a later year if the contributions for 
that later year are less than the maximum al-
lowed for that year.
Can You Move Amounts 
Into a Roth IRA?
Y ou may be able to convert amounts from either 
a traditional, SEP , or SIMPLE IRA into a Roth 
IRA. Y ou may be able to roll amounts over from 
a qualified retirement plan to a Roth IRA. Y ou 
may be able to recharacterize contributions 
made to one IRA as having been made directly 
to a different IRA. Y ou can roll amounts over 
from a designated Roth account or from one 
Roth IRA to another Roth IRA.
Conversions
Y ou can convert a traditional IRA to a Roth IRA. 
The conversion is treated as a rollover, regard-
less of the conversion method used. Most of the 
rules for rollovers, described earlier under Roll-
over From One IRA Into Another  under T radi-
tional IRAs , apply to these rollovers. However, 
the 1-year waiting period doesn't apply.
Conversion methods.  Y ou can convert 
amounts from a traditional IRA to a Roth IRA in 
any of the following ways.
• Rollover. Y ou can receive a distribution 
from a traditional IRA and roll it over (con-
tribute it) to a Roth IRA within 60 days after 
the distribution.
• Trustee-to-trustee transfer. Y ou can di-
rect the trustee of the traditional IRA to 
transfer an amount from the traditional IRA 
to the trustee of the Roth IRA.
• Same trustee transfer. If the trustee of 
the traditional IRA also maintains the Roth 
IRA, you can direct the trustee to transfer 
an amount from the traditional IRA to the 
Roth IRA.
Same trustee.  Conversions made with the 
same trustee can be made by redesignating the 
traditional IRA as a Roth IRA, rather than open-
ing a new account or issuing a new contract.
Rollover from a qualified retirement plan 
into a Roth IRA.  Y ou can roll over into a Roth 
IRA all or part of an eligible rollover distribution 
you receive from your (or your deceased spou-
se's):
• Employer's qualified pension, profit-shar-
ing, or stock bonus plan;
• Annuity plan;
• T ax-sheltered annuity plan (section 403(b) 
plan); or
• Governmental deferred compensation plan 
(section 457 plan).
Any amount rolled over is subject to the same 
rules as those for converting a traditional IRA 
into a Roth IRA. Also, the rollover contribution 
must meet the rollover requirements that apply 
to the specific type of retirement plan.
Page 93 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17 (2023) Chapter 9 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) 91

Income. Y ou must include in your gross in-
come distributions from a qualified retirement 
plan that you would have had to include in in-
come if you hadn't rolled them over into a Roth 
IRA. Y ou don't include in gross income any part 
of a distribution from a qualified retirement plan 
that is a return of basis (after -tax contributions) 
to the plan that was taxable to you when paid. 
These amounts are normally included in income 
on your return for the year of the rollover from 
the qualified employer plan to a Roth IRA.
If you must include any amount in your 
gross income, you may have to in-
crease your withholding or make esti-
mated tax payments. See Pub. 505, T ax With-
holding and Estimated T ax.
For more information, see Rollover From 
Employer's Plan Into a Roth IRA  in chapter 2 of 
Pub. 590-A.
Converting from a SIMPLE IRA.  Generally, 
you can convert an amount in your SIMPLE IRA 
to a Roth IRA under the same rules explained 
earlier under Converting From Any T raditional 
IRA to a Roth IRA under T raditional IRAs.
However, you can't convert any amount dis-
tributed from the SIMPLE IRA plan during the 
2-year period beginning on the date you first 
participated in any SIMPLE IRA plan main-
tained by your employer.
More information. For more detailed informa-
tion on conversions, see Can Y ou Move 
Amounts Into a Roth IRA?  in chapter 2 of Pub. 
590-A.
Rollover From a Roth IRA
Y ou can withdraw, tax free, all or part of the as-
sets from one Roth IRA if you contribute them 
within 60 days to another Roth IRA. Most of the 
rules for rollovers, explained earlier under Roll-
over From One IRA Into Another  under T radi-
tional IRAs, apply to these rollovers.
Rollover from designated Roth account.  A 
rollover from a designated Roth account can 
CAUTION
!
only be made to another designated Roth ac-
count or to a Roth IRA. For more information 
about designated Roth accounts, see Designa-
ted Roth accounts under Rollovers in Pub. 575.
Are Distributions Taxable?
Y ou don't include in your gross income qualified 
distributions or distributions that are a return of 
your regular contributions from your Roth 
IRA(s). Y ou also don't include distributions from 
your Roth IRA that you roll over tax free into an-
other Roth IRA. Y ou may have to include part of 
other distributions in your income. See Ordering 
rules for distributions, later.
What are qualified distributions?  A qualified 
distribution is any payment or distribution from 
your Roth IRA that meets the following require-
ments.
1. It is made after the 5-year period begin-
ning with the first tax year for which a con-
tribution was made to a Roth IRA set up 
for your benefit.
2. The payment or distribution is:
a. Made on or after the date you reach 
age 591/2,
b. Made because you are disabled,
c. Made to a beneficiary or to your es-
tate after your death, or
d. T o pay up to $10,000 (lifetime limit) of 
certain qualified first-time homebuyer 
amounts. See First home under What 
Acts Result in Penalties or Additional 
T axes? in chapter 1 of Pub. 590-B for 
more information.
Additional tax on distributions of conver-
sion and certain rollover contributions 
within 5-year period. If, within the 5 -year pe-
riod starting with the first day of your tax year in 
which you convert an amount from a traditional 
IRA or roll over an amount from a qualified re-
tirement plan to a Roth IRA, you take a distribu-
tion from a Roth IRA, you may have to pay the 
10% additional tax on early distributions. Y ou 
must generally pay the 10% additional tax on 
any amount attributable to the part of the 
amount converted or rolled over (the conversion 
or rollover contribution) that you had to include 
in income. A separate 5 -year period applies to 
each conversion and rollover. See Ordering 
rules for distributions , later, to determine the 
amount, if any, of the distribution that is attribut-
able to the part of the conversion or rollover 
contribution that you had to include in income.
Additional tax on other early distributions. 
Unless an exception applies, you must pay the 
10% additional tax on the taxable part of any 
distributions that aren't qualified distributions. 
See Pub. 590-B for more information.
Ordering rules for distributions.  If you re-
ceive a distribution from your Roth IRA that isn't 
a qualified distribution, part of it may be taxable. 
There is a set order in which contributions (in-
cluding conversion contributions and rollover 
contributions from qualified retirement plans) 
and earnings are considered to be distributed 
from your Roth IRA. Regular contributions are 
distributed first. See Ordering Rules for Distribu-
tions under Are Distributions T axable? in chap-
ter 2 of Pub. 590-B for more information.
Must you withdraw or use Roth IRA assets? 
Y ou aren't required to take distributions from 
your Roth IRA at any age. The minimum distri-
bution rules that apply to traditional IRAs don't 
apply to Roth IRAs while the owner is alive. 
However, after the death of a Roth IRA owner, 
certain minimum distribution rules that apply to 
traditional IRAs also apply to Roth IRAs.
More information. For more detailed informa-
tion on Roth IRAs, see chapter 2 of Pub. 590 -A 
and Pub. 590-B.
Page 94 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
92 Chapter 9 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs) Publication 17 (2023)

Part Three.
Standard 
Deduction, 
Itemized 
Deductions, and 
Other 
Deductions
After you have figured your adjusted gross income, you are ready to 
subtract the deductions used to figure taxable income. Y ou can subtract 
either the standard deduction or itemized deductions, and, if you qualify, 
the qualified business income deduction. Itemized deductions are 
deductions for certain expenses that are listed on Schedule A (Form 1040). 
The three chapters in this part discuss the standard deduction and certain 
itemized deductions. See chapter 10 for the factors to consider when 
deciding whether to take the standard deduction or itemized deductions.
The Form 1040 and Form 1040-SR schedules that are discussed in these 
chapters are:
• Schedule 1, Additional Income and Adjustments to Income;
• Schedule 2 (Part II), Other T axes; and
• Schedule 3 (Part I), Nonrefundable Credits.
10.
Standard 
Deduction
What's New
Standard deduction increased.  The stand-
ard deduction for taxpayers who don't itemize 
their deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040) 
has increased. The amount of your standard 
deduction depends on your filing status and 
other factors. Use the 2023 Standard Deduction 
T ables near the end of this chapter to figure 
your standard deduction.
Introduction
This chapter discusses the following topics.
• How to figure the amount of your standard 
deduction.
• The standard deduction for dependents.
• Who should itemize deductions.
Most taxpayers have a choice of either tak-
ing a standard deduction or itemizing their de-
ductions. If you have a choice, you can use the 
method that gives you the lower tax.
The standard deduction is a dollar amount 
that reduces your taxable income. It is a benefit 
that eliminates the need for many taxpayers to 
itemize actual deductions, such as medical ex-
penses, charitable contributions, and taxes, on 
Schedule A (Form 1040). The standard deduc-
tion is higher for taxpayers who:
• Are 65 or older, or
• Are blind.
Y ou benefit from the standard deduc-
tion if your standard deduction is more 
than the total of your allowable itemized 
deductions.
Persons not eligible for the standard de-
duction. Y our standard deduction is zero and 
you should itemize any deductions you have if:
• Y our filing status is married filing sepa-
rately, and your spouse itemizes deduc-
tions on their return;
• Y ou are filing a tax return for a short tax 
year because of a change in your annual 
accounting period; or
• Y ou are a nonresident or dual-status alien 
during the year. Y ou are considered a 
dual-status alien if you were both a nonres-
ident and resident alien during the year.
If you are a nonresident alien who is married 
to a U.S. citizen or resident alien at the end of 
the year, you can choose to be treated as a U.S. 
resident. (See Pub. 519.) If you make this 
choice, you can take the standard deduction.
If you can be claimed as a dependent 
on another person’s return (such as 
your parents’ return), your standard de-
duction may be limited. See Standard Deduc-
tion for Dependents, later.
Useful Items
Y ou may want to see:
Publication
501 Dependents, Standard Deduction, 
and Filing Information
502 Medical and Dental Expenses
526 Charitable Contributions
530 T ax Information for Homeowners
547 Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
550 Investment Income and Expenses
936 Home Mortgage Interest Deduction
TIP
CAUTION
!
  501
  502
  526
  530
  547
  550
  936
970 T ax Benefits for Education
Form (and Instructions)
Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized 
Deductions
Standard Deduction 
Amount
The standard deduction amount depends on 
your filing status, whether you are 65 or older or 
blind, and whether another taxpayer can claim 
you as a dependent. Generally, the standard 
deduction amounts are adjusted each year for 
inflation. The standard deduction amounts for 
most people are shown in T able 10-1.
Decedent's final return. The standard deduc-
tion for a decedent's final tax return is the same 
as it would have been had the decedent contin-
ued to live. However, if the decedent wasn't 65 
or older at the time of death, the higher stand-
ard deduction for age can't be claimed.
Higher Standard 
Deduction for Age (65 or 
Older)
If you are age 65 or older on the last day of the 
year and don't itemize deductions, you are enti-
tled to a higher standard deduction. Y ou are 
considered 65 on the day before your 65th birth-
day. Therefore, you can take a higher standard 
deduction for 2023 if you were born before Jan-
uary 2, 1959.
Use T able 10-2 to figure the standard de-
duction amount.
Death of a taxpayer. If you are preparing a re-
turn for someone who died in 2023, read this 
before using T able 10-2 or T able 10-3. Consider 
the taxpayer to be 65 or older at the end of 2023 
only if they were 65 or older at the time of death. 
Even if the taxpayer was born before January 2, 
1959, they are not considered 65 or older at the 
  970
  Schedule A (Form 1040) 
Page 95 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17 (2023) Chapter 10 Standard Deduction 93

end of 2023 unless they were 65 or older at the 
time of death.
A person is considered to reach age 65 on 
the day before their 65th birthday.
Higher Standard 
Deduction for Blindness
If you are blind on the last day of the year and 
you don't itemize deductions, you are entitled to 
a higher standard deduction.
Not totally blind. If you aren't totally blind, you 
must get a certified statement from an eye doc-
tor (ophthalmologist or optometrist) that:
• Y ou can't see better than 20/200 in the bet-
ter eye with glasses or contact lenses, or
• Y our field of vision is 20 degrees or less.
If your eye condition isn't likely to improve 
beyond these limits, the statement should in-
clude this fact. Keep the statement in your re-
cords.
If your vision can be corrected beyond these 
limits only by contact lenses that you can wear 
only briefly because of pain, infection, or ulcers, 
you can take the higher standard deduction for 
blindness if you otherwise qualify.
Spouse 65 or Older or 
Blind
Y ou can take the higher standard deduction if 
your spouse is age 65 or older or blind and:
• Y ou file a joint return, or
• Y ou file a separate return and your spouse 
had no gross income and can't be claimed 
as a dependent by another taxpayer.
Death of a spouse.  If your spouse died in 
2023 before reaching age 65, you can't take a 
higher standard deduction because of your 
spouse. Even if your spouse was born before 
January 2, 1959, your spouse isn't considered 
65 or older at the end of 2023 unless your 
spouse was 65 or older at the time of death.
A person is considered to reach age 65 on 
the day before their 65th birthday.
Example. Y our spouse was born on Febru-
ary 14, 1958, and died on February 13, 2023. 
Y our spouse is considered age 65 at the time of 
death. However, if your spouse died on Febru-
ary 12, 2023, your spouse isn't considered age 
65 at the time of death and isn't 65 or older at 
the end of 2023.
Y ou can't claim the higher standard de-
duction for an individual other than 
yourself and your spouse.
Higher Standard 
Deduction for Net Disaster 
Loss
Y our standard deduction may be increased by 
any net qualified disaster loss.
See the Instructions for Form 1040 and the 
Instructions for Schedule A (Form 1040) for 
more information on how to figure your 
CAUTION
!
increased standard deduction and how to report 
it on Form 1040 or 1040-SR.
Examples
The following examples illustrate how to deter-
mine your standard deduction using T ables 
10-1 and 10-2.
Example 1. Hunter, 46, and Avery, 33, are 
filing a joint return for 2023. Neither is blind, and 
neither can be claimed as a dependent. They 
decide not to itemize their deductions. They use 
T able 10-1. Their standard deduction is 
$27,700.
Example 2.  The facts are the same as in 
Example 1 , except that Hunter is blind at the 
end of 2023. Hunter and Avery use T able 10-2. 
Their standard deduction is $29,200.
Example 3. Dylan and Dru are filing a joint 
return for 2023. Both are over age 65. Neither is 
blind, and neither can be claimed as a depend-
ent. If they don't itemize deductions, they use 
T able 10-2. Their standard deduction is 
$30,700.
Standard Deduction for 
Dependents
The standard deduction for an individual who 
can be claimed as a dependent on another per-
son's tax return is generally limited to the 
greater of:
• $1,250, or
• The individual's earned income for the year 
plus $400 (but not more than the regular 
standard deduction amount, generally 
$13,850).
However, if the individual is 65 or older or 
blind, the standard deduction may be higher.
If you (or your spouse, if filing jointly) can be 
claimed as a dependent on someone else's re-
turn, use T able 10-3 to determine your standard 
deduction.
Earned income defined.  Earned income is 
salaries, wages, tips, professional fees, and 
other amounts received as pay for work you ac-
tually perform.
For purposes of the standard deduction, 
earned income also includes any part of a taxa-
ble scholarship or fellowship grant. See chap-
ter 1 of Pub. 970 for more information on what 
qualifies as a scholarship or fellowship grant.
Example 1.  Y ou are 16 years old and sin-
gle. Y our parents can claim you as a dependent 
on their 2023 tax return. Y ou have interest in-
come of $780 and wages of $150. Y ou have no 
itemized deductions and use T able 10-3 to find 
your standard deduction. Y ou enter $150 
(earned income) on line 1, $550 ($150 + $400) 
on line 3, $1,250 (the larger of $550 and 
$1,250) on line 5, and $13,850 on line 6. Y our 
standard deduction, on line 7a, is $1,250 (the 
smaller of $1,250 and $13,850).
Example 2.  Y ou are a 22-year-old college 
student and can be claimed as a dependent on 
your parents' 2023 tax return. Y ou are married 
filing a separate return. Y our spouse doesn't 
itemize deductions. Y ou have $1,500 in interest 
income and wages of $3,800 and no itemized 
deductions. Y ou find your standard deduction 
by using T able 10-3. Y ou enter earned income, 
$3,800, on line 1. Y ou add lines 1 and 2 and en-
ter $4,200 ($3,800 + $400) on line 3. On line 5, 
you enter $4,200, the larger of lines 3 and 4. 
Because you are married filing a separate re-
turn, you enter $13,850 on line 6. On line 7a, 
you enter $4,200 as the standard deduction 
amount because it is smaller than $13,850, the 
amount on line 6.
Example 3.  Y ou are single and can be 
claimed as a dependent on your parents' 2023 
tax return. Y ou are 18 years old and blind and 
have interest income of $1,300, wages of 
$2,900, and no itemized deductions. Y ou use 
T able 10-3 to find the standard deduction 
amount. Y ou enter wages of $2,900 on line 1, 
and add lines 1 and 2 and enter $3,300 ($2,900 
+ $400) on line 3. On line 5, you enter $3,300, 
the larger of lines 3 and 4. Because you are sin-
gle, you enter $13,850 on line 6 and $3,300 on 
line 7a. This is the smaller of the amounts on 
lines 5 and 6. Because you checked one box in 
the top part of the worksheet, you enter $1,850 
on line 7b, then add the amounts on lines 7a 
and 7b and enter the standard deduction 
amount of $5,150 ($3,300 + $1,850) on line 7c.
Example 4. Y ou are 18 years old and single 
and can be claimed as a dependent on your pa-
rents’ 2023 tax return. Y ou have wages of 
$7,000, interest income of $500, a business 
loss of $3,000, and no itemized deductions. Y ou 
use T able 10-3 to figure the standard deduction 
amount. Y ou enter $4,000 ($7,000 − $3,000) on 
line 1, and add lines 1 and 2 and enter $4,400 
($4,000 + $400) on line 3. On line 5, you enter 
$4,400, the larger of lines 3 and 4, and, be-
cause you are single, $13,850 on line 6. On 
line 7a, you enter $4,400 as the standard de-
duction amount because it is smaller than 
$13,850, the amount on line 6.
Who Should Itemize
Y ou should itemize deductions if your total de-
ductions are more than your standard deduction 
amount. Also, you should itemize if you don't 
qualify for the standard deduction, as discussed 
earlier under Persons not eligible for the stand-
ard deduction.
Y ou should first figure your itemized deduc-
tions and compare that amount to your standard 
deduction to make sure you are using the 
method that gives you the greater benefit.
When to itemize.  Y ou may benefit from 
itemizing your deductions on Schedule A (Form 
1040) if you:
• Don't qualify for the standard deduction,
• Had large uninsured medical and dental 
expenses during the year,
• Paid interest and taxes on your home,
• Had large uninsured casualty or theft los-
ses,
• Made large contributions to qualified chari-
ties, or
Page 96 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
94 Chapter 10 Standard Deduction Publication 17 (2023)

• Have total itemized deductions that are 
more than the standard deduction to which 
you are otherwise entitled.
These deductions are explained in chapter 11 
and in the publications listed under Useful 
Items, earlier.
If you decide to itemize your deductions, 
complete Schedule A and attach it to your Form 
1040 or 1040 -SR. Enter the amount from 
Schedule A, line 17, on Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, 
line 12.
Electing to itemize for state tax or other 
purposes. Even if your itemized deductions 
are less than your standard deduction, you can 
elect to itemize deductions on your federal re-
turn rather than taking the standard deduction. 
Y ou may want to do this if, for example, the tax 
benefit of itemizing your deductions on your 
state tax return is greater than the tax benefit 
you lose on your federal return by not taking the 
standard deduction. T o make this election, you 
must check the box on line 18 of Schedule A.
Changing your mind. If you don't itemize your 
deductions and later find that you should have 
itemized—or if you itemize your deductions and 
later find you shouldn't have —you can change 
your return by filing Form 1040 -X, Amended 
U.S. Individual Income T ax Return. See Amen-
ded Returns and Claims for Refund in chapter 1 
for more information on amended returns.
Married persons who filed separate re-
turns. Y ou can change methods of taking de-
ductions only if you and your spouse both make 
the same changes. Both of you must file a con-
sent to assessment for any additional tax either 
one may owe as a result of the change.
Y ou and your spouse can use the method 
that gives you the lower total tax, even though 
one of you may pay more tax than you would 
have paid by using the other method. Y ou both 
must use the same method of claiming deduc-
tions. If one itemizes deductions, the other 
should itemize because they won't qualify for 
the standard deduction. See Persons not eligi-
ble for the standard deduction, earlier.
Page 97 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17 (2023) Chapter 10 Standard Deduction 95

2023 Standard Deduction Tables
CAUTION
!
If you are married filing a separate return and your spouse itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien, you can't take the standard deduction 
even if you were born before January 2, 1959, or are blind.
Standard Deduction Chart for Most People*Table 10-1.
IF your filing status is... THEN your standard deduction is...
Single or Married filing separately $13,850
Married filing jointly or Qualifying surviving spouse  27,700
Head of household  20,800
* Don't use this chart if you were born before January 2, 1959, are blind, or if someone else can claim you (or your spouse, if filing jointly) as a dependent. Use T able 10-2 or 
10-3 instead.
Standard Deduction Chart for People Born Before January 2, 1959, or Who Are Blind*Table 10-2.
Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the chart.
You: Born before January 2, 1959 
 Blind 
Your spouse: Born before January 2, 1959 
 Blind 
Total number of boxes checked 
IF 
your filing status is...
AND
the number in the box above is...
THEN
your standard deduction is...
Single 1 $15,700
2  17,550
Married filing jointly 1 $29,200
2   30,700
3   32,200
4   33,700
Qualifying surviving spouse 1 $29,200
2  30,700
Married filing 1 $15,350
separately** 2  16,850
3   18,350
4   19,850
Head of household 1 $22,650
2   24,500
* If someone else can claim you (or your spouse, if filing jointly) as a dependent, use T able 10-3 instead.
** Y ou can check the boxes for Y our Spouse if your filing status is married filing separately and your spouse had no income, isn’t filing a return, and can’t be claimed as a 
dependent on another person’s return. 
Standard Deduction Worksheet for Dependents
Use this worksheet only if someone else can claim you (or your spouse, if filing jointly) as a dependent.
Table 10-3.
Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the worksheet.
You: Born before January 2, 1959 
 Blind 
Your spouse: Born before January 2, 1959 
 Blind 
Total number of boxes checked 
1. Enter your earned income (defined below). If none, enter -0-. 1.  
2. Additional amount. 2. $400
3. Add lines 1 and 2. 3.  
4. Minimum standard deduction. 4. $1,250
5. Enter the larger of line 3 or line 4. 5.  
6. Enter the amount shown below for your filing status. 
• Single or Married filing separately—$13,850
• Married filing jointly—$27,700
• Head of household—$20,800
6.  
7. Standard deduction. 
a. Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6. If born after January 1, 1959, and not blind, stop here. This is your 
standard deduction. Otherwise, go on to line 7b. 7a.  
b. If born before January 2, 1959, or blind, multiply $1,850 ($1,500 if married) by the number in the box above. 7b.  
c. Add lines 7a and 7b. This is your standard deduction for 2023. 7c.  
Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees, and other compensation received for personal services you performed. It also includes any 
taxable scholarship or fellowship grant.
Page 98 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
96 Chapter 10 Standard Deduction Publication 17 (2023)

11.
Taxes
Reminders
Limitation on deduction for state and local 
taxes.  The T ax Cuts and Jobs Act provided for 
a temporary limitation on the deduction for state 
and local taxes. See Limitation on deduction for 
state and local taxes, later.
No deduction for foreign taxes paid for real 
estate.  Y ou can no longer deduct foreign taxes 
you paid on real estate.
Introduction
This chapter discusses which taxes you can de-
duct if you itemize deductions on Schedule A 
(Form 1040). It also explains which taxes you 
can deduct on other schedules or forms and 
which taxes you can’t deduct.
This chapter covers the following topics.
• Income taxes (federal, state, local, and for-
eign).
• General sales taxes (state and local).
• Real estate taxes (state, local, and for-
eign).
• Personal property taxes (state and local).
• T axes and fees you can’t deduct.
Use T able 11-1 as a guide to determine 
which taxes you can deduct.
The end of the chapter contains a section 
that explains which forms you use to deduct dif-
ferent types of taxes.
Business taxes. Y ou can deduct certain taxes 
only if they are ordinary and necessary expen-
ses of your trade or business or of producing in-
come. For information on these taxes, see Busi-
ness Expenses in Chapter 8 of Pub. 334.
State or local taxes. These are taxes imposed 
by the 50 states, U.S. territories, or any of their 
political subdivisions (such as a county or city), 
or by the District of Columbia.
Indian tribal government.  An Indian tribal 
government recognized by the Secretary of the 
T reasury as performing substantial government 
functions will be treated as a state for purposes 
of claiming a deduction for taxes. Income taxes, 
real estate taxes, and personal property taxes 
imposed by that Indian tribal government (or by 
any of its subdivisions that are treated as politi-
cal subdivisions of a state) are deductible.
General sales taxes.  These are taxes im-
posed at one rate on retail sales of a broad 
range of classes of items.
Foreign taxes. These are taxes imposed by a 
foreign country or any of its political subdivi-
sions.
Useful Items
Y ou may want to see:
Publication
502 Medical and Dental Expenses
503 Child and Dependent Care Expenses
504 Divorced or Separated Individuals
514 Foreign T ax Credit for Individuals
525 T axable and Nontaxable Income
530 T ax Information for Homeowners
Form (and Instructions)
Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized 
Deductions
Schedule C (Form 1040) Profit or Loss 
From Business (Sole Proprietorship)
Schedule E (Form 1040) Supplemental 
Income and Loss
Schedule F (Form 1040) Profit or Loss 
From Farming
Schedule SE (Form 1040) 
Self-Employment T ax
1116 Foreign T ax Credit
For these and other useful items, go to IRS.gov/
Forms.
Tests To Deduct
Any Tax
The following two tests must be met for you to 
deduct any tax.
• The tax must be imposed on you.
• Y ou must pay the tax during your tax year.
The tax must be imposed on you.  In gen-
eral, you can deduct only taxes imposed on 
you.
Generally, you can deduct property taxes 
only if you are an owner of the property. If your 
spouse owns the property and pays the real es-
tate taxes, the taxes are deductible on your 
spouse's separate return or on your joint return.
You must pay the tax during your tax year. 
If you are a cash basis taxpayer, you can deduct 
only those taxes you actually paid during your 
tax year. If you pay your taxes by check and the 
check is honored by your financial institution, 
the day you mail or deliver the check is the date 
of payment. If you use a pay -by-phone account 
(such as a credit card or electronic funds with-
drawal), the date reported on the statement of 
the financial institution showing when payment 
was made is the date of payment. If you contest 
a tax liability and are a cash basis taxpayer, you 
can deduct the tax only in the year you actually 
pay it (or transfer money or other property to 
provide for satisfaction of the contested liabil-
ity). See Pub. 538 for details.
If you use an accrual method of accounting, 
see Pub. 538 for more information.
Income Taxes
This section discusses the deductibility of state 
and local income taxes (including employee 
  502
  503
  504
  514 
  525
  530 
  Schedule A (Form 1040) 
  Schedule C (Form 1040)
  Schedule E (Form 1040) 
  Schedule F (Form 1040)
  Schedule SE (Form 1040)
  1116 
contributions to state benefit funds) and foreign 
income taxes.
State and Local Income 
Taxes
Y ou can deduct state and local income taxes.
Exception. Y ou can’t deduct state and local in-
come taxes you pay on income that is exempt 
from federal income tax, unless the exempt in-
come is interest income. For example, you can’t 
deduct the part of a state's income tax that is on 
a cost -of-living allowance exempt from federal 
income tax.
What To Deduct
Y our deduction may be for withheld taxes, esti-
mated tax payments, or other tax payments as 
follows.
Withheld taxes. Y ou can deduct state and lo-
cal income taxes withheld from your salary in 
the year they are withheld. Y our Form(s) W -2 
will show these amounts. Forms W-2G, 1099-B, 
1099-DIV , 1099 -G, 1099 -K, 1099 -MISC, 
1099-NEC, 1099 -OID, and 1099 -R may also 
show state and local income taxes withheld.
Estimated tax payments. Y ou can deduct es-
timated tax payments you made during the year 
to a state or local government. However, you 
must have a reasonable basis for making the 
estimated tax payments. Any estimated state or 
local tax payments that aren’t made in good 
faith at the time of payment aren’t deductible.
Example. Y ou made an estimated state in-
come tax payment. However, the estimate of 
your state tax liability shows that you will get a 
refund of the full amount of your estimated pay-
ment. Y ou had no reasonable basis to believe 
you had any additional liability for state income 
taxes and you can’t deduct the estimated tax 
payment.
Refund applied to taxes. Y ou can deduct any 
part of a refund of prior -year state or local in-
come taxes that you chose to have credited to 
your 2023 estimated state or local income 
taxes.
Don’t reduce your deduction by either of the 
following items.
• Any state or local income tax refund (or 
credit) you expect to receive for 2023.
• Any refund of (or credit for) prior-year state 
and local income taxes you actually re-
ceived in 2023.
However, part or all of this refund (or credit) 
may be taxable. See Refund (or credit) of state 
or local income taxes, later.
Separate federal returns.  If you and your 
spouse file separate state, local, and federal in-
come tax returns, each of you can deduct on 
your federal return only the amount of your own 
state and local income tax that you paid during 
the tax year.
Joint state and local returns.  If you and 
your spouse file joint state and local returns and 
separate federal returns, each of you can de-
duct on your separate federal return a part of 
the state and local income taxes paid during the 
Page 99 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17 (2023) Chapter 11 Taxes 97

tax year. Y ou can deduct only the amount of the 
total taxes that is proportionate to your gross in-
come compared to the combined gross income 
of you and your spouse. However, you can’t de-
duct more than the amount you actually paid 
during the year. Y ou can avoid this calculation if 
you and your spouse are jointly and individually 
liable for the full amount of the state and local 
income taxes. If so, you and your spouse can 
deduct on your separate federal returns the 
amount you each actually paid.
Joint federal return.  If you file a joint federal 
return, you can deduct the state and local in-
come taxes both of you paid.
Contributions to state benefit funds.  As an 
employee, you can deduct mandatory contribu-
tions to state benefit funds withheld from your 
wages that provide protection against loss of 
wages. For example, certain states require em-
ployees to make contributions to state funds 
providing disability or unemployment insurance 
benefits. Mandatory payments made to the fol-
lowing state benefit funds are deductible as 
state income taxes on Schedule A (Form 1040), 
line 5a.
• Alaska Unemployment Compensation 
Fund.
• California Nonoccupational Disability Ben-
efit Fund.
• New Jersey Nonoccupational Disability 
Benefit Fund.
• New Jersey Unemployment Compensation 
Fund.
• New Y ork Nonoccupational Disability Ben-
efit Fund.
• Pennsylvania Unemployment Compensa-
tion Fund.
• Rhode Island T emporary Disability Benefit 
Fund.
• Washington State Supplemental Work-
men's Compensation Fund.
Employee contributions to private or 
voluntary disability plans aren’t deduc-
tible.
Refund (or credit) of state or local income 
taxes. If you receive a refund of (or credit for) 
state or local income taxes in a year after the 
year in which you paid them, you may have to 
include the refund in income on Schedule 1 
(Form 1040), line 1, in the year you receive it. 
This includes refunds resulting from taxes that 
were overwithheld, applied from a prior -year re-
turn, not figured correctly, or figured again be-
cause of an amended return. If you didn’t item-
ize your deductions in the previous year, don’t 
include the refund in income. If you deducted 
the taxes in the previous year, include all or part 
of the refund on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 1, 
in the year you receive the refund. For a discus-
sion of how much to include, see Recoveries in 
Pub. 525, T axable and Nontaxable Income, for 
more information.
Foreign Income Taxes
Generally, you can take either a deduction or a 
credit for income taxes imposed on you by a for-
eign country or a U.S. territory. However, you 
CAUTION
!
can’t take a deduction or credit for foreign in-
come taxes paid on income that is exempt from 
U.S. tax under the foreign earned income exclu-
sion or the foreign housing exclusion. For infor-
mation on these exclusions, see Pub. 54, T ax 
Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resident Aliens 
Abroad. For information on the foreign tax 
credit, see Pub. 514.
State and Local 
General Sales Taxes
Y ou can elect to deduct state and local general 
sales taxes, instead of state and local income 
taxes, as an itemized deduction on Schedule A 
(Form 1040), line 5a. Y ou can use either your 
actual expenses or the state and local sales tax 
tables to figure your sales tax deduction.
Actual expenses.  Generally, you can deduct 
the actual state and local general sales taxes 
(including compensating use taxes) if the tax 
rate was the same as the general sales tax rate.
Food, clothing, and medical supplies. 
Sales taxes on food, clothing, and medical sup-
plies are deductible as a general sales tax even 
if the tax rate was less than the general sales 
tax rate.
Motor vehicles. Sales taxes on motor vehi-
cles are deductible as a general sales tax even 
if the tax rate was less than the general sales 
tax rate. However, if you paid sales tax on a mo-
tor vehicle at a rate higher than the general 
sales tax, you can deduct only the amount of 
the tax that you would have paid at the general 
sales tax rate on that vehicle. Include any state 
and local general sales taxes paid for a leased 
motor vehicle. For purposes of this section, mo-
tor vehicles include cars, motorcycles, motor 
homes, recreational vehicles, sport utility vehi-
cles, trucks, vans, and off-road vehicles.
If you use the actual expenses method, 
you must have receipts to show the 
general sales taxes paid.
Trade or business items.  Don't include 
sales taxes paid on items used in your trade or 
business on Schedule A (Form 1040). Instead, 
go to the instructions for the form you are using 
to report business income and expenses to see 
if you can deduct these taxes.
Optional sales tax tables.  Instead of using 
your actual expenses, you can figure your state 
and local general sales tax deduction using the 
state and local sales tax tables in the Instruc-
tions for Schedule A (Form 1040). Y ou may also 
be able to add the state and local general sales 
taxes paid on certain specified items.
Y our applicable table amount is based on 
the state where you live, your income, and your 
family size. Y our income is your adjusted gross 
income plus any nontaxable items such as the 
following.
• T ax-exempt interest.
• Veterans’ benefits.
• Nontaxable combat pay.
• Workers’ compensation.
• Nontaxable part of social security and rail-
road retirement benefits.
CAUTION
!
• Nontaxable part of IRA, pension, or annuity 
distributions, excluding rollovers.
• Public assistance payments.
If you lived in different states during the 
same tax year, you must prorate your applicable 
table amount for each state based on the days 
you lived in each state. See the instructions for 
Schedule A (Form 1040), line 5a, for details.
State and Local Real 
Estate Taxes
Deductible real estate taxes are any state and 
local taxes on real property levied for the gen-
eral public welfare. Y ou can deduct these taxes 
only if they are assessed uniformly against all 
property under the jurisdiction of the taxing au-
thority. The proceeds must be for general com-
munity or governmental purposes and not be a 
payment for a special privilege granted or serv-
ice rendered to you.
Deductible real estate taxes generally don’t 
include taxes charged for local benefits and im-
provements that increase the value of the prop-
erty. They also don’t include itemized charges 
for services (such as trash collection) assessed 
against specific property or certain people, even 
if the charge is paid to the taxing authority. For 
more information about taxes and charges that 
aren’t deductible, see Real Estate -Related 
Items Y ou Can’t Deduct, later.
Tenant-shareholders in a cooperative hous-
ing corporation.  Generally, if you are a ten-
ant-stockholder in a cooperative housing corpo-
ration, you can deduct the amount paid to the 
corporation that represents your share of the 
real estate taxes the corporation paid or incur-
red for your dwelling unit. The corporation 
should provide you with a statement showing 
your share of the taxes. For more information, 
see Special Rules for Cooperatives in Pub. 530.
Division of real estate taxes between buy-
ers and sellers.  If you bought or sold real es-
tate during the year, the real estate taxes must 
be divided between the buyer and the seller.
The buyer and the seller must divide the real 
estate taxes according to the number of days in 
the real property tax year (the period to which 
the tax is imposed relates) that each owned the 
property. The seller is treated as paying the 
taxes up to, but not including, the date of sale. 
The buyer is treated as paying the taxes begin-
ning with the date of sale. This applies regard-
less of the lien dates under local law. Generally, 
this information is included on the settlement 
statement provided at the closing.
If you (the seller) can’t deduct taxes until 
they are paid because you use the cash method 
of accounting, and the buyer of your property is 
personally liable for the tax, you are considered 
to have paid your part of the tax at the time of 
the sale. This lets you deduct the part of the tax 
to the date of sale even though you didn’t ac-
tually pay it. However, you must also include the 
amount of that tax in the selling price of the 
property. The buyer must include the same 
amount in his or her cost of the property.
Y ou figure your deduction for taxes on each 
property bought or sold during the real property 
tax year as follows.
Page 100 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
98 Chapter 11 Taxes Publication 17 (2023)

Worksheet 11-1. Figuring 
Your State and Local Real 
Estate Tax Deduction
Keep for Y our Records
1. Enter the total state and local real estate 
taxes for the real property tax 
year ....................  
2. Enter the number of days in the real 
property tax year that you owned the 
property .................  
3. Divide line 2 by 365 (for leap years, 
divide line 2 by 366) ........... .    
4. Multiply line 1 by line 3. This is your 
deduction. Enter it on Schedule A (Form 
1040), line 5b ..............
Note. Repeat steps 1 through 4 for each property you bought 
or sold during the real property tax year. Y our total deduction is 
the sum of the line 4 amounts for all of the properties.
Real estate taxes for prior years. Don’t di-
vide delinquent taxes between the buyer and 
seller if the taxes are for any real property tax 
year before the one in which the property is 
sold. Even if the buyer agrees to pay the delin-
quent taxes, the buyer can’t deduct them. The 
buyer must add them to the cost of the property. 
The seller can deduct these taxes paid by the 
buyer. However, the seller must include them in 
the selling price.
Examples. The following examples illustrate 
how real estate taxes are divided between 
buyer and seller.
Example 1.  Dennis and Beth White's real 
property tax year for both their old home and 
their new home is the calendar year, with pay-
ment due August 1. The tax on their old home, 
sold on May 7, was $620. The tax on their new 
home, bought on May 3, was $732. Dennis and 
Beth are considered to have paid a proportion-
ate share of the real estate taxes on the old 
home even though they didn’t actually pay them 
to the taxing authority. On the other hand, they 
can claim only a proportionate share of the 
taxes they paid on their new property even 
though they paid the entire amount.
Dennis and Beth owned their old home dur-
ing the real property tax year for 126 days (Jan-
uary 1 to May 6, the day before the sale). They 
figure their deduction for taxes on their old 
home as follows.
Worksheet 11-1. Figuring Your 
State and Local Real Estate Tax 
Deduction — Taxes on Old Home
1. Enter the total state and local real estate 
taxes for the real property tax year ... $620 
2. Enter the number of days in the real 
property tax year that you owned the 
property ................ 126 
3. Divide line 2 by 365 (for leap years, 
divide line 2 by 366) .......... 0.3452 
4. Multiply line 1 by line 3. This is your 
deduction. Enter it on Schedule A (Form 
1040), line 5b ............. $214 
Since the buyers of their old home paid all of 
the taxes, Dennis and Beth also include the 
$214 in the selling price of the old home. (The 
buyers add the $214 to their cost of the home.)
Dennis and Beth owned their new home dur-
ing the real property tax year for 243 days (May 
3 to December 31, including their date of pur-
chase). They figure their deduction for taxes on 
their new home as follows.
Worksheet 11-1. Figuring Your 
State and Local Real Estate Tax 
Deduction — Taxes on New Home
1. Enter the total state and local real estate 
taxes for the real property tax year ... $732 
2. Enter the number of days in the real 
property tax year that you owned the 
property ................ 243 
3. Divide line 2 by 365 (for leap years, 
divide line 2 by 366) .......... 0.6658 
4. Multiply line 1 by line 3. This is your 
deduction. Enter it on Schedule A (Form 
1040), line 5b ............. $487 
Since Dennis and Beth paid all of the taxes on 
the new home, they add $245 ($732 paid less 
$487 deduction) to their cost of the new home. 
(The sellers add this $245 to their selling price 
and deduct the $245 as a real estate tax.)
Dennis and Beth's real estate tax deduction 
for their old and new homes is the sum of $214 
and $487, or $701. They will enter this amount 
on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 5b.
Example 2.  George and Helen Brown 
bought a new home on May 3, 2023. Their real 
property tax year for the new home is the calen-
dar year. Real estate taxes for 2022 were as-
sessed in their state on January 1, 2023. The 
taxes became due on May 31, 2023, and Octo-
ber 31, 2023.
The Browns agreed to pay all taxes due after 
the date of purchase. Real estate taxes for 2022 
were $680. They paid $340 on May 31, 2023, 
and $340 on October 31, 2023. These taxes 
were for the 2022 real property tax year. The 
Browns can’t deduct them since they didn’t own 
the property until 2023. Instead, they must add 
$680 to the cost of their new home.
In January 2024, the Browns receive their 
2023 property tax statement for $752, which 
they will pay in 2024. The Browns owned their 
new home during the 2023 real property tax 
year for 243 days (May 3 to December 31). 
They will figure their 2024 deduction for taxes 
as follows.
Worksheet 11-1. Figuring Your 
State and Local Real Estate Tax 
Deduction — Taxes on New Home
1. Enter the total state and local real estate 
taxes for the real property tax year ... $752 
2. Enter the number of days in the real 
property tax year that you owned the 
property ................ 243 
3. Divide line 2 by 365 (for leap years, 
divide line 2 by 366) .......... 0.6658 
4. Multiply line 1 by line 3. This is your 
deduction. Claim it on Schedule A 
(Form 1040), line 5b .......... $501
The remaining $251 ($752 paid less $501 de-
duction) of taxes paid in 2024, along with the 
$680 paid in 2023, is added to the cost of their 
new home.
Because the taxes up to the date of sale are 
considered paid by the seller on the date of 
sale, the seller is entitled to a 2023 tax deduc-
tion of $931. This is the sum of the $680 for 
2022 and the $251 for the 122 days the seller 
owned the home in 2023. The seller must also 
include the $931 in the selling price when they 
figure the gain or loss on the sale. The seller 
should contact the Browns in January 2024 to 
find out how much real estate tax is due for 
2023.
Form 1099 -S. For certain sales or ex-
changes of real estate, the person responsible 
for closing the sale (generally, the settlement 
agent) prepares Form 1099 -S, Proceeds From 
Real Estate T ransactions, to report certain infor-
mation to the IRS and to the seller of the prop-
erty. Box 2 of Form 1099 -S is for the gross pro-
ceeds from the sale and should include the 
portion of the seller's real estate tax liability that 
the buyer will pay after the date of sale. The 
buyer includes these taxes in the cost basis of 
the property, and the seller both deducts this 
amount as a tax paid and includes it in the sales 
price of the property.
For a real estate transaction that involves a 
home, any real estate tax the seller paid in ad-
vance but that is the liability of the buyer ap-
pears on Form 1099 -S, box 6. The buyer de-
ducts this amount as a real estate tax, and the 
seller reduces their real estate tax deduction (or 
includes it in income) by the same amount. See 
Refund (or rebate), later.
Taxes placed in escrow. If your monthly mort-
gage payment includes an amount placed in es-
crow (put in the care of a third party) for real es-
tate taxes, you may not be able to deduct the 
total amount placed in escrow. Y ou can deduct 
only the real estate tax that the third party ac-
tually paid to the taxing authority. If the third 
party doesn’t notify you of the amount of real 
estate tax that was paid for you, contact the 
third party or the taxing authority to find the 
proper amount to show on your return.
Tenants by the entirety.  If you and your 
spouse held property as tenants by the entirety 
and you file separate federal returns, each of 
you can deduct only the taxes each of you paid 
on the property.
Divorced individuals. If your divorce or sepa-
ration agreement states that you must pay the 
real estate taxes for a home owned by you and 
your spouse, part of your payments may be de-
ductible as alimony and part as real estate 
taxes. See Payments to a third party in Pub. 504 
for more information.
Ministers’ and military housing allowances. 
If you are a minister or a member of the uni-
formed services and receive a housing allow-
ance that you can exclude from income, you still 
can deduct all of the real estate taxes you pay 
on your home.
Refund (or rebate). If you received a refund or 
rebate in 2023 of real estate taxes you paid in 
2023, you must reduce your deduction by the 
amount refunded to you. If you received a re-
fund or rebate in 2023 of real estate taxes you 
deducted in an earlier year, you generally must 
include the refund or rebate in income in the 
year you receive it. However, the amount you in-
clude in income is limited to the amount of the 
deduction that reduced your tax in the earlier 
Page 101 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17 (2023) Chapter 11 Taxes 99

year. For more information, see Recoveries in 
Pub. 525.
Real Estate-Related Items 
You Can’t Deduct
Payments for the following items generally 
aren’t deductible as real estate taxes.
• T axes for local benefits.
• Itemized charges for services (such as 
trash and garbage pickup fees).
• T ransfer taxes (or stamp taxes).
• Rent increases due to higher real estate 
taxes.
• Homeowners' association charges.
Taxes for local benefits.  Deductible real es-
tate taxes generally don’t include taxes charged 
for local benefits and improvements tending to 
increase the value of your property. These in-
clude assessments for streets, sidewalks, water 
mains, sewer lines, public parking facilities, and 
similar improvements. Y ou should increase the 
basis of your property by the amount of the as-
sessment.
Local benefit taxes are deductible only if 
they are for maintenance, repair, or interest 
charges related to those benefits. If only a part 
of the taxes is for maintenance, repair, or inter-
est, you must be able to show the amount of 
that part to claim the deduction. If you can’t de-
termine what part of the tax is for maintenance, 
repair, or interest, none of it is deductible.
T axes for local benefits may be inclu-
ded in your real estate tax bill. If your 
taxing authority (or mortgage lender) 
doesn’t furnish you a copy of your real estate 
tax bill, ask for it. Y ou should use the rules 
above to determine if the local benefit tax is de-
ductible. Contact the taxing authority if you 
need additional information about a specific 
charge on your real estate tax bill.
Itemized charges for services.  An itemized 
charge for services assessed against specific 
property or certain people isn’t a tax, even if the 
charge is paid to the taxing authority. For exam-
ple, you can’t deduct the charge as a real estate 
tax if it is:
• A unit fee for the delivery of a service (such 
as a $5 fee charged for every 1,000 gallons 
of water you use),
CAUTION
!
• A periodic charge for a residential service 
(such as a $20 per month or $240 annual 
fee charged to each homeowner for trash 
collection), or
• A flat fee charged for a single service pro-
vided by your government (such as a $30 
charge for mowing your lawn because it 
was allowed to grow higher than permitted 
under your local ordinance).
Y ou must look at your real estate tax bill 
to determine if any nondeductible item-
ized charges, such as those listed 
above, are included in the bill. If your taxing au-
thority (or mortgage lender) doesn’t furnish you 
a copy of your real estate tax bill, ask for it.
Exception. Service charges used to main-
tain or improve services (such as trash collec-
tion or police and fire protection) are deductible 
as real estate taxes if:
• The fees or charges are imposed at a like 
rate against all property in the taxing juris-
diction;
• The funds collected aren’t earmarked; in-
stead, they are commingled with general 
revenue funds; and
CAUTION
!
T able 11-1. Which Taxes Can You Deduct?
Type of Tax You Can Deduct You Can’t Deduct
Fees and Charges Fees and charges that are expenses of your trade or 
business or of producing income.
Fees and charges that aren’t expenses of your trade or 
business or of producing income, such as fees for 
driver's licenses, car inspections, parking, or 
charges for water bills (see T axes and Fees Y ou 
Can’t Deduct).
Fines and penalties.
Income Taxes State and local income taxes. Federal income taxes.
Foreign income taxes. Employee contributions to private or voluntary 
disability plans. 
Employee contributions to state funds listed under 
Contributions to state benefit funds. 
State and local general sales taxes if you choose to 
deduct state and local income taxes. 
General Sales Taxes State and local general sales taxes, including 
compensating use taxes. 
State and local income taxes if you choose to deduct 
state and local general sales taxes.
Other Taxes T axes that are expenses of your trade or business. Federal excise taxes, such as tax on gasoline, that 
aren’t expenses of your trade or business or of 
producing income.
T axes on property producing rent or royalty income. Per capita taxes.
One-half of self-employment tax paid. 
Personal Property 
Taxes
State and local personal property taxes. Customs duties that aren’t expenses of your trade or 
business or of producing income.
Real Estate Taxes State and local real estate taxes. Real estate taxes that are treated as imposed on 
someone else (see Division of real estate taxes 
between buyers and sellers).
T enant's share of real estate taxes paid by a
cooperative housing corporation. 
Foreign real estate taxes.
T axes for local benefits (with exceptions). See Real 
Estate-Related Items Y ou Can’t Deduct.
T rash and garbage pickup fees (with exceptions). See 
Real Estate-Related Items Y ou Can’t Deduct.
Rent increase due to higher real estate taxes.
Homeowners' association charges.
Page 102 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
100 Chapter 11 Taxes Publication 17 (2023)

• Funds used to maintain or improve serv-
ices aren’t limited to or determined by the 
amount of these fees or charges collected.
Transfer taxes (or stamp taxes).  T ransfer 
taxes and similar taxes and charges on the sale 
of a personal home aren’t deductible. If they are 
paid by the seller, they are expenses of the sale 
and reduce the amount realized on the sale. If 
paid by the buyer, they are included in the cost 
basis of the property.
Rent increase due to higher real estate 
taxes. If your landlord increases your rent in 
the form of a tax surcharge because of in-
creased real estate taxes, you can’t deduct the 
increase as taxes.
Homeowners' association charges.  These 
charges aren’t deductible because they are im-
posed by the homeowners' association, rather 
than the state or local government.
Personal Property 
Taxes
Personal property tax is deductible if it is a state 
or local tax that is:
• Charged on personal property;
• Based only on the value of the personal 
property; and
• Charged on a yearly basis, even if it is col-
lected more or less than once a year.
A tax that meets the above requirements 
can be considered charged on personal prop-
erty even if it is for the exercise of a privilege. 
For example, a yearly tax based on value quali-
fies as a personal property tax even if it is called 
a registration fee and is for the privilege of regis-
tering motor vehicles or using them on the high-
ways.
If the tax is partly based on value and partly 
based on other criteria, it may qualify in part.
Example. Y our state charges a yearly motor 
vehicle registration tax of 1% of value plus 50 
cents per hundredweight. Y ou paid $32 based 
on the value ($1,500) and weight (3,400 lbs.) of 
your car. Y ou can deduct $15 (1% × $1,500) as 
a personal property tax because it is based on 
the value. The remaining $17 ($0.50 × 34), 
based on the weight, isn’t deductible.
Taxes and Fees
You Can’t Deduct
Many federal, state, and local government taxes 
aren’t deductible because they don’t fall within 
the categories discussed earlier. Other taxes 
and fees, such as federal income taxes, aren’t 
deductible because the tax law specifically pro-
hibits a deduction for them. See T able 11-1.
T axes and fees that are generally not deduc-
tible include the following items.
• Employment taxes. This includes social 
security, Medicare, and railroad retirement 
taxes withheld from your pay. However, 
one-half of self-employment tax you pay is 
deductible. In addition, the social security 
and other employment taxes you pay on 
the wages of a household worker may be 
included in medical expenses that you can 
deduct, or childcare expenses that allow 
you to claim the child and dependent care 
credit. For more information, see Pub. 502 
and Pub. 503. 
• Estate, inheritance, legacy, or succes-
sion taxes. Y ou can deduct the estate tax 
attributable to income in respect of a dece-
dent if you, as a beneficiary, must include 
that income in your gross income. In that 
case, deduct the estate tax on Schedule A 
(Form 1040), line 16. For more information, 
see Pub. 559. 
• Federal income taxes. This includes in-
come taxes withheld from your pay.
• Fines and penalties. Y ou can’t deduct 
fines and penalties paid to a government 
for violation of any law, including related 
amounts forfeited as collateral deposits. 
• Foreign personal or real property 
taxes.
• Gift taxes.
• License fees. Y ou can’t deduct license 
fees for personal purposes (such as mar-
riage, driver's, and pet license fees). 
• Per capita taxes. Y ou can’t deduct state 
or local per capita taxes.
Many taxes and fees other than those listed 
above are also nondeductible, unless they are 
ordinary and necessary expenses of a business 
or income -producing activity. For other nonde-
ductible items, see Real Estate -Related Items 
Y ou Can’t Deduct, earlier.
Where To Deduct
Y ou deduct taxes on the following schedules.
State and local income taxes.  These taxes 
are deducted on Schedule A (Form 1040), 
line 5a, even if your only source of income is 
from business, rents, or royalties.
Limitation on deduction for state and lo-
cal taxes.  The deduction for state and local 
taxes is limited to $10,000 ($5,000 if married fil-
ing married separately). State and local taxes 
are the taxes that you include on Schedule A 
(Form 1040), lines 5a, 5b, and 5c. Include taxes 
imposed by a U.S. territory with your state and 
local taxes on Schedule A (Form 1040), lines 
5a, 5b, and 5c. However, don't include any U.S. 
territory taxes you paid that are allocable to ex-
cluded income.
Y ou may want to take a credit for U.S. 
territory tax instead of a deduction. See 
the instructions for Schedule 3 (Form 
1040), line 1, for details.
General sales taxes.  Sales taxes are deduc-
ted on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 5a. Y ou 
must check the box on line 5a. If you elect to 
deduct sales taxes, you can’t deduct state and 
local income taxes on Schedule A (Form 1040), 
line 5a.
Foreign income taxes.  Generally, income 
taxes you pay to a foreign country or U.S. terri-
tory can be claimed as an itemized deduction 
on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 6, or as a 
TIP
credit against your U.S. income tax on Schedule 
3 (Form 1040), line 1. T o claim the credit, you 
may have to complete and attach Form 1116. 
For more information, see the Instructions for 
Form 1040 or Pub. 514.
Real estate taxes and personal property 
taxes. Real estate and personal property taxes 
are deducted on Schedule A (Form 1040), lines 
5b and 5c, respectively, unless they are paid on 
property used in your business, in which case 
they are deducted on Schedule C (Form 1040) 
or Schedule F (Form 1040). T axes on property 
that produces rent or royalty income are deduc-
ted on Schedule E (Form 1040).
Self-employment tax. Deduct one-half of your 
self-employment tax on Schedule 1 (Form 
1040), line 15.
Other taxes. All other deductible taxes are de-
ducted on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 6.
12.
Other Itemized 
Deductions
What's New
Standard mileage rate.  The 2023 rate for 
business use of a vehicle is 65.5 cents a mile.
Reminders
No miscellaneous itemized deductions al-
lowed. Y ou can no longer claim any miscella-
neous itemized deductions. Miscellaneous 
itemized deductions are those deductions that 
would have been subject to the 2% -of-adjus-
ted-gross-income (AGI) limitation. See Miscella-
neous Itemized Deductions, later.
Fines and penalties.  Rules regarding deduct-
ing fines and penalties have changed. See 
Fines and Penalties, later.
Introduction
This chapter explains that you can no longer 
claim any miscellaneous itemized deductions, 
unless you fall into one of the qualified catego-
ries of employment claiming a deduction relat-
ing to unreimbursed employee expenses. Mis-
cellaneous itemized deductions are those 
deductions that would have been subject to the 
2%-of-AGI limitation. Y ou can still claim certain 
expenses as itemized deductions on Sched-
ule A (Form 1040), Schedule A (Form 
1040-NR), or as an adjustment to income on 
Form 1040 or 1040-SR. This chapter covers the 
following topics.
• Miscellaneous itemized deductions.
Page 103 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17 (2023) Chapter 12 Other Itemized Deductions 101

• Expenses you can't deduct.
• Expenses you can deduct.
• How to report your deductions.
Y ou must keep records to verify your 
deductions. Y ou should keep receipts, 
canceled checks, substitute checks, fi-
nancial account statements, and other docu-
mentary evidence. For more information on re-
cordkeeping, see What Records Should I 
Keep? in chapter 1.
Useful Items
Y ou may want to see:
Publication
463 T ravel, Gift, and Car Expenses
525 T axable and Nontaxable Income
529 Miscellaneous Deductions
547 Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
575 Pension and Annuity Income
587 Business Use of Y our Home
946 How T o Depreciate Property
Form (and Instructions)
Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized 
Deductions
2106 Employee Business Expenses
8839 Qualified Adoption Expenses
Schedule K-1 (Form 1041) Beneficiary's 
Share of Income, Deductions, 
Credits, etc.
For these and other useful items, go to IRS.gov/
Forms.
Miscellaneous 
Itemized Deductions
Y ou can no longer claim any miscellaneous 
itemized deductions that are subject to the 
2%-of-AGI limitation, including unreimbursed 
employee expenses. However, you may be able 
to deduct certain unreimbursed employee busi-
ness expenses if you fall into one of the follow-
ing categories of employment listed under Un-
reimbursed Employee Expenses next.
Unreimbursed Employee 
Expenses
Y ou can no longer claim a deduction for unreim-
bursed employee expenses unless you fall into 
one of the following categories of employment.
• Armed Forces reservists.
• Qualified performing artists.
• Fee-basis state or local government offi-
cials.
• Employees with impairment-related work 
expenses.
Categories of Employment
Y ou can deduct unreimbursed employee expen-
ses only if you qualify as an Armed Forces re-
servist, a qualified performing artist, a fee -basis 
RECORDS
  463 
  525 
  529 
  547 
  575 
  587 
  946 
  Schedule A (Form 1040)
  2106 
  8839 
  Schedule K-1 (Form 1041)
state or local government official, or an em-
ployee with impairment-related work expenses.
Armed Forces reservist (member of a re-
serve component).  Y ou are a member of a 
reserve component of the Armed Forces of the 
United States if you are in the Army, Navy, Ma-
rine Corps, Air Force, or Coast Guard Reserve; 
the Army National Guard of the United States; 
or the Reserve Corps of the Public Health Serv-
ice.
Qualified performing artist.  Y ou are a 
qualified performing artist if you:
1. Performed services in the performing arts 
as an employee for at least two employers 
during the tax year,
2. Received from at least two of the employ-
ers wages of $200 or more per employer,
3. Had allowable business expenses attribut-
able to the performing arts of more than 
10% of gross income from the performing 
arts, and
4. Had AGI of $16,000 or less before deduct-
ing expenses as a performing artist.
Fee-basis state or local government offi-
cial.  Y ou are a qualifying fee -basis official if 
you are employed by a state or political subdivi-
sion of a state and are compensated, in whole 
or in part, on a fee basis.
Employee with impairment -related work 
expenses.  Impairment-related work expenses 
are the allowable expenses of an individual with 
physical or mental disabilities for attendant care 
at their place of employment. They also include 
other expenses in connection with the place of 
employment that enable the employee to work. 
See Pub. 463, T ravel, Gift, and Car Expenses, 
for more details.
Allowable unreimbursed employee expen-
ses.  If you qualify as an employee in one of 
the categories mentioned above, you may be 
able to deduct the following items as unreim-
bursed employee expenses.
Unreimbursed employee expenses for indi-
viduals in these categories of employment are 
deducted as adjustments to gross income. 
Qualified employees listed in one of the catego-
ries above must complete Form 2106, Em-
ployee Business Expenses, to take the deduc-
tion.
Y ou can deduct only unreimbursed em-
ployee expenses that are paid or incurred dur-
ing your tax year, for carrying on your trade or 
business of being an employee, and ordinary 
and necessary.
An expense is ordinary if it's common and 
accepted in your trade, business, or profession. 
An expense is necessary if it's appropriate and 
helpful to your business. An expense doesn't 
have to be required to be considered neces-
sary.
Educator Expenses
If you were an eligible educator in 2023, you 
can deduct up to $300 of qualified expenses 
you paid in 2023 as an adjustment to gross in-
come on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 11, 
rather than as a miscellaneous itemized 
deduction. If you and your spouse are filing 
jointly and both of you were eligible educators, 
the maximum deduction is $600. However, nei-
ther spouse can deduct more than $300 of their 
qualified expenses. For additional information, 
see Educator Expenses  in Pub. 529, Miscella-
neous Deductions.
Educator expenses include amounts 
paid or incurred after March 12, 2020, 
for personal protective equipment, dis-
infectant, and other supplies used for the pre-
vention of the spread of coronavirus. For more 
information, see the instructions for Schedule 1 
(Form 1040), line 11, and Educator Expenses in 
Pub. 529, Miscellaneous Deductions.
Expenses You Can’t 
Deduct
Because of the suspension of miscellaneous 
itemized deductions, there are two categories of 
expenses you can't deduct: miscellaneous item-
ized deductions subject to the 2% -of-AGI limita-
tion, and those expenses that are traditionally 
nondeductible under the Internal Revenue 
Code. Both categories of deduction are dis-
cussed next.
Miscellaneous Deductions Subject 
to 2% AGI
Unless you fall into one of the qualified catego-
ries of employment under Unreimbursed Em-
ployee Expenses , earlier, miscellaneous item-
ized deductions that are subject to the 
2%-of-AGI limitation can no longer be claimed. 
For expenses not related to unreimbursed em-
ployee expenses, you generally can't deduct the 
following expenses, even if you fall into one of 
the qualified categories of employment listed 
earlier.
Appraisal Fees
Appraisal fees you pay to figure a casualty loss 
or the fair market value of donated property are 
miscellaneous itemized deductions and can no 
longer be deducted.
Casualty and Theft Losses
Damaged or stolen property used in performing 
services as an employee is a miscellaneous de-
duction and can no longer be deducted. For 
other casualty and theft losses, see Pub. 547, 
Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts.
Clerical Help and Office Rent
Office expenses, such as rent and clerical help, 
you pay in connection with your investments 
and collecting taxable income on those invest-
ments are miscellaneous itemized deductions 
and are no longer deductible.
Credit or Debit Card Convenience 
Fees
The convenience fee charged by the card pro-
cessor for paying your income tax (including es-
timated tax payments) by credit or debit card is 
a miscellaneous itemized deduction and is no 
longer deductible.
TIP
Page 104 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
102 Chapter 12 Other Itemized Deductions Publication 17 (2023)

Depreciation on Home Computer
If you use your home computer to produce in-
come (for example, to manage your investments 
that produce taxable income), the depreciation 
of the computer for that part of the usage of the 
computer is a miscellaneous itemized deduc-
tion and is no longer deductible.
Fees To Collect Interest and 
Dividends
Fees you pay to a broker, bank, trustee, or simi-
lar agent to collect your taxable bond interest or 
dividends on shares of stock are miscellaneous 
itemized deductions and can no longer be de-
ducted.
Hobby Expenses
A hobby isn't a business because it isn't carried 
on to make a profit. Hobby expenses are mis-
cellaneous itemized deductions and can no lon-
ger be deducted.
Indirect Deductions of
Pass-Through Entities
Pass-through entities include partnerships, S 
corporations, and mutual funds that aren't pub-
licly offered. Deductions of pass -through enti-
ties are passed through to the partners or 
shareholders. The partner’s or shareholder’s 
share of passed -through deductions for invest-
ment expenses are miscellaneous itemized de-
ductions and can no longer be deducted.
Nonpublicly offered mutual funds.  These 
funds will send you a Form 1099-DIV , Dividends 
and Distributions, or a substitute form, showing 
your share of gross income and investment ex-
penses. The investment expenses reported on 
Form 1099 -DIV are a miscellaneous itemized 
deduction and are no longer deductible.
Investment Fees and Expenses
Investment fees, custodial fees, trust adminis-
tration fees, and other expenses you paid for 
managing your investments that produce taxa-
ble income are miscellaneous itemized deduc-
tions and are no longer deductible.
Legal Expenses
Y ou can usually deduct legal expenses that you 
incur in attempting to produce or collect taxable 
income or that you pay in connection with the 
determination, collection, or refund of any tax.
Legal expenses that you incur in attempting 
to produce or collect taxable income, or that you 
pay in connection with the determination, col-
lection, or refund of any tax are miscellaneous 
itemized deductions and are no longer deducti-
ble.
Y ou can deduct expenses of resolving tax is-
sues relating to profit or loss from business re-
ported on Schedule C (Form 1040), Profit or 
Loss From Business, from rentals or royalties 
reported on Schedule E (Form 1040), Supple-
mental Income and Loss, or from farm income 
and expenses reported on Schedule F (Form 
1040), Profit or Loss From Farming, on that 
schedule. Expenses for resolving nonbusiness 
tax issues are miscellaneous itemized deduc-
tions and are no longer deductible.
Loss on Deposits
For information on whether, and if so, how, you 
may deduct a loss on your deposit in a qualified 
financial institution, see Loss on Deposits  in 
Pub. 547.
Repayments of Income
Generally, repayments of amounts that you in-
cluded in income in an earlier year is a miscella-
neous itemized deduction and can no longer be 
deducted. If you had to repay more than $3,000 
that you included in your income in an earlier 
year, you may be able to deduct the amount. 
See Repayments Under Claim of Right, later.
Repayments of Social Security 
Benefits
For information on how to deduct your repay-
ments of certain social security benefits, see 
Repayments More Than Gross Benefits  in 
chapter 7.
Safe Deposit Box Rent
Rent you pay for a safe deposit box you use to 
store taxable income -producing stocks, bonds, 
or investment-related papers is a miscellaneous 
itemized deduction and can no longer be de-
ducted. Y ou also can't deduct the rent if you use 
the box for jewelry, other personal items, or 
tax-exempt securities.
Service Charges on Dividend 
Reinvestment Plans
Service charges you pay as a subscriber in a 
dividend reinvestment plan are a miscellaneous 
itemized deduction and can no longer be de-
ducted. These service charges include pay-
ments for:
• Holding shares acquired through a plan,
• Collecting and reinvesting cash dividends, 
and
• Keeping individual records and providing 
detailed statements of accounts.
Tax Preparation Fees
T ax preparation fees on the return for the year in 
which you pay them are a miscellaneous item-
ized deduction and can no longer be deducted. 
These fees include the cost of tax preparation 
software programs and tax publications. They 
also include any fee you paid for electronic filing 
of your return.
Trustee's Administrative Fees for 
IRA
T rustee's administrative fees that are billed sep-
arately and paid by you in connection with your 
IRA are a miscellaneous itemized deduction 
and can no longer be deducted. For more infor-
mation about IRAs, see chapter 9.
Nondeductible 
Expenses
In addition to the miscellaneous itemized de-
ductions discussed earlier, you can't deduct the 
following expenses.
List of Nondeductible 
Expenses
• Adoption expenses.
• Broker's commissions.
• Burial or funeral expenses, including the 
cost of a cemetery lot. 
• Campaign expenses.
• Capital expenses.
• Check-writing fees.
• Club dues.
• Commuting expenses.
• Fees and licenses, such as car licenses, 
marriage licenses, and dog tags. 
• Fines or penalties.
• Health spa expenses.
• Hobby losses, but see Hobby Expenses, 
earlier.
• Home repairs, insurance, and rent.
• Home security system.
• Illegal bribes and kickbacks.
• Investment-related seminars.
• Life insurance premiums paid by the in-
sured.
• Lobbying expenses.
• Losses from the sale of your home, furni-
ture, personal car, etc.
• Lost or misplaced cash or property.
• Lunches with co-workers.
• Meals while working late.
• Medical expenses as business expenses 
other than medical examinations required 
by your employer.
• Personal disability insurance premiums.
• Personal legal expenses.
• Personal, living, or family expenses.
• Political contributions.
• Professional accreditation fees.
• Professional reputation improvement ex-
pense.
• Relief fund contributions.
• Residential telephone line.
• Stockholders’ meeting attendance expen-
ses.
• T ax-exempt income earning/collecting ex-
penses.
• The value of wages never received or lost 
vacation time.
• T ravel expenses for another individual.
• Voluntary unemployment benefit fund con-
tributions.
Page 105 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17 (2023) Chapter 12 Other Itemized Deductions 103

• Wristwatches.
Adoption Expenses
Y ou can't deduct the expenses of adopting a 
child, but you may be able to take a credit for 
those expenses. See the Instructions for Form 
8839, Qualified Adoption Expenses, for more 
information.
Campaign Expenses
Y ou can't deduct campaign expenses of a can-
didate for any office, even if the candidate is 
running for reelection to the office. These in-
clude qualification and registration fees for pri-
mary elections.
Legal fees.  Y ou can't deduct legal fees paid 
to defend charges that arise from participation 
in a political campaign.
Check-Writing Fees on Personal 
Account
If you have a personal checking account, you 
can't deduct fees charged by the bank for the 
privilege of writing checks, even if the account 
pays interest.
Club Dues
Generally, you can't deduct the cost of member-
ship in any club organized for business, pleas-
ure, recreation, or other social purpose. This in-
cludes business, social, athletic, luncheon, 
sporting, airline, hotel, golf, and country clubs.
Y ou can't deduct dues paid to an organiza-
tion if one of its main purposes is to:
• Conduct entertainment activities for mem-
bers or their guests, or
• Provide members or their guests with ac-
cess to entertainment facilities.
Dues paid to airline, hotel, and luncheon 
clubs aren't deductible.
Commuting Expenses
Y ou can't deduct commuting expenses (the cost 
of transportation between your home and your 
main or regular place of work). If you haul tools, 
instruments, or other items in your car to and 
from work, you can deduct only the additional 
cost of hauling the items such as the rent on a 
trailer to carry the items.
Fines and Penalties
Generally, no deduction is allowed for fines and 
penalties paid to a government or specified 
nongovernmental entity for the violation of any 
law except in the following situations.
• Amounts that constitute restitution.
• Amounts paid to come into compliance 
with the law.
• Amounts paid or incurred as the result of 
certain court orders in which no govern-
ment or specified nongovernmental 
agency is a party.
• Amounts paid or incurred for taxes due.
Nondeductible amounts include an amount 
paid in settlement of your actual or potential lia-
bility for a fine or penalty (civil or criminal). Fines 
or penalties include amounts paid such as park-
ing tickets, tax penalties, and penalties deduc-
ted from teachers' paychecks after an illegal 
strike.
No deduction is allowed for the restitution 
amount or amount paid to come into compli-
ance with the law unless the amounts are spe-
cifically identified in the settlement agreement 
or court order. Also, any amount paid or incur-
red as reimbursement to the government for the 
costs of any investigation or litigation are not eli-
gible for the exceptions and are nondeductible.
Health Spa Expenses
Y ou can't deduct health spa expenses, even if 
there is a job requirement to stay in excellent 
physical condition, such as might be required of 
a law enforcement officer.
Home Security System
Y ou can't deduct the cost of a home security 
system as a miscellaneous deduction. How-
ever, you may be able to claim a deduction for a 
home security system as a business expense if 
you have a home office. See Security system 
under Figuring the Deduction in Pub. 587.
Investment-Related Seminars
Y ou can't deduct any expenses for attending a 
convention, seminar, or similar meeting for in-
vestment purposes.
Life Insurance Premiums
Y ou can't deduct premiums you pay on your life 
insurance. Y ou may be able to deduct, as ali-
mony, premiums you pay on life insurance poli-
cies assigned to your former spouse. See Pub. 
504, Divorced or Separated Individuals, for in-
formation on alimony.
Lobbying Expenses
Y ou generally can't deduct amounts paid or in-
curred for lobbying expenses. These include ex-
penses to:
• Influence legislation;
• Participate or intervene in any political 
campaign for, or against, any candidate for 
public office;
• Attempt to influence the general public, or 
segments of the public, about elections, 
legislative matters, or referendums; or
• Communicate directly with covered execu-
tive branch officials in any attempt to influ-
ence the official actions or positions of 
those officials.
Lobbying expenses also include any amounts 
paid or incurred for research, preparation, plan-
ning, or coordination of any of these activities.
Dues used for lobbying.  If a tax -exempt 
organization notifies you that part of the dues or 
other amounts you pay to the organization are 
used to pay nondeductible lobbying expenses, 
you can't deduct that part. See Lobbying Ex-
penses in Pub. 529 for information on excep-
tions.
Lost or Mislaid Cash or Property
Y ou can't deduct a loss based on the mere dis-
appearance of money or property. However, an 
accidental loss or disappearance of property 
can qualify as a casualty if it results from an 
identifiable event that is sudden, unexpected, or 
unusual. See Pub. 547 for more information.
Lunches With Co-Workers
Y ou can't deduct the expenses of lunches with 
co-workers, except while traveling away from 
home on business. See Pub. 463 for information 
on deductible expenses while traveling away 
from home.
Meals While Working Late
Y ou can't deduct the cost of meals while work-
ing late. However, you may be able to claim a 
deduction if the cost of meals is a deductible 
entertainment expense, or if you're traveling 
away from home. See Pub. 463 for information 
on deductible entertainment expenses and ex-
penses while traveling away from home.
Personal Legal Expenses
Y ou can't deduct personal legal expenses such 
as those for the following.
• Custody of children.
• Breach of promise to marry suit.
• Civil or criminal charges resulting from a 
personal relationship.
• Damages for personal injury, except for 
certain unlawful discrimination and whis-
tle-blower claims.
• Preparation of a title (or defense or perfec-
tion of a title).
• Preparation of a will.
• Property claims or property settlement in a 
divorce.
Y ou can't deduct these expenses even if a 
result of the legal proceeding is the loss of in-
come-producing property.
Political Contributions
Y ou can't deduct contributions made to a politi-
cal candidate, a campaign committee, or a 
newsletter fund. Advertisements in convention 
bulletins and admissions to dinners or programs 
that benefit a political party or political candi-
date aren't deductible.
Professional Accreditation Fees
Y ou can't deduct professional accreditation fees 
such as the following.
• Accounting certificate fees paid for the ini-
tial right to practice accounting.
• Bar exam fees and incidental expenses in 
securing initial admission to the bar.
• Medical and dental license fees paid to get 
initial licensing.
Professional Reputation
Y ou can't deduct expenses of radio and TV ap-
pearances to increase your personal prestige or 
establish your professional reputation.
Page 106 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
104 Chapter 12 Other Itemized Deductions Publication 17 (2023)

Relief Fund Contributions
Y ou can't deduct contributions paid to a private 
plan that pays benefits to any covered em-
ployee who can't work because of any injury or 
illness not related to the job.
Residential Telephone Service
Y ou can't deduct any charge (including taxes) 
for basic local telephone service for the first tel-
ephone line to your residence, even if it's used 
in a trade or business.
Stockholders' Meetings
Y ou can't deduct transportation and other ex-
penses you pay to attend stockholders' meet-
ings of companies in which you own stock but 
have no other interest. Y ou can't deduct these 
expenses even if you're attending the meeting 
to get information that would be useful in mak-
ing further investments.
Tax-Exempt Income Expenses
Y ou can't deduct expenses to produce tax -ex-
empt income. Y ou can't deduct interest on a 
debt incurred or continued to buy or carry
tax-exempt securities.
If you have expenses to produce both taxa-
ble and tax -exempt income, but you can't iden-
tify the expenses that produce each type of in-
come, you must divide the expenses based on 
the amount of each type of income to determine 
the amount that you can deduct.
Travel Expenses for Another 
Individual
Y ou generally can't deduct travel expenses you 
pay or incur for a spouse, dependent, or other 
individual who accompanies you (or your em-
ployee) on business or personal travel unless 
the spouse, dependent, or other individual is an 
employee of the taxpayer, the travel is for a 
bona fide business purpose, and such expen-
ses would otherwise be deductible by the 
spouse, dependent, or other individual. See 
Pub. 463 for more information on deductible 
travel expenses.
Voluntary Unemployment
Benefit Fund Contributions
Y ou can't deduct voluntary unemployment ben-
efit fund contributions you make to a union fund 
or a private fund. However, you can deduct con-
tributions as taxes if state law requires you to 
make them to a state unemployment fund that 
covers you for the loss of wages from unem-
ployment caused by business conditions.
Wristwatches
Y ou can't deduct the cost of a wristwatch, even 
if there is a job requirement that you know the 
correct time to properly perform your duties.
Expenses You Can 
Deduct
Y ou can deduct the items listed below as item-
ized deductions. Report these items on Sched-
ule A (Form 1040), line 16, or Schedule A (Form 
1040-NR), line 7.
List of Deductions
Each of the following items is discussed in de-
tail after the list (except where indicated).
• Amortizable premium on taxable bonds.
• Casualty and theft losses from income-
producing property.
• Excess deductions of an estate or trust.
• Federal estate tax on income in respect of 
a decedent.
• Gambling losses up to the amount of gam-
bling winnings.
• Impairment-related work expenses of per-
sons with disabilities.
• Losses from Ponzi-type investment 
schemes (see Pub. 547 for more informa-
tion).
• Repayments of more than $3,000 under a 
claim of right.
• Unlawful discrimination claims.
• Unrecovered investment in an annuity.
Amortizable Premium on Taxable 
Bonds
In general, if the amount you pay for a bond is 
greater than its stated principal amount, the ex-
cess is bond premium. Y ou can elect to amor-
tize the premium on taxable bonds. The amorti-
zation of the premium is generally an offset to 
interest income on the bond rather than a sepa-
rate deduction item.
Part of the premium on some bonds may be 
an itemized deduction on Schedule A (Form 
1040). For more information, see Amortizable 
Premium on T axable Bonds in Pub. 529, and 
Bond Premium Amortization  in chapter 3 of 
Pub. 550, Investment Income and Expenses.
Casualty and Theft Losses of 
Income-Producing Property
Y ou can deduct a casualty or theft loss as an 
itemized deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040), 
line 16, if the damaged or stolen property was 
income-producing property (property held for 
investment, such as stocks, notes, bonds, gold, 
silver, vacant lots, and works of art). First, report 
the loss in Form 4684, Section B. Y ou may also 
have to include the loss on Form 4797 if you're 
otherwise required to file that form. T o figure 
your deduction, add all casualty or theft losses 
from this type of property included on Form 
4684, lines 32 and 38b, or Form 4797, line 18a. 
For more information on casualty and theft los-
ses, see Pub. 547.
Excess Deductions of an Estate or 
Trust
Generally, if an estate or trust has an excess de-
duction resulting from total deductions being 
greater than its gross income, in the estate’s or 
trust's last tax year, a beneficiary can deduct the 
excess deductions, depending on its character. 
The excess deductions retain their character as 
an adjustment to arrive at adjusted gross in-
come on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), as a 
non-miscellaneous itemized deduction reported 
on Schedule A (Form 1040), or as a miscellane-
ous itemized deduction. For more information 
on excess deductions of an estate or trust, see 
the Instructions for Schedule K -1 (Form 1041) 
for a Beneficiary Filing Form 1040.
Federal Estate Tax on Income in 
Respect of a Decedent
Y ou can deduct the federal estate tax attributa-
ble to income in respect of a decedent that you 
as a beneficiary include in your gross income. 
Income in respect of the decedent is gross in-
come that the decedent would have received 
had death not occurred and that wasn't properly 
includible in the decedent's final income tax re-
turn. See Pub. 559, Survivors, Executors, and 
Administrators, for more information.
Gambling Losses up to the
Amount of Gambling Winnings
Y ou must report the full amount of your gam-
bling winnings for the year on Schedule 1 (Form 
1040), line 8b. Y ou deduct your gambling losses 
for the year on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 16. 
Y ou can't deduct gambling losses that are more 
than your winnings.
Y ou can't reduce your gambling win-
nings by your gambling losses and re-
port the difference. Y ou must report the 
full amount of your winnings as income and 
claim your losses (up to the amount of win-
nings) as an itemized deduction. Therefore, 
your records should show your winnings sepa-
rately from your losses.
Diary of winnings and losses. Y ou 
must keep an accurate diary or similar 
record of your losses and winnings.
Y our diary should contain at least the following 
information.
• The date and type of your specific wager or 
wagering activity.
• The name and address or location of the 
gambling establishment.
• The names of other persons present with 
you at the gambling establishment.
• The amount(s) you won or lost.
See Pub. 529 for more information.
Impairment-Related Work 
Expenses
If you have a physical or mental disability that 
limits your being employed, or substantially lim-
its one or more of your major life activities, such 
as performing manual tasks, walking, speaking, 
breathing, learning, and working, you can 
deduct your impairment-related work expenses.
CAUTION
!
RECORDS
Page 107 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17 (2023) Chapter 12 Other Itemized Deductions 105

Impairment-related work expenses are ordi-
nary and necessary business expenses for at-
tendant care services at your place of work and 
for other expenses in connection with your 
place of work that are necessary for you to be 
able to work.
Self-employed.  If you're self-employed, en-
ter your impairment -related work expenses on 
the appropriate form (Schedule C (Form 1040), 
Schedule E (Form 1040), or Schedule F (Form 
1040)) used to report your business income and 
expenses.
Repayments Under Claim of Right
If you had to repay more than $3,000 that you 
included in your income in an earlier year be-
cause at the time you thought you had an unre-
stricted right to it, you may be able to deduct the 
amount you repaid or take a credit against your 
tax. See Repayments in chapter 8 for more in-
formation.
Unlawful Discrimination Claims
Y ou may be able to deduct, as an adjustment to 
income on Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 24h, 
attorney fees and court costs for actions settled 
or decided after October 22, 2004, involving a 
claim of unlawful discrimination, a claim against 
the U.S. Government, or a claim made under 
section 1862(b)(3)(A) of the Social Security Act. 
However, the amount you can deduct on 
Schedule 1 (Form 1040), line 24h, is limited to 
the amount of the judgment or settlement you 
are including in income for the tax year. See 
Pub. 525, T axable and Nontaxable Income, for 
more information.
Unrecovered Investment in 
Annuity
A retiree who contributed to the cost of an annu-
ity can exclude from income a part of each pay-
ment received as a tax -free return of the retir-
ee's investment. If the retiree dies before the 
entire investment is recovered tax free, any un-
recovered investment can be deducted on the 
retiree's final income tax return. See Pub. 575, 
Pension and Annuity Income, for more informa-
tion about the tax treatment of pensions and an-
nuities.
Page 108 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
106 Chapter 12 Other Itemized Deductions Publication 17 (2023)

Part Four.
Figuring Your 
Taxes, and 
Refundable and 
Nonrefundable 
Credits
The two chapters in this part explain how to figure your tax. They also 
discuss tax credits that, unlike deductions, are subtracted directly from your 
tax and reduce your tax dollar for dollar.
The Form 1040 and Form 1040-SR schedules that are discussed in these 
chapters are:
• Schedule 1, Additional Income and Adjustments to Income;
• Schedule 2, Additional T axes; and
• Schedule 3, Additional Credits and Payments.
13.
How To Figure 
Your Tax
Introduction
After you have figured your income and deduc-
tions, your next step is to figure your tax. This 
chapter discusses:
• The general steps you take to figure your 
tax,
• An additional tax you may have to pay 
called the alternative minimum tax (AMT), 
and
• The conditions you must meet if you want 
the IRS to figure your tax.
Useful Items
Y ou may want to see:
Publication
503 Child and Dependent Care Expenses
505 T ax Withholding and Estimated T ax
524 Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
525 T axable and Nontaxable Income
531 Reporting Tip Income
550 Investment Income and Expenses
560 Retirement Plans for Small Business 
(SEP , SIMPLE, and Qualified Plans)
575 Pension and Annuity Income
596 Earned Income Credit (EIC)
926 Household Employer’s T ax Guide
969 Health Savings Accounts and Other 
T ax-Favored Health Plans
970 T ax Benefits for Education
974 Premium T ax Credit (PTC)
  503
  505
  524
  525
  531
  550
  560
  575
  596
  926
  969
  970
  974
Form (and Instructions)
W-2 Wage and T ax Statement
Schedule SE (Form 1040) 
Self-Employment T ax
Schedule 8812 (Form 1040) Credits for 
Qualifying Children and Other 
Dependents
1116 Foreign T ax Credit
3800 General Business Credit
4136 Credit for Federal T ax Paid on Fuels
4970 T ax on Accumulation Distribution of 
T rusts
5329 Additional T axes on Qualified Plans 
(Including IRAs) and Other 
T ax-Favored Accounts
5405 Repayment of the First-Time 
Homebuyer Credit
5695 Residential Energy Credits
5884 Work Opportunity Credit
8396 Mortgage Interest Credit
8801 Credit for Prior Y ear Minimum 
T ax—Individuals, Estates, and T rusts
8835 Renewable Electricity Production 
Credit
8839 Qualified Adoption Expenses
8846 Credit for Employer Social Security 
and Medicare T axes Paid on Certain 
Employee Tips
8853 Archer MSAs and Long-T erm Care 
Insurance Contracts
8880 Credit for Qualified Retirement 
Savings Contributions
8889 Health Savings Accounts (HSAs)
8910 Alternative Motor Vehicle Credit
8912 Credit to Holders of T ax Credit 
Bonds
8936 Clean Vehicle Credits
8959 Additional Medicare T ax
8960 Net Investment Income 
T ax—Individuals, Estates, and T rusts
8962 Premium T ax Credit (PTC)
  W-2
  Schedule SE (Form 1040)
  Schedule 8812 (Form 1040)
  1116
  3800
  4136
  4970
  5329
  5405
  5695
  5884
  8396
  8801
  8835
  8839
  8846
  8853
  8880
  8889
  8910
  8912
  8936
  8959
  8960
  8962
Figuring Your Tax
Y our income tax is based on your taxable in-
come. After you figure your income tax and 
AMT , if any, subtract your tax credits and add 
any other taxes you may owe. The result is your 
total tax. Compare your total tax with your total 
payments to determine whether you are entitled 
to a refund or must make a payment.
This section provides a general outline of 
how to figure your tax. Y ou can find step-by-step 
directions in the Instructions for Form 1040.
Tax. Most taxpayers use either the T ax T able or 
the T ax Computation Worksheet to figure their 
income tax. However, there are special meth-
ods if your income includes any of the following 
items.
• A net capital gain. See Pub. 550.
• Qualified dividends taxed at the same 
rates as a net capital gain. See Pub. 550.
• Lump-sum distributions. See Pub. 575.
• Farming or fishing income. See Schedule J 
(Form 1040).
• T ax for certain children who have unearned 
income. See Form 8615.
• Parent's election to report child's interest 
and dividends. See Form 8814.
• Foreign earned income exclusion or the 
housing exclusion. (See Form 2555, For-
eign Earned Income, and the Foreign 
Earned Income T ax Worksheet in the In-
structions for Form 1040.)
Credits. After you figure your income tax and 
any AMT (discussed later), determine if you are 
eligible for any tax credits. Eligibility information 
for these tax credits is discussed in other publi-
cations and your form instructions. The follow-
ing items are some of the credits you may be 
able to subtract from your tax and shows where 
you can find more information on each credit.
• Adoption credit. See Form 8839.
• Alternative motor vehicle credit. See Form 
8910.
• Child and dependent care credit. See Pub. 
503.
• Child tax credit. See Schedule 8812 (Form 
1040).
Page 109 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17 (2023) Chapter 13 How To Figure Your Tax 107

• Credit for employer social security and 
Medicare taxes paid on certain employee 
tips. See Form 8846.
• Credit to holders of tax credit bonds. See 
Form 8912.
• Education credit. See Pub. 970.
• Elderly or disabled credit. See Pub. 524.
• Foreign tax credit. See Form 1116.
• General business credit. See Form 3800.
• Mortgage interest credit. See Form 8396.
• Clean vehicle credits. See Form 8936.
• Premium tax credit. See Pub. 974.
• Prior year minimum tax credit. See Form 
8801.
• Renewable electricity production credit. 
See Form 8835.
• Residential clean energy credit. See Form 
5695.
• Retirement savings contribution credit. See 
Form 8880.
• Work opportunity credit. See Form 5884.
Some credits (such as the earned income 
credit) aren’t listed because they are treated as 
payments. See Payments, later.
Other taxes. After you subtract your tax cred-
its, determine whether there are any other taxes 
you must pay. This chapter doesn’t explain 
these other taxes. Y ou can find that information 
in other publications and your form instructions. 
See the following list for other taxes you may 
need to add to your income tax.
• Additional Medicare tax. See Form 8959.
• Additional tax on ABLE accounts. See 
Pub. 969.
• Additional tax on Archer MSAs and 
long-term care insurance contracts. See 
Form 8853.
• Additional tax on Coverdell ESAs. See 
Form 5329.
• Additional tax on HSAs. See Form 8889.
• Additional tax on income you received from 
a nonqualified deferred compensation plan 
that fails to meet certain requirements. See 
the Instructions for Form 1040.
• Additional tax on qualified plans and other 
tax-favored accounts. See Form 5329.
• Additional tax on qualified retirement plans 
and IRAs. See Form 5329.
• Additional tax on qualified tuition pro-
grams. See Pub. 970.
• Excise tax on insider stock compensation 
from an expatriated corporation. See the 
Instructions for Form 1040.
• Household employment taxes. See Pub. 
926.
• Interest on the deferred tax on gain from 
certain installment sales with a sales price 
over $150,000. See the Instructions for 
Form 1040.
• Interest on the tax due on installment in-
come from the sale of certain residential 
lots and timeshares. See the Instructions 
for Form 1040.
• Net investment income tax. See Form 
8960.
• Recapture of an education credit. See Pub. 
970.
• Recapture of other credits. See the Instruc-
tions for Form 1040.
• Repayment of first-time homebuyer credit. 
See Form 5405.
• Section 72(m)(5) excess benefits tax. See 
Pub. 560.
• Self-employment tax. See Schedule SE 
(Form 1040).
• Social security and Medicare tax on tips. 
See Pub. 531.
• Social security and Medicare tax on wa-
ges. See Pub. 525.
• T ax on accumulation distribution of trusts. 
See Form 4970.
• T ax on golden parachute payments. See 
the Instructions for Form 1040.
• Uncollected social security and Medicare 
tax on group-term life insurance. See Form 
W-2.
• Uncollected social security and Medicare 
tax on tips. See Pub. 531.
Y ou may also have to pay AMT (discussed 
later in this chapter).
Payments. After you determine your total tax, 
figure the total payments you have already 
made for the year. Include credits that are trea-
ted as payments. This chapter doesn’t explain 
these payments and credits. Y ou can find that 
information in other publications and your form 
instructions. See the following list of payments 
and credits that you may be able to include in 
your total payments.
• American opportunity credit. See Pub. 970.
• Additional child tax credit. See Schedule 
8812 (Form 1040).
• Credit for federal tax on fuels. See Form 
4136.
• Credit for tax on undistributed capital gain. 
See the Instructions for Form 1040.
• Earned income credit. See Pub. 596.
• Estimated tax paid. See Pub. 505.
• Excess social security and RRTA tax with-
held. See the Instructions for Form 1040.
• Federal income tax withheld. See Pub. 
505.
• Net premium tax credit. See the Instruc-
tions for Form 8962 or the Instructions for 
Form 1040.
• Qualified sick and family leave credits. See 
the Instructions for Form 1040.
• T ax paid with extension. See the Instruc-
tions for Form 1040.
Refund or balance due.  T o determine 
whether you are entitled to a refund or whether 
you must make a payment, compare your total 
payments with your total tax. If you are entitled 
to a refund, see your form instructions for infor-
mation on having it directly deposited into one 
or more of your accounts (including a traditional 
IRA, Roth IRA, or a SEP -IRA), or to purchase 
U.S. savings bonds instead of receiving a paper 
check.
Alternative
Minimum Tax (AMT)
This section briefly discusses an additional tax 
you may have to pay.
The tax law gives special treatment to some 
kinds of income and allows special deductions 
and credits for some kinds of expenses. T ax-
payers who benefit from this special treatment 
may have to pay at least a minimum amount of 
tax through an additional tax called AMT .
Y ou may have to pay the AMT if your taxable 
income for regular tax purposes, combined with 
certain adjustments and tax preference items, is 
more than a certain amount. See Form 6251, 
Alternative Minimum T ax—Individuals.
Adjustments and tax preference items.  The 
more common adjustments and tax preference 
items include:
• Addition of the standard deduction (if 
claimed);
• Addition of itemized deductions claimed for 
state and local taxes and certain interest;
• Subtraction of any refund of state and local 
taxes included in gross income;
• Changes to accelerated depreciation of 
certain property;
• Difference between gain or loss on the sale 
of property reported for regular tax purpo-
ses and AMT purposes;
• Addition of certain income from incentive 
stock options;
• Change in certain passive activity loss de-
ductions;
• Addition of certain depletion that is more 
than the adjusted basis of the property;
• Addition of part of the deduction for certain 
intangible drilling costs; and
• Addition of tax-exempt interest on certain 
private activity bonds.
More information. For more information about 
the AMT , see the Instructions for Form 6251.
Tax Figured by the IRS
If you file by the due date of your return (not 
counting extensions) — April 15, 2024, for most 
people — you can have the IRS figure your tax 
for you on Form 1040 or 1040-SR.
If the IRS figures your tax and you paid too 
much, you will receive a refund. If you didn’t pay 
enough, you will receive a bill for the balance. 
T o avoid interest or the penalty for late payment, 
you must pay the bill within 30 days of the date 
of the bill or by the due date for your return, 
whichever is later.
The IRS can also figure the credit for the eld-
erly or the disabled and the earned income 
credit for you.
When the IRS cannot figure your tax.  The 
IRS can’t figure your tax for you if any of the 
following apply.
Page 110 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
108 Chapter 13 How To Figure Your Tax Publication 17 (2023)

1. Y ou want your refund directly deposited 
into your checking or savings account.
2. Y ou want any part of your refund applied to 
your 2024 estimated tax.
3. Y ou had income for the year from sources 
other than wages, salaries, tips, interest, 
dividends, taxable social security benefits, 
unemployment compensation, IRA distri-
butions, pensions, and annuities.
4. Y our taxable income is $100,000 or more.
5. Y ou itemize deductions.
6. Y ou file any of the following forms.
a. Form 2555, Foreign Earned Income.
b. Form 4137, Social Security and Medi-
care T ax on Unreported Tip Income.
c. Form 4970, T ax on Accumulation Dis-
tribution of T rusts.
d. Form 4972, T ax on Lump-Sum Distri-
butions.
e. Form 6198, At-Risk Limitations.
f. Form 6251, Alternative Minimum 
T ax—Individuals.
g. Form 8606, Nondeductible IRAs.
h. Form 8615, T ax for Certain Children 
Who Have Unearned Income.
i. Form 8814, Parents' Election T o Re-
port Child's Interest and Dividends.
j. Form 8839, Qualified Adoption Ex-
penses.
k. Form 8853, Archer MSAs and 
Long-T erm Care Insurance Contracts.
l. Form 8889, Health Savings Accounts 
(HSAs).
m. Form 8919, Uncollected Social Secur-
ity and Medicare T ax on Wages.
Filing the Return
After you complete the line entries for the tax 
form you are filing, fill in your name and ad-
dress. Enter your social security number in the 
space provided. If you are married, enter the so-
cial security numbers of you and your spouse, 
even if you file separately. Sign and date your 
return and enter your occupation(s). If you are 
filing a joint return, both you and your spouse 
must sign it. Enter your daytime phone number 
in the space provided. This may help speed the 
processing of your return if we have a question 
that can be answered over the phone. If you are 
filing a joint return, you may enter either your or 
your spouse's daytime phone number.
If you want to allow your preparer, a friend, a 
family member, or any other person you choose 
to discuss your 2023 tax return with the IRS, 
check the “Y es” box in the “Third Party Desig-
nee” area on your return. Also, enter the design-
ee's name, phone number, and any five digits 
the designee chooses as their personal identifi-
cation number (PIN). If you check the “Y es” box, 
you, and your spouse if filing a joint return, are 
authorizing the IRS to call the designee to an-
swer any questions that may arise during the 
processing of your return.
Fill in and attach any schedules and forms 
asked for on the lines you completed to your pa-
per return. Attach a copy of each of your Forms 
W-2 to your paper return. Also, attach to your 
paper return any Form 1099-R you received that 
has withholding tax in box 4.
Mail your return to the Internal Revenue 
Service Center for the area where you live. A list 
of Service Center addresses is in the instruc-
tions for your tax return.
Form 1040 or 1040-SR Line Entries
If you want the IRS to figure your tax.  Read 
Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, lines 1 through 15, and 
Schedule 1 (Form 1040), if applicable. Fill in the 
lines that apply to you and attach Schedule 1 
(Form 1040), if applicable. Don’t complete Form 
1040 or 1040-SR, line 16 or 17.
If you are filing a joint return, use the space 
on the dotted line next to the words “Adjusted 
Gross Income” on the first page of your return to 
separately show your taxable income and your 
spouse's taxable income.
Read Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, lines 19 
through 33, and Schedules 2 and 3 (Form 
1040), if applicable. Fill in the lines that apply to 
you and attach Schedules 2 and 3 (Form 1040), 
if applicable. Don’t fill in Form 1040 or 1040-SR, 
lines 22, 24, 33, or 34 through 38. Don’t fill in 
Schedule 2 (Form 1040), line 1 or 3. Also, don’t 
complete Schedule 3 (Form 1040), line 6d, if 
you are completing Schedule R (Form 1040), or 
Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, line 27, if you want the 
IRS to figure the credits shown on those lines.
Payments. If you have federal income tax with-
held that is shown on Form W -2, box 2; Form 
1099, box 4; Form W-2G, box 4; or another form 
(see the Instructions for Form 1040 for more in-
formation), enter the amount on Form 1040 or 
1040-SR, line 25. Enter any estimated tax pay-
ments you made on Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, 
line 26.
Credit for child and dependent care expen-
ses. If you can take this credit, complete Form 
2441 and attach it to your paper return. Enter 
the amount of the credit on Schedule 3 (Form 
1040), line 2. The IRS will not figure this credit.
Net premium tax credit. If you take this credit, 
complete Form 8962, Premium T ax Credit 
(PTC), and attach it to your return. Enter the 
amount of the credit on Schedule 3 (Form 
1040), line 9. The IRS will not figure this credit.
Credit for the elderly or the disabled.  If you 
can take this credit, the IRS can figure it for you. 
Enter “CFE” on the line next to Schedule 3 
(Form 1040), line 6d, and attach Schedule R 
(Form 1040) to your paper return. On Sched-
ule R (Form 1040), check the box in Part I for 
your filing status and age. Complete Parts II and 
III, lines 11 and 13, if they apply.
Earned income credit.  If you can take this 
credit, the IRS can figure it for you. Enter “EIC” 
on the dotted line on Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, 
line 27. If you elect to use your nontaxable com-
bat pay in figuring your EIC, enter the amount 
on Form 1040 or 1040-SR, line 1i.
If you have a qualifying child, you must fill in 
Schedule EIC (Form 1040), Earned Income 
Credit, and attach it to your paper return. If you 
don’t provide the child's social security number 
on Schedule EIC, line 2, the credit will be re-
duced or disallowed unless the child was born 
and died in 2023.
If your credit for any year after 1996 was re-
duced or disallowed by the IRS, you may also 
have to file Form 8862 with your return. For de-
tails, see the Instructions for Form 1040.
14.
Child Tax Credit 
and Credit for 
Other 
Dependents
What’s New
ACTC amount increased.  The maximum 
amount of ACTC for each qualifying child in-
creased to $1,600.
Reminders
Schedule 8812 (Form 1040).  The Schedule 
8812 (Form 1040) and its instructions are the 
single source for figuring and reporting the child 
tax credit, credit for other dependents, and ad-
ditional child tax credit. The instructions now in-
clude all applicable worksheets for figuring 
these credits. As a result, Pub. 972, Child T ax 
Credit, won’t be revised. For prior -year versions 
of Pub. 972, go to IRS.gov/Pub972.
Abbreviations used throughout this chap-
ter.  The following abbreviations will be used in 
this chapter when appropriate.
• ACTC means additional child tax credit.
• ATIN means adoption taxpayer identifica-
tion number.
• CTC means child tax credit.
• ITIN means individual taxpayer identifica-
tion number.
• ODC means credit for other dependents.
• SSN means social security number.
• TIN means taxpayer identification number. 
A TIN may be an ATIN, an ITIN, or an SSN.
Other abbreviations may be used in this chapter 
and will be defined as needed.
Delayed refund for returns claiming the 
ACTC. The IRS can’t issue refunds before 
mid-February 2024 for returns that properly 
claim the ACTC. This time frame applies to the 
Page 111 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17 (2023) Chapter 14 Child Tax Credit and Credit for Other Dependents 109

entire refund, not just the portion associated 
with the ACTC.
Introduction
The CTC is a credit that may reduce your tax by 
as much as $2,000 for each child who qualifies 
you for the credit. See Limits on the CTC and 
ODC, later.
The ACTC is a credit you may be able to 
take if you are not able to claim the full amount 
of the CTC.
The ODC is a credit that may reduce your 
tax by as much as $500 for each eligible de-
pendent.
The CTC and the ACTC shouldn’t be 
confused with the child and dependent 
care credit discussed in Pub. 503.
Useful Items
Y ou may want to see:
Form (and Instructions)
Schedule 8812 (Form 1040) Credits for 
Qualifying Children and Other 
Dependents
8862 Information T o Claim Certain Credits 
After Disallowance
For these and other useful items, go to IRS.gov/
Forms.
Taxpayer Identification 
Number Requirements
You must have a TIN by the due date of your 
return. If you, or your spouse if filing jointly, 
don’t have an SSN or ITIN issued on or before 
the due date of your 2023 return (including ex-
tensions), you can’t claim the CTC, ODC, or 
ACTC on either your original or amended 2023 
tax return.
If you apply for an ITIN on or before the due 
date of your 2023 return (including extensions) 
and the IRS issues you an ITIN as a result of the 
application, the IRS will consider your ITIN as 
issued on or before the due date of your return.
Each qualifying child you use for CTC or 
ACTC must have the required SSN.  If you 
have a qualifying child who doesn’t have the re-
quired SSN, you can’t use the child to claim the 
CTC or ACTC on either your original or amen-
ded 2023 tax return. The required SSN is one 
that is valid for employment and is issued be-
fore the due date of your 2023 return (including 
extensions).
If your qualifying child was born and died in 
2023 and you don’t have an SSN for the child, 
attach a copy of the child’s birth certificate, 
death certificate, or hospital records. The docu-
ment must show the child was born alive.
If your qualifying child doesn’t have the re-
quired SSN but has another type of TIN issued 
on or before the due date of your 2023 return 
(including extensions), you may be able to claim 
the ODC for that child. See Credit for Other De-
pendents (ODC), later.
Each dependent you use for the ODC must 
have a TIN by the due date of your return. If 
CAUTION
!
  Schedule 8812 (Form 1040)
  8862
you have a dependent who doesn’t have an 
SSN, ITIN, or ATIN issued on or before the due 
date of your 2023 return (including extensions), 
you can’t use that dependent to claim the ODC 
on either your original or amended 2023 tax re-
turn.
If you apply for an ITIN or ATIN for the de-
pendent on or before the due date of your 2023 
return (including extensions) and the IRS issues 
the ITIN or ATIN as a result of the application, 
the IRS will consider the ITIN or ATIN as issued 
on or before the due date of your return.
Improper Claims
If you erroneously claim the CTC, ACTC, or 
ODC, and it is later determined that your error 
was due to reckless or intentional disregard of 
the CTC, ACTC, or ODC rules, you will not be 
allowed to claim any of these credits for 2 years. 
If it is determined that your error was due to 
fraud, you will not be allowed to claim any of 
these credits for 10 years. Y ou may also have to 
pay penalties.
Form 8862 may be required.  If your CTC (re-
fundable or nonrefundable depending on the 
tax year), ACTC, or ODC for a year after 2015 
was denied or reduced for any reason other 
than a math or clerical error, you must attach 
Form 8862 to your tax return to claim the CTC, 
ACTC, or ODC, unless an exception applies. 
See Form 8862, Information T o Claim Certain 
Credits After Disallowance, and its instructions 
for more information, including whether an ex-
ception applies.
Child Tax Credit (CTC)
The CTC is for individuals who claim a child as 
a dependent if the child meets additional condi-
tions (described later).
Note. This credit is different from and in ad-
dition to the credit for child and dependent care 
expenses and the earned income credit that 
you may also be eligible to claim.
The maximum amount you can claim for the 
credit is $2,000 for each child who qualifies you 
for the CTC. But, see Limits on the CTC and 
ODC, later.
For more information about claiming the 
CTC, see Claiming the CTC and ODC, later.
Qualifying Child for the 
CTC
A child qualifies you for the CTC if the child 
meets all of the following conditions.
1. The child is your son, daughter, stepchild, 
foster child, brother, sister, stepbrother, 
stepsister, half brother, half sister, or a de-
scendant of any of them (for example, your 
grandchild, niece, or nephew).
2. The child was under age 17 at the end of 
2023.
3. The child didn’t provide over half the 
child’s own support for 2023.
4. The child lived with you for more than half 
of 2023 (see Exceptions to time lived with 
you, later).
5. The child is claimed as a dependent on 
your return. See chapter 3 for more infor-
mation about claiming someone as a de-
pendent.
6. The child doesn’t file a joint return for the 
year (or files it only to claim a refund of 
withheld income tax or estimated tax 
paid).
7. The child was a U.S. citizen, U.S. national, 
or U.S. resident alien. For more informa-
tion, see Pub. 519. If the child was adop-
ted, see Adopted child, later.
Example. Y our child turned 17 on Decem-
ber 30, 2023, and is a citizen of the United 
States and claimed as a dependent on your re-
turn. Y ou can't use the child to claim the CTC or 
ACTC because the child was not under age 17 
at the end of 2023.
If your child is age 17 or older at the 
end of 2023, see Credit for Other De-
pendents (ODC), later.
Adopted child.  An adopted child is always 
treated as your own child. An adopted child in-
cludes a child lawfully placed with you for legal 
adoption.
If you are a U.S. citizen or U.S. national and 
your adopted child lived with you all year as a 
member of your household in 2023, that child 
meets condition 7, earlier, to be a qualifying 
child for the child tax credit (or condition 3, later, 
to be a qualifying person for the ODC).
Exceptions to time lived with you.  A child is 
considered to have lived with you for more than 
half of 2023 if the child was born or died in 2023 
and your home was this child's home for more 
than half the time the child was alive. T emporary 
absences by you or the child for special circum-
stances, such as school, vacation, business, 
medical care, military service, or detention in a 
juvenile facility, count as time the child lived with 
you.
There are also exceptions for kidnapped 
children and children of divorced or separated 
parents. For details, see Residency T est in 
chapter 3.
Qualifying child of more than one person. 
A special rule applies if your qualifying child is 
the qualifying child of more than one person. 
For details, see Qualifying Child of More Than 
One Person in chapter 3.
Required SSN
In addition to being a qualifying child for the 
CTC, your child must have the required SSN. 
The required SSN is one that is valid for em-
ployment and that is issued by the Social Se-
curity Administration (SSA) before the due date 
of your 2023 return (including extensions).
If your qualifying child does not have 
the required SSN, see Credit for Other 
Dependents (ODC), later.
If your child was a U.S. citizen when the 
child received the SSN, the SSN is valid for 
TIP
TIP
Page 112 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
110 Chapter 14 Child Tax Credit and Credit for Other Dependents Publication 17 (2023)

employment. If “Not Valid for Employment” is 
printed on your child’s social security card and 
your child’s immigration status has changed so 
that your child is now a U.S. citizen or perma-
nent resident, ask the SSA for a new social se-
curity card without the legend. However, if “Valid 
for Work Only With DHS Authorization” is prin-
ted on your child’s social security card, your 
child has the required SSN only as long as the 
Department of Homeland Security (DHS) au-
thorization is valid.
If your child doesn’t have the required SSN, 
you can't use the child to claim the CTC or 
ACTC on either your original or amended 2023 
tax return.
Credit for Other 
Dependents (ODC)
This credit is for individuals with a dependent 
who meets additional conditions (described 
later).
Note. This credit is different from and in ad-
dition to the credit for child and dependent care 
expenses that you may also be eligible to claim.
The maximum amount you can claim for this 
credit is $500 for each qualifying dependent. 
See Limits on the CTC and ODC, later.
For more information about claiming the 
ODC, see Claiming the CTC and ODC, later.
Qualifying Person for the 
ODC
A person qualifies you for the ODC if the person 
meets all of the following conditions.
1. The person is claimed as a dependent on 
your return. See chapter 3 for more infor-
mation about claiming someone as a de-
pendent.
2. The person can’t be used by you to claim 
the CTC or ACTC. See Child T ax Credit 
(CTC), earlier.
3. The person was a U.S. citizen, U.S. na-
tional, or U.S. resident alien. For more in-
formation, see Pub. 519. If the person is 
your adopted child, see Adopted child, 
earlier.
Example. Y our sibling’s 10-year-old child 
lives in Mexico and qualifies as your dependent. 
The child is not a U.S. citizen, U.S. national, or 
U.S. resident alien. Y ou can't use this depend-
ent to claim the ODC.
Y ou can’t use the same child to claim 
the CTC or ACTC, and the ODC.
Timely Issued TIN
In addition to being a qualifying person for the 
ODC, the person must have an SSN, ITIN, or 
ATIN issued to the dependent on or before the 
due date of your 2023 return (including exten-
sions). If the person has not been issued an 
SSN, ITIN, or ATIN by that date, you can’t use 
the person to claim the ODC on either your orig-
inal or amended 2023 return. For more informa-
tion, see T axpayer Identification Number Re-
quirements, earlier.
Limits on the CTC and 
ODC
The credit amount of your CTC or ODC may be 
reduced if your modified adjusted gross income 
(AGI) is more than the amounts shown below 
for your filing status.
• Married filing jointly — $400,000.
• All other filing statuses — $200,000.
Modified AGI. For purposes of the CTC and 
ODC, your modified AGI is the amount on line 3 
of Schedule 8812.
For more information about limits on the 
CTC and ODC, see the Instructions for Sched-
ule 8812 (Form 1040).
Claiming the CTC and 
ODC
T o claim the CTC or ODC, be sure you meet the 
following requirements.
• Y ou must file Form 1040, 1040-SR, or 
1040-NR and include the name and TIN of 
each dependent for whom you are claiming 
the CTC or ODC.
CAUTION
!
• Y ou must file Schedule 8812 (Form 1040).
• Y ou must file Form 8862, if applicable. See 
Improper Claims, earlier.
• Y ou must enter a timely issued TIN on your 
tax return for you and your spouse (if filing 
jointly). See T axpayer Identification Num-
ber Requirements, earlier.
• For each qualifying child under 17 for 
whom you are claiming the CTC, you must 
enter the required SSN for the child in col-
umn (2) of the Dependents section of your 
tax return and check the Child tax credit 
box in column (4). See Child T ax Credit 
(CTC), earlier.
• For each dependent for whom you are 
claiming the ODC, you must enter the 
timely issued TIN for the dependent in col-
umn (2) of the Dependents section of your 
tax return and check the Credit for other 
dependents box in column (4). See Credit 
for Other Dependents (ODC), earlier.
Don't check both the Child tax credit 
box and the Credit for other depend-
ents box for the same person.
Additional Child Tax 
Credit (ACTC)
This credit is for certain individuals who get less 
than the full amount of the CTC.
The ODC can’t be used to figure the 
ACTC. Only your CTC can be used to 
figure your ACTC. If you are claiming 
the ODC but not the CTC, you can’t claim the 
ACTC.
Foreign earned income. If you file Form 2555 
(relating to foreign earned income), you can’t 
claim the ACTC.
Bona fide residents of Puerto Rico.  Bona 
fide residents of Puerto Rico are no longer re-
quired to have three or more qualifying children 
to be eligible to claim the ACTC. See Schedule 
8812 (Form 1040) and its instructions.
How to claim the ACTC.  T o claim the ACTC, 
see Schedule 8812 (Form 1040) and its instruc-
tions.
CAUTION
!
CAUTION
!
Page 113 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 17 (2023) Chapter 14 Child Tax Credit and Credit for Other Dependents 111

Page 114 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2023
Tax Table
CAUTION
!
See Line 16 in the Instructions for Form 1040 to see if you must use 
the T ax T able below to figure your tax.
At 
Least
But 
Less 
Than
Single Married 
/f_iling
jointly*
Married 
/f_iling
sepa-
rately
Head 
of a 
house-
hold
Your tax is—
25,200
25,250
25,300
25,350
2,807
2,813
2,819
2,825
Sample Table
25,250
25,300
25,350
25,400
2,587
2,593
2,599
2,605
2,807
2,813
2,819
2,825
2,713
2,719
2,725
2,731
Example. A married couple are filing a joint return. Their taxable income on Form 
1040, line 15, is $25,300. First, they find the $25,300–$25,350 taxable income line. 
Next, they find the column for married filing jointly and read down the column. The 
amount shown where the taxable income line and filing status column meet is 
$2,599. This is the tax amount they should enter in the entry space on Form 1040, 
line 16.
If line 15
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa-
rately
Head of 
a 
house-
hold
Your tax is—
0 5 0 0 0 0
5 15 1 1 1 1
15 25 2 2 2 2
25 50 4 4 4 4
50 75 6 6 6 6
75 100 9 9 9 9
100 125 11 11 11 11
125 150 14 14 14 14
150 175 16 16 16 16
175 200 19 19 19 19
200 225 21 21 21 21
225 250 24 24 24 24
250 275 26 26 26 26
275 300 29 29 29 29
300 325 31 31 31 31
325 350 34 34 34 34
350 375 36 36 36 36
375 400 39 39 39 39
400 425 41 41 41 41
425 450 44 44 44 44
450 475 46 46 46 46
475 500 49 49 49 49
500 525 51 51 51 51
525 550 54 54 54 54
550 575 56 56 56 56
575 600 59 59 59 59
600 625 61 61 61 61
625 650 64 64 64 64
650 675 66 66 66 66
675 700 69 69 69 69
700 725 71 71 71 71
725 750 74 74 74 74
750 775 76 76 76 76
775 800 79 79 79 79
800 825 81 81 81 81
825 850 84 84 84 84
850 875 86 86 86 86
875 900 89 89 89 89
900 925 91 91 91 91
925 950 94 94 94 94
950 975 96 96 96 96
975 1,000 99 99 99 99
If line 15
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa-
rately
Head of 
a 
house-
hold
Your tax is—
1,000
1,000 1,025 101 101 101 101
1,025 1,050 104 104 104 104
1,050 1,075 106 106 106 106
1,075 1,100 109 109 109 109
1,100 1,125 111 111 111 111
1,125 1,150 114 114 114 114
1,150 1,175 116 116 116 116
1,175 1,200 119 119 119 119
1,200 1,225 121 121 121 121
1,225 1,250 124 124 124 124
1,250 1,275 126 126 126 126
1,275 1,300 129 129 129 129
1,300 1,325 131 131 131 131
1,325 1,350 134 134 134 134
1,350 1,375 136 136 136 136
1,375 1,400 139 139 139 139
1,400 1,425 141 141 141 141
1,425 1,450 144 144 144 144
1,450 1,475 146 146 146 146
1,475 1,500 149 149 149 149
1,500 1,525 151 151 151 151
1,525 1,550 154 154 154 154
1,550 1,575 156 156 156 156
1,575 1,600 159 159 159 159
1,600 1,625 161 161 161 161
1,625 1,650 164 164 164 164
1,650 1,675 166 166 166 166
1,675 1,700 169 169 169 169
1,700 1,725 171 171 171 171
1,725 1,750 174 174 174 174
1,750 1,775 176 176 176 176
1,775 1,800 179 179 179 179
1,800 1,825 181 181 181 181
1,825 1,850 184 184 184 184
1,850 1,875 186 186 186 186
1,875 1,900 189 189 189 189
1,900 1,925 191 191 191 191
1,925 1,950 194 194 194 194
1,950 1,975 196 196 196 196
1,975 2,000 199 199 199 199
If line 15
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa-
rately
Head of 
a 
house-
hold
Your tax is—
2,000
2,000 2,025 201 201 201 201
2,025 2,050 204 204 204 204
2,050 2,075 206 206 206 206
2,075 2,100 209 209 209 209
2,100 2,125 211 211 211 211
2,125 2,150 214 214 214 214
2,150 2,175 216 216 216 216
2,175 2,200 219 219 219 219
2,200 2,225 221 221 221 221
2,225 2,250 224 224 224 224
2,250 2,275 226 226 226 226
2,275 2,300 229 229 229 229
2,300 2,325 231 231 231 231
2,325 2,350 234 234 234 234
2,350 2,375 236 236 236 236
2,375 2,400 239 239 239 239
2,400 2,425 241 241 241 241
2,425 2,450 244 244 244 244
2,450 2,475 246 246 246 246
2,475 2,500 249 249 249 249
2,500 2,525 251 251 251 251
2,525 2,550 254 254 254 254
2,550 2,575 256 256 256 256
2,575 2,600 259 259 259 259
2,600 2,625 261 261 261 261
2,625 2,650 264 264 264 264
2,650 2,675 266 266 266 266
2,675 2,700 269 269 269 269
2,700 2,725 271 271 271 271
2,725 2,750 274 274 274 274
2,750 2,775 276 276 276 276
2,775 2,800 279 279 279 279
2,800 2,825 281 281 281 281
2,825 2,850 284 284 284 284
2,850 2,875 286 286 286 286
2,875 2,900 289 289 289 289
2,900 2,925 291 291 291 291
2,925 2,950 294 294 294 294
2,950 2,975 296 296 296 296
2,975 3,000 299 299 299 299
(Continued)
* This column must also be used by a qualifying surviving spouse.
112 Publication 17 (2023)

Page 115 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2023 Tax Table — Continued
If line 15
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa-
rately
Head of 
a 
house-
hold
Your tax is—
3,000
3,000 3,050 303 303 303 303
3,050 3,100 308 308 308 308
3,100 3,150 313 313 313 313
3,150 3,200 318 318 318 318
3,200 3,250 323 323 323 323
3,250 3,300 328 328 328 328
3,300 3,350 333 333 333 333
3,350 3,400 338 338 338 338
3,400 3,450 343 343 343 343
3,450 3,500 348 348 348 348
3,500 3,550 353 353 353 353
3,550 3,600 358 358 358 358
3,600 3,650 363 363 363 363
3,650 3,700 368 368 368 368
3,700 3,750 373 373 373 373
3,750 3,800 378 378 378 378
3,800 3,850 383 383 383 383
3,850 3,900 388 388 388 388
3,900 3,950 393 393 393 393
3,950 4,000 398 398 398 398
4,000
4,000 4,050 403 403 403 403
4,050 4,100 408 408 408 408
4,100 4,150 413 413 413 413
4,150 4,200 418 418 418 418
4,200 4,250 423 423 423 423
4,250 4,300 428 428 428 428
4,300 4,350 433 433 433 433
4,350 4,400 438 438 438 438
4,400 4,450 443 443 443 443
4,450 4,500 448 448 448 448
4,500 4,550 453 453 453 453
4,550 4,600 458 458 458 458
4,600 4,650 463 463 463 463
4,650 4,700 468 468 468 468
4,700 4,750 473 473 473 473
4,750 4,800 478 478 478 478
4,800 4,850 483 483 483 483
4,850 4,900 488 488 488 488
4,900 4,950 493 493 493 493
4,950 5,000 498 498 498 498
5,000
5,000 5,050 503 503 503 503
5,050 5,100 508 508 508 508
5,100 5,150 513 513 513 513
5,150 5,200 518 518 518 518
5,200 5,250 523 523 523 523
5,250 5,300 528 528 528 528
5,300 5,350 533 533 533 533
5,350 5,400 538 538 538 538
5,400 5,450 543 543 543 543
5,450 5,500 548 548 548 548
5,500 5,550 553 553 553 553
5,550 5,600 558 558 558 558
5,600 5,650 563 563 563 563
5,650 5,700 568 568 568 568
5,700 5,750 573 573 573 573
5,750 5,800 578 578 578 578
5,800 5,850 583 583 583 583
5,850 5,900 588 588 588 588
5,900 5,950 593 593 593 593
5,950 6,000 598 598 598 598
If line 15
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa-
rately
Head of 
a 
house-
hold
Your tax is—
6,000
6,000 6,050 603 603 603 603
6,050 6,100 608 608 608 608
6,100 6,150 613 613 613 613
6,150 6,200 618 618 618 618
6,200 6,250 623 623 623 623
6,250 6,300 628 628 628 628
6,300 6,350 633 633 633 633
6,350 6,400 638 638 638 638
6,400 6,450 643 643 643 643
6,450 6,500 648 648 648 648
6,500 6,550 653 653 653 653
6,550 6,600 658 658 658 658
6,600 6,650 663 663 663 663
6,650 6,700 668 668 668 668
6,700 6,750 673 673 673 673
6,750 6,800 678 678 678 678
6,800 6,850 683 683 683 683
6,850 6,900 688 688 688 688
6,900 6,950 693 693 693 693
6,950 7,000 698 698 698 698
7,000
7,000 7,050 703 703 703 703
7,050 7,100 708 708 708 708
7,100 7,150 713 713 713 713
7,150 7,200 718 718 718 718
7,200 7,250 723 723 723 723
7,250 7,300 728 728 728 728
7,300 7,350 733 733 733 733
7,350 7,400 738 738 738 738
7,400 7,450 743 743 743 743
7,450 7,500 748 748 748 748
7,500 7,550 753 753 753 753
7,550 7,600 758 758 758 758
7,600 7,650 763 763 763 763
7,650 7,700 768 768 768 768
7,700 7,750 773 773 773 773
7,750 7,800 778 778 778 778
7,800 7,850 783 783 783 783
7,850 7,900 788 788 788 788
7,900 7,950 793 793 793 793
7,950 8,000 798 798 798 798
8,000
8,000 8,050 803 803 803 803
8,050 8,100 808 808 808 808
8,100 8,150 813 813 813 813
8,150 8,200 818 818 818 818
8,200 8,250 823 823 823 823
8,250 8,300 828 828 828 828
8,300 8,350 833 833 833 833
8,350 8,400 838 838 838 838
8,400 8,450 843 843 843 843
8,450 8,500 848 848 848 848
8,500 8,550 853 853 853 853
8,550 8,600 858 858 858 858
8,600 8,650 863 863 863 863
8,650 8,700 868 868 868 868
8,700 8,750 873 873 873 873
8,750 8,800 878 878 878 878
8,800 8,850 883 883 883 883
8,850 8,900 888 888 888 888
8,900 8,950 893 893 893 893
8,950 9,000 898 898 898 898
If line 15
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa-
rately
Head of 
a 
house-
hold
Your tax is—
9,000
9,000 9,050 903 903 903 903
9,050 9,100 908 908 908 908
9,100 9,150 913 913 913 913
9,150 9,200 918 918 918 918
9,200 9,250 923 923 923 923
9,250 9,300 928 928 928 928
9,300 9,350 933 933 933 933
9,350 9,400 938 938 938 938
9,400 9,450 943 943 943 943
9,450 9,500 948 948 948 948
9,500 9,550 953 953 953 953
9,550 9,600 958 958 958 958
9,600 9,650 963 963 963 963
9,650 9,700 968 968 968 968
9,700 9,750 973 973 973 973
9,750 9,800 978 978 978 978
9,800 9,850 983 983 983 983
9,850 9,900 988 988 988 988
9,900 9,950 993 993 993 993
9,950 10,000 998 998 998 998
10,000
10,000 10,050 1,003 1,003 1,003 1,003
10,050 10,100 1,008 1,008 1,008 1,008
10,100 10,150 1,013 1,013 1,013 1,013
10,150 10,200 1,018 1,018 1,018 1,018
10,200 10,250 1,023 1,023 1,023 1,023
10,250 10,300 1,028 1,028 1,028 1,028
10,300 10,350 1,033 1,033 1,033 1,033
10,350 10,400 1,038 1,038 1,038 1,038
10,400 10,450 1,043 1,043 1,043 1,043
10,450 10,500 1,048 1,048 1,048 1,048
10,500 10,550 1,053 1,053 1,053 1,053
10,550 10,600 1,058 1,058 1,058 1,058
10,600 10,650 1,063 1,063 1,063 1,063
10,650 10,700 1,068 1,068 1,068 1,068
10,700 10,750 1,073 1,073 1,073 1,073
10,750 10,800 1,078 1,078 1,078 1,078
10,800 10,850 1,083 1,083 1,083 1,083
10,850 10,900 1,088 1,088 1,088 1,088
10,900 10,950 1,093 1,093 1,093 1,093
10,950 11,000 1,098 1,098 1,098 1,098
11,000
11,000 11,050 1,103 1,103 1,103 1,103
11,050 11,100 1,109 1,108 1,109 1,108
11,100 11,150 1,115 1,113 1,115 1,113
11,150 11,200 1,121 1,118 1,121 1,118
11,200 11,250 1,127 1,123 1,127 1,123
11,250 11,300 1,133 1,128 1,133 1,128
11,300 11,350 1,139 1,133 1,139 1,133
11,350 11,400 1,145 1,138 1,145 1,138
11,400 11,450 1,151 1,143 1,151 1,143
11,450 11,500 1,157 1,148 1,157 1,148
11,500 11,550 1,163 1,153 1,163 1,153
11,550 11,600 1,169 1,158 1,169 1,158
11,600 11,650 1,175 1,163 1,175 1,163
11,650 11,700 1,181 1,168 1,181 1,168
11,700 11,750 1,187 1,173 1,187 1,173
11,750 11,800 1,193 1,178 1,193 1,178
11,800 11,850 1,199 1,183 1,199 1,183
11,850 11,900 1,205 1,188 1,205 1,188
11,900 11,950 1,211 1,193 1,211 1,193
11,950 12,000 1,217 1,198 1,217 1,198
(Continued)
* This column must also be used by a qualifying surviving spouse.
Publication 17 (2023) 113

Page 116 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2023 Tax Table — Continued
If line 15
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa-
rately
Head of 
a 
house-
hold
Your tax is—
12,000
12,000 12,050 1,223 1,203 1,223 1,203
12,050 12,100 1,229 1,208 1,229 1,208
12,100 12,150 1,235 1,213 1,235 1,213
12,150 12,200 1,241 1,218 1,241 1,218
12,200 12,250 1,247 1,223 1,247 1,223
12,250 12,300 1,253 1,228 1,253 1,228
12,300 12,350 1,259 1,233 1,259 1,233
12,350 12,400 1,265 1,238 1,265 1,238
12,400 12,450 1,271 1,243 1,271 1,243
12,450 12,500 1,277 1,248 1,277 1,248
12,500 12,550 1,283 1,253 1,283 1,253
12,550 12,600 1,289 1,258 1,289 1,258
12,600 12,650 1,295 1,263 1,295 1,263
12,650 12,700 1,301 1,268 1,301 1,268
12,700 12,750 1,307 1,273 1,307 1,273
12,750 12,800 1,313 1,278 1,313 1,278
12,800 12,850 1,319 1,283 1,319 1,283
12,850 12,900 1,325 1,288 1,325 1,288
12,900 12,950 1,331 1,293 1,331 1,293
12,950 13,000 1,337 1,298 1,337 1,298
13,000
13,000 13,050 1,343 1,303 1,343 1,303
13,050 13,100 1,349 1,308 1,349 1,308
13,100 13,150 1,355 1,313 1,355 1,313
13,150 13,200 1,361 1,318 1,361 1,318
13,200 13,250 1,367 1,323 1,367 1,323
13,250 13,300 1,373 1,328 1,373 1,328
13,300 13,350 1,379 1,333 1,379 1,333
13,350 13,400 1,385 1,338 1,385 1,338
13,400 13,450 1,391 1,343 1,391 1,343
13,450 13,500 1,397 1,348 1,397 1,348
13,500 13,550 1,403 1,353 1,403 1,353
13,550 13,600 1,409 1,358 1,409 1,358
13,600 13,650 1,415 1,363 1,415 1,363
13,650 13,700 1,421 1,368 1,421 1,368
13,700 13,750 1,427 1,373 1,427 1,373
13,750 13,800 1,433 1,378 1,433 1,378
13,800 13,850 1,439 1,383 1,439 1,383
13,850 13,900 1,445 1,388 1,445 1,388
13,900 13,950 1,451 1,393 1,451 1,393
13,950 14,000 1,457 1,398 1,457 1,398
14,000
14,000 14,050 1,463 1,403 1,463 1,403
14,050 14,100 1,469 1,408 1,469 1,408
14,100 14,150 1,475 1,413 1,475 1,413
14,150 14,200 1,481 1,418 1,481 1,418
14,200 14,250 1,487 1,423 1,487 1,423
14,250 14,300 1,493 1,428 1,493 1,428
14,300 14,350 1,499 1,433 1,499 1,433
14,350 14,400 1,505 1,438 1,505 1,438
14,400 14,450 1,511 1,443 1,511 1,443
14,450 14,500 1,517 1,448 1,517 1,448
14,500 14,550 1,523 1,453 1,523 1,453
14,550 14,600 1,529 1,458 1,529 1,458
14,600 14,650 1,535 1,463 1,535 1,463
14,650 14,700 1,541 1,468 1,541 1,468
14,700 14,750 1,547 1,473 1,547 1,473
14,750 14,800 1,553 1,478 1,553 1,478
14,800 14,850 1,559 1,483 1,559 1,483
14,850 14,900 1,565 1,488 1,565 1,488
14,900 14,950 1,571 1,493 1,571 1,493
14,950 15,000 1,577 1,498 1,577 1,498
If line 15
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa-
rately
Head of 
a 
house-
hold
Your tax is—
15,000
15,000 15,050 1,583 1,503 1,583 1,503
15,050 15,100 1,589 1,508 1,589 1,508
15,100 15,150 1,595 1,513 1,595 1,513
15,150 15,200 1,601 1,518 1,601 1,518
15,200 15,250 1,607 1,523 1,607 1,523
15,250 15,300 1,613 1,528 1,613 1,528
15,300 15,350 1,619 1,533 1,619 1,533
15,350 15,400 1,625 1,538 1,625 1,538
15,400 15,450 1,631 1,543 1,631 1,543
15,450 15,500 1,637 1,548 1,637 1,548
15,500 15,550 1,643 1,553 1,643 1,553
15,550 15,600 1,649 1,558 1,649 1,558
15,600 15,650 1,655 1,563 1,655 1,563
15,650 15,700 1,661 1,568 1,661 1,568
15,700 15,750 1,667 1,573 1,667 1,573
15,750 15,800 1,673 1,578 1,673 1,579
15,800 15,850 1,679 1,583 1,679 1,585
15,850 15,900 1,685 1,588 1,685 1,591
15,900 15,950 1,691 1,593 1,691 1,597
15,950 16,000 1,697 1,598 1,697 1,603
16,000
16,000 16,050 1,703 1,603 1,703 1,609
16,050 16,100 1,709 1,608 1,709 1,615
16,100 16,150 1,715 1,613 1,715 1,621
16,150 16,200 1,721 1,618 1,721 1,627
16,200 16,250 1,727 1,623 1,727 1,633
16,250 16,300 1,733 1,628 1,733 1,639
16,300 16,350 1,739 1,633 1,739 1,645
16,350 16,400 1,745 1,638 1,745 1,651
16,400 16,450 1,751 1,643 1,751 1,657
16,450 16,500 1,757 1,648 1,757 1,663
16,500 16,550 1,763 1,653 1,763 1,669
16,550 16,600 1,769 1,658 1,769 1,675
16,600 16,650 1,775 1,663 1,775 1,681
16,650 16,700 1,781 1,668 1,781 1,687
16,700 16,750 1,787 1,673 1,787 1,693
16,750 16,800 1,793 1,678 1,793 1,699
16,800 16,850 1,799 1,683 1,799 1,705
16,850 16,900 1,805 1,688 1,805 1,711
16,900 16,950 1,811 1,693 1,811 1,717
16,950 17,000 1,817 1,698 1,817 1,723
17,000
17,000 17,050 1,823 1,703 1,823 1,729
17,050 17,100 1,829 1,708 1,829 1,735
17,100 17,150 1,835 1,713 1,835 1,741
17,150 17,200 1,841 1,718 1,841 1,747
17,200 17,250 1,847 1,723 1,847 1,753
17,250 17,300 1,853 1,728 1,853 1,759
17,300 17,350 1,859 1,733 1,859 1,765
17,350 17,400 1,865 1,738 1,865 1,771
17,400 17,450 1,871 1,743 1,871 1,777
17,450 17,500 1,877 1,748 1,877 1,783
17,500 17,550 1,883 1,753 1,883 1,789
17,550 17,600 1,889 1,758 1,889 1,795
17,600 17,650 1,895 1,763 1,895 1,801
17,650 17,700 1,901 1,768 1,901 1,807
17,700 17,750 1,907 1,773 1,907 1,813
17,750 17,800 1,913 1,778 1,913 1,819
17,800 17,850 1,919 1,783 1,919 1,825
17,850 17,900 1,925 1,788 1,925 1,831
17,900 17,950 1,931 1,793 1,931 1,837
17,950 18,000 1,937 1,798 1,937 1,843
If line 15
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa-
rately
Head of 
a 
house-
hold
Your tax is—
18,000
18,000 18,050 1,943 1,803 1,943 1,849
18,050 18,100 1,949 1,808 1,949 1,855
18,100 18,150 1,955 1,813 1,955 1,861
18,150 18,200 1,961 1,818 1,961 1,867
18,200 18,250 1,967 1,823 1,967 1,873
18,250 18,300 1,973 1,828 1,973 1,879
18,300 18,350 1,979 1,833 1,979 1,885
18,350 18,400 1,985 1,838 1,985 1,891
18,400 18,450 1,991 1,843 1,991 1,897
18,450 18,500 1,997 1,848 1,997 1,903
18,500 18,550 2,003 1,853 2,003 1,909
18,550 18,600 2,009 1,858 2,009 1,915
18,600 18,650 2,015 1,863 2,015 1,921
18,650 18,700 2,021 1,868 2,021 1,927
18,700 18,750 2,027 1,873 2,027 1,933
18,750 18,800 2,033 1,878 2,033 1,939
18,800 18,850 2,039 1,883 2,039 1,945
18,850 18,900 2,045 1,888 2,045 1,951
18,900 18,950 2,051 1,893 2,051 1,957
18,950 19,000 2,057 1,898 2,057 1,963
19,000
19,000 19,050 2,063 1,903 2,063 1,969
19,050 19,100 2,069 1,908 2,069 1,975
19,100 19,150 2,075 1,913 2,075 1,981
19,150 19,200 2,081 1,918 2,081 1,987
19,200 19,250 2,087 1,923 2,087 1,993
19,250 19,300 2,093 1,928 2,093 1,999
19,300 19,350 2,099 1,933 2,099 2,005
19,350 19,400 2,105 1,938 2,105 2,011
19,400 19,450 2,111 1,943 2,111 2,017
19,450 19,500 2,117 1,948 2,117 2,023
19,500 19,550 2,123 1,953 2,123 2,029
19,550 19,600 2,129 1,958 2,129 2,035
19,600 19,650 2,135 1,963 2,135 2,041
19,650 19,700 2,141 1,968 2,141 2,047
19,700 19,750 2,147 1,973 2,147 2,053
19,750 19,800 2,153 1,978 2,153 2,059
19,800 19,850 2,159 1,983 2,159 2,065
19,850 19,900 2,165 1,988 2,165 2,071
19,900 19,950 2,171 1,993 2,171 2,077
19,950 20,000 2,177 1,998 2,177 2,083
20,000
20,000 20,050 2,183 2,003 2,183 2,089
20,050 20,100 2,189 2,008 2,189 2,095
20,100 20,150 2,195 2,013 2,195 2,101
20,150 20,200 2,201 2,018 2,201 2,107
20,200 20,250 2,207 2,023 2,207 2,113
20,250 20,300 2,213 2,028 2,213 2,119
20,300 20,350 2,219 2,033 2,219 2,125
20,350 20,400 2,225 2,038 2,225 2,131
20,400 20,450 2,231 2,043 2,231 2,137
20,450 20,500 2,237 2,048 2,237 2,143
20,500 20,550 2,243 2,053 2,243 2,149
20,550 20,600 2,249 2,058 2,249 2,155
20,600 20,650 2,255 2,063 2,255 2,161
20,650 20,700 2,261 2,068 2,261 2,167
20,700 20,750 2,267 2,073 2,267 2,173
20,750 20,800 2,273 2,078 2,273 2,179
20,800 20,850 2,279 2,083 2,279 2,185
20,850 20,900 2,285 2,088 2,285 2,191
20,900 20,950 2,291 2,093 2,291 2,197
20,950 21,000 2,297 2,098 2,297 2,203
(Continued)
* This column must also be used by a qualifying surviving spouse.
114 Publication 17 (2023)

Page 117 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2023 Tax Table — Continued
If line 15
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa-
rately
Head of 
a 
house-
hold
Your tax is—
21,000
21,000 21,050 2,303 2,103 2,303 2,209
21,050 21,100 2,309 2,108 2,309 2,215
21,100 21,150 2,315 2,113 2,315 2,221
21,150 21,200 2,321 2,118 2,321 2,227
21,200 21,250 2,327 2,123 2,327 2,233
21,250 21,300 2,333 2,128 2,333 2,239
21,300 21,350 2,339 2,133 2,339 2,245
21,350 21,400 2,345 2,138 2,345 2,251
21,400 21,450 2,351 2,143 2,351 2,257
21,450 21,500 2,357 2,148 2,357 2,263
21,500 21,550 2,363 2,153 2,363 2,269
21,550 21,600 2,369 2,158 2,369 2,275
21,600 21,650 2,375 2,163 2,375 2,281
21,650 21,700 2,381 2,168 2,381 2,287
21,700 21,750 2,387 2,173 2,387 2,293
21,750 21,800 2,393 2,178 2,393 2,299
21,800 21,850 2,399 2,183 2,399 2,305
21,850 21,900 2,405 2,188 2,405 2,311
21,900 21,950 2,411 2,193 2,411 2,317
21,950 22,000 2,417 2,198 2,417 2,323
22,000
22,000 22,050 2,423 2,203 2,423 2,329
22,050 22,100 2,429 2,209 2,429 2,335
22,100 22,150 2,435 2,215 2,435 2,341
22,150 22,200 2,441 2,221 2,441 2,347
22,200 22,250 2,447 2,227 2,447 2,353
22,250 22,300 2,453 2,233 2,453 2,359
22,300 22,350 2,459 2,239 2,459 2,365
22,350 22,400 2,465 2,245 2,465 2,371
22,400 22,450 2,471 2,251 2,471 2,377
22,450 22,500 2,477 2,257 2,477 2,383
22,500 22,550 2,483 2,263 2,483 2,389
22,550 22,600 2,489 2,269 2,489 2,395
22,600 22,650 2,495 2,275 2,495 2,401
22,650 22,700 2,501 2,281 2,501 2,407
22,700 22,750 2,507 2,287 2,507 2,413
22,750 22,800 2,513 2,293 2,513 2,419
22,800 22,850 2,519 2,299 2,519 2,425
22,850 22,900 2,525 2,305 2,525 2,431
22,900 22,950 2,531 2,311 2,531 2,437
22,950 23,000 2,537 2,317 2,537 2,443
23,000
23,000 23,050 2,543 2,323 2,543 2,449
23,050 23,100 2,549 2,329 2,549 2,455
23,100 23,150 2,555 2,335 2,555 2,461
23,150 23,200 2,561 2,341 2,561 2,467
23,200 23,250 2,567 2,347 2,567 2,473
23,250 23,300 2,573 2,353 2,573 2,479
23,300 23,350 2,579 2,359 2,579 2,485
23,350 23,400 2,585 2,365 2,585 2,491
23,400 23,450 2,591 2,371 2,591 2,497
23,450 23,500 2,597 2,377 2,597 2,503
23,500 23,550 2,603 2,383 2,603 2,509
23,550 23,600 2,609 2,389 2,609 2,515
23,600 23,650 2,615 2,395 2,615 2,521
23,650 23,700 2,621 2,401 2,621 2,527
23,700 23,750 2,627 2,407 2,627 2,533
23,750 23,800 2,633 2,413 2,633 2,539
23,800 23,850 2,639 2,419 2,639 2,545
23,850 23,900 2,645 2,425 2,645 2,551
23,900 23,950 2,651 2,431 2,651 2,557
23,950 24,000 2,657 2,437 2,657 2,563
If line 15
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa-
rately
Head of 
a 
house-
hold
Your tax is—
24,000
24,000 24,050 2,663 2,443 2,663 2,569
24,050 24,100 2,669 2,449 2,669 2,575
24,100 24,150 2,675 2,455 2,675 2,581
24,150 24,200 2,681 2,461 2,681 2,587
24,200 24,250 2,687 2,467 2,687 2,593
24,250 24,300 2,693 2,473 2,693 2,599
24,300 24,350 2,699 2,479 2,699 2,605
24,350 24,400 2,705 2,485 2,705 2,611
24,400 24,450 2,711 2,491 2,711 2,617
24,450 24,500 2,717 2,497 2,717 2,623
24,500 24,550 2,723 2,503 2,723 2,629
24,550 24,600 2,729 2,509 2,729 2,635
24,600 24,650 2,735 2,515 2,735 2,641
24,650 24,700 2,741 2,521 2,741 2,647
24,700 24,750 2,747 2,527 2,747 2,653
24,750 24,800 2,753 2,533 2,753 2,659
24,800 24,850 2,759 2,539 2,759 2,665
24,850 24,900 2,765 2,545 2,765 2,671
24,900 24,950 2,771 2,551 2,771 2,677
24,950 25,000 2,777 2,557 2,777 2,683
25,000
25,000 25,050 2,783 2,563 2,783 2,689
25,050 25,100 2,789 2,569 2,789 2,695
25,100 25,150 2,795 2,575 2,795 2,701
25,150 25,200 2,801 2,581 2,801 2,707
25,200 25,250 2,807 2,587 2,807 2,713
25,250 25,300 2,813 2,593 2,813 2,719
25,300 25,350 2,819 2,599 2,819 2,725
25,350 25,400 2,825 2,605 2,825 2,731
25,400 25,450 2,831 2,611 2,831 2,737
25,450 25,500 2,837 2,617 2,837 2,743
25,500 25,550 2,843 2,623 2,843 2,749
25,550 25,600 2,849 2,629 2,849 2,755
25,600 25,650 2,855 2,635 2,855 2,761
25,650 25,700 2,861 2,641 2,861 2,767
25,700 25,750 2,867 2,647 2,867 2,773
25,750 25,800 2,873 2,653 2,873 2,779
25,800 25,850 2,879 2,659 2,879 2,785
25,850 25,900 2,885 2,665 2,885 2,791
25,900 25,950 2,891 2,671 2,891 2,797
25,950 26,000 2,897 2,677 2,897 2,803
26,000
26,000 26,050 2,903 2,683 2,903 2,809
26,050 26,100 2,909 2,689 2,909 2,815
26,100 26,150 2,915 2,695 2,915 2,821
26,150 26,200 2,921 2,701 2,921 2,827
26,200 26,250 2,927 2,707 2,927 2,833
26,250 26,300 2,933 2,713 2,933 2,839
26,300 26,350 2,939 2,719 2,939 2,845
26,350 26,400 2,945 2,725 2,945 2,851
26,400 26,450 2,951 2,731 2,951 2,857
26,450 26,500 2,957 2,737 2,957 2,863
26,500 26,550 2,963 2,743 2,963 2,869
26,550 26,600 2,969 2,749 2,969 2,875
26,600 26,650 2,975 2,755 2,975 2,881
26,650 26,700 2,981 2,761 2,981 2,887
26,700 26,750 2,987 2,767 2,987 2,893
26,750 26,800 2,993 2,773 2,993 2,899
26,800 26,850 2,999 2,779 2,999 2,905
26,850 26,900 3,005 2,785 3,005 2,911
26,900 26,950 3,011 2,791 3,011 2,917
26,950 27,000 3,017 2,797 3,017 2,923
If line 15
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa-
rately
Head of 
a 
house-
hold
Your tax is—
27,000
27,000 27,050 3,023 2,803 3,023 2,929
27,050 27,100 3,029 2,809 3,029 2,935
27,100 27,150 3,035 2,815 3,035 2,941
27,150 27,200 3,041 2,821 3,041 2,947
27,200 27,250 3,047 2,827 3,047 2,953
27,250 27,300 3,053 2,833 3,053 2,959
27,300 27,350 3,059 2,839 3,059 2,965
27,350 27,400 3,065 2,845 3,065 2,971
27,400 27,450 3,071 2,851 3,071 2,977
27,450 27,500 3,077 2,857 3,077 2,983
27,500 27,550 3,083 2,863 3,083 2,989
27,550 27,600 3,089 2,869 3,089 2,995
27,600 27,650 3,095 2,875 3,095 3,001
27,650 27,700 3,101 2,881 3,101 3,007
27,700 27,750 3,107 2,887 3,107 3,013
27,750 27,800 3,113 2,893 3,113 3,019
27,800 27,850 3,119 2,899 3,119 3,025
27,850 27,900 3,125 2,905 3,125 3,031
27,900 27,950 3,131 2,911 3,131 3,037
27,950 28,000 3,137 2,917 3,137 3,043
28,000
28,000 28,050 3,143 2,923 3,143 3,049
28,050 28,100 3,149 2,929 3,149 3,055
28,100 28,150 3,155 2,935 3,155 3,061
28,150 28,200 3,161 2,941 3,161 3,067
28,200 28,250 3,167 2,947 3,167 3,073
28,250 28,300 3,173 2,953 3,173 3,079
28,300 28,350 3,179 2,959 3,179 3,085
28,350 28,400 3,185 2,965 3,185 3,091
28,400 28,450 3,191 2,971 3,191 3,097
28,450 28,500 3,197 2,977 3,197 3,103
28,500 28,550 3,203 2,983 3,203 3,109
28,550 28,600 3,209 2,989 3,209 3,115
28,600 28,650 3,215 2,995 3,215 3,121
28,650 28,700 3,221 3,001 3,221 3,127
28,700 28,750 3,227 3,007 3,227 3,133
28,750 28,800 3,233 3,013 3,233 3,139
28,800 28,850 3,239 3,019 3,239 3,145
28,850 28,900 3,245 3,025 3,245 3,151
28,900 28,950 3,251 3,031 3,251 3,157
28,950 29,000 3,257 3,037 3,257 3,163
29,000
29,000 29,050 3,263 3,043 3,263 3,169
29,050 29,100 3,269 3,049 3,269 3,175
29,100 29,150 3,275 3,055 3,275 3,181
29,150 29,200 3,281 3,061 3,281 3,187
29,200 29,250 3,287 3,067 3,287 3,193
29,250 29,300 3,293 3,073 3,293 3,199
29,300 29,350 3,299 3,079 3,299 3,205
29,350 29,400 3,305 3,085 3,305 3,211
29,400 29,450 3,311 3,091 3,311 3,217
29,450 29,500 3,317 3,097 3,317 3,223
29,500 29,550 3,323 3,103 3,323 3,229
29,550 29,600 3,329 3,109 3,329 3,235
29,600 29,650 3,335 3,115 3,335 3,241
29,650 29,700 3,341 3,121 3,341 3,247
29,700 29,750 3,347 3,127 3,347 3,253
29,750 29,800 3,353 3,133 3,353 3,259
29,800 29,850 3,359 3,139 3,359 3,265
29,850 29,900 3,365 3,145 3,365 3,271
29,900 29,950 3,371 3,151 3,371 3,277
29,950 30,000 3,377 3,157 3,377 3,283
(Continued)
* This column must also be used by a qualifying surviving spouse.
Publication 17 (2023) 115

Page 118 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2023 Tax Table — Continued
If line 15
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa-
rately
Head of 
a 
house-
hold
Your tax is—
30,000
30,000 30,050 3,383 3,163 3,383 3,289
30,050 30,100 3,389 3,169 3,389 3,295
30,100 30,150 3,395 3,175 3,395 3,301
30,150 30,200 3,401 3,181 3,401 3,307
30,200 30,250 3,407 3,187 3,407 3,313
30,250 30,300 3,413 3,193 3,413 3,319
30,300 30,350 3,419 3,199 3,419 3,325
30,350 30,400 3,425 3,205 3,425 3,331
30,400 30,450 3,431 3,211 3,431 3,337
30,450 30,500 3,437 3,217 3,437 3,343
30,500 30,550 3,443 3,223 3,443 3,349
30,550 30,600 3,449 3,229 3,449 3,355
30,600 30,650 3,455 3,235 3,455 3,361
30,650 30,700 3,461 3,241 3,461 3,367
30,700 30,750 3,467 3,247 3,467 3,373
30,750 30,800 3,473 3,253 3,473 3,379
30,800 30,850 3,479 3,259 3,479 3,385
30,850 30,900 3,485 3,265 3,485 3,391
30,900 30,950 3,491 3,271 3,491 3,397
30,950 31,000 3,497 3,277 3,497 3,403
31,000
31,000 31,050 3,503 3,283 3,503 3,409
31,050 31,100 3,509 3,289 3,509 3,415
31,100 31,150 3,515 3,295 3,515 3,421
31,150 31,200 3,521 3,301 3,521 3,427
31,200 31,250 3,527 3,307 3,527 3,433
31,250 31,300 3,533 3,313 3,533 3,439
31,300 31,350 3,539 3,319 3,539 3,445
31,350 31,400 3,545 3,325 3,545 3,451
31,400 31,450 3,551 3,331 3,551 3,457
31,450 31,500 3,557 3,337 3,557 3,463
31,500 31,550 3,563 3,343 3,563 3,469
31,550 31,600 3,569 3,349 3,569 3,475
31,600 31,650 3,575 3,355 3,575 3,481
31,650 31,700 3,581 3,361 3,581 3,487
31,700 31,750 3,587 3,367 3,587 3,493
31,750 31,800 3,593 3,373 3,593 3,499
31,800 31,850 3,599 3,379 3,599 3,505
31,850 31,900 3,605 3,385 3,605 3,511
31,900 31,950 3,611 3,391 3,611 3,517
31,950 32,000 3,617 3,397 3,617 3,523
32,000
32,000 32,050 3,623 3,403 3,623 3,529
32,050 32,100 3,629 3,409 3,629 3,535
32,100 32,150 3,635 3,415 3,635 3,541
32,150 32,200 3,641 3,421 3,641 3,547
32,200 32,250 3,647 3,427 3,647 3,553
32,250 32,300 3,653 3,433 3,653 3,559
32,300 32,350 3,659 3,439 3,659 3,565
32,350 32,400 3,665 3,445 3,665 3,571
32,400 32,450 3,671 3,451 3,671 3,577
32,450 32,500 3,677 3,457 3,677 3,583
32,500 32,550 3,683 3,463 3,683 3,589
32,550 32,600 3,689 3,469 3,689 3,595
32,600 32,650 3,695 3,475 3,695 3,601
32,650 32,700 3,701 3,481 3,701 3,607
32,700 32,750 3,707 3,487 3,707 3,613
32,750 32,800 3,713 3,493 3,713 3,619
32,800 32,850 3,719 3,499 3,719 3,625
32,850 32,900 3,725 3,505 3,725 3,631
32,900 32,950 3,731 3,511 3,731 3,637
32,950 33,000 3,737 3,517 3,737 3,643
If line 15
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa-
rately
Head of 
a 
house-
hold
Your tax is—
33,000
33,000 33,050 3,743 3,523 3,743 3,649
33,050 33,100 3,749 3,529 3,749 3,655
33,100 33,150 3,755 3,535 3,755 3,661
33,150 33,200 3,761 3,541 3,761 3,667
33,200 33,250 3,767 3,547 3,767 3,673
33,250 33,300 3,773 3,553 3,773 3,679
33,300 33,350 3,779 3,559 3,779 3,685
33,350 33,400 3,785 3,565 3,785 3,691
33,400 33,450 3,791 3,571 3,791 3,697
33,450 33,500 3,797 3,577 3,797 3,703
33,500 33,550 3,803 3,583 3,803 3,709
33,550 33,600 3,809 3,589 3,809 3,715
33,600 33,650 3,815 3,595 3,815 3,721
33,650 33,700 3,821 3,601 3,821 3,727
33,700 33,750 3,827 3,607 3,827 3,733
33,750 33,800 3,833 3,613 3,833 3,739
33,800 33,850 3,839 3,619 3,839 3,745
33,850 33,900 3,845 3,625 3,845 3,751
33,900 33,950 3,851 3,631 3,851 3,757
33,950 34,000 3,857 3,637 3,857 3,763
34,000
34,000 34,050 3,863 3,643 3,863 3,769
34,050 34,100 3,869 3,649 3,869 3,775
34,100 34,150 3,875 3,655 3,875 3,781
34,150 34,200 3,881 3,661 3,881 3,787
34,200 34,250 3,887 3,667 3,887 3,793
34,250 34,300 3,893 3,673 3,893 3,799
34,300 34,350 3,899 3,679 3,899 3,805
34,350 34,400 3,905 3,685 3,905 3,811
34,400 34,450 3,911 3,691 3,911 3,817
34,450 34,500 3,917 3,697 3,917 3,823
34,500 34,550 3,923 3,703 3,923 3,829
34,550 34,600 3,929 3,709 3,929 3,835
34,600 34,650 3,935 3,715 3,935 3,841
34,650 34,700 3,941 3,721 3,941 3,847
34,700 34,750 3,947 3,727 3,947 3,853
34,750 34,800 3,953 3,733 3,953 3,859
34,800 34,850 3,959 3,739 3,959 3,865
34,850 34,900 3,965 3,745 3,965 3,871
34,900 34,950 3,971 3,751 3,971 3,877
34,950 35,000 3,977 3,757 3,977 3,883
35,000
35,000 35,050 3,983 3,763 3,983 3,889
35,050 35,100 3,989 3,769 3,989 3,895
35,100 35,150 3,995 3,775 3,995 3,901
35,150 35,200 4,001 3,781 4,001 3,907
35,200 35,250 4,007 3,787 4,007 3,913
35,250 35,300 4,013 3,793 4,013 3,919
35,300 35,350 4,019 3,799 4,019 3,925
35,350 35,400 4,025 3,805 4,025 3,931
35,400 35,450 4,031 3,811 4,031 3,937
35,450 35,500 4,037 3,817 4,037 3,943
35,500 35,550 4,043 3,823 4,043 3,949
35,550 35,600 4,049 3,829 4,049 3,955
35,600 35,650 4,055 3,835 4,055 3,961
35,650 35,700 4,061 3,841 4,061 3,967
35,700 35,750 4,067 3,847 4,067 3,973
35,750 35,800 4,073 3,853 4,073 3,979
35,800 35,850 4,079 3,859 4,079 3,985
35,850 35,900 4,085 3,865 4,085 3,991
35,900 35,950 4,091 3,871 4,091 3,997
35,950 36,000 4,097 3,877 4,097 4,003
If line 15
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa-
rately
Head of 
a 
house-
hold
Your tax is—
36,000
36,000 36,050 4,103 3,883 4,103 4,009
36,050 36,100 4,109 3,889 4,109 4,015
36,100 36,150 4,115 3,895 4,115 4,021
36,150 36,200 4,121 3,901 4,121 4,027
36,200 36,250 4,127 3,907 4,127 4,033
36,250 36,300 4,133 3,913 4,133 4,039
36,300 36,350 4,139 3,919 4,139 4,045
36,350 36,400 4,145 3,925 4,145 4,051
36,400 36,450 4,151 3,931 4,151 4,057
36,450 36,500 4,157 3,937 4,157 4,063
36,500 36,550 4,163 3,943 4,163 4,069
36,550 36,600 4,169 3,949 4,169 4,075
36,600 36,650 4,175 3,955 4,175 4,081
36,650 36,700 4,181 3,961 4,181 4,087
36,700 36,750 4,187 3,967 4,187 4,093
36,750 36,800 4,193 3,973 4,193 4,099
36,800 36,850 4,199 3,979 4,199 4,105
36,850 36,900 4,205 3,985 4,205 4,111
36,900 36,950 4,211 3,991 4,211 4,117
36,950 37,000 4,217 3,997 4,217 4,123
37,000
37,000 37,050 4,223 4,003 4,223 4,129
37,050 37,100 4,229 4,009 4,229 4,135
37,100 37,150 4,235 4,015 4,235 4,141
37,150 37,200 4,241 4,021 4,241 4,147
37,200 37,250 4,247 4,027 4,247 4,153
37,250 37,300 4,253 4,033 4,253 4,159
37,300 37,350 4,259 4,039 4,259 4,165
37,350 37,400 4,265 4,045 4,265 4,171
37,400 37,450 4,271 4,051 4,271 4,177
37,450 37,500 4,277 4,057 4,277 4,183
37,500 37,550 4,283 4,063 4,283 4,189
37,550 37,600 4,289 4,069 4,289 4,195
37,600 37,650 4,295 4,075 4,295 4,201
37,650 37,700 4,301 4,081 4,301 4,207
37,700 37,750 4,307 4,087 4,307 4,213
37,750 37,800 4,313 4,093 4,313 4,219
37,800 37,850 4,319 4,099 4,319 4,225
37,850 37,900 4,325 4,105 4,325 4,231
37,900 37,950 4,331 4,111 4,331 4,237
37,950 38,000 4,337 4,117 4,337 4,243
38,000
38,000 38,050 4,343 4,123 4,343 4,249
38,050 38,100 4,349 4,129 4,349 4,255
38,100 38,150 4,355 4,135 4,355 4,261
38,150 38,200 4,361 4,141 4,361 4,267
38,200 38,250 4,367 4,147 4,367 4,273
38,250 38,300 4,373 4,153 4,373 4,279
38,300 38,350 4,379 4,159 4,379 4,285
38,350 38,400 4,385 4,165 4,385 4,291
38,400 38,450 4,391 4,171 4,391 4,297
38,450 38,500 4,397 4,177 4,397 4,303
38,500 38,550 4,403 4,183 4,403 4,309
38,550 38,600 4,409 4,189 4,409 4,315
38,600 38,650 4,415 4,195 4,415 4,321
38,650 38,700 4,421 4,201 4,421 4,327
38,700 38,750 4,427 4,207 4,427 4,333
38,750 38,800 4,433 4,213 4,433 4,339
38,800 38,850 4,439 4,219 4,439 4,345
38,850 38,900 4,445 4,225 4,445 4,351
38,900 38,950 4,451 4,231 4,451 4,357
38,950 39,000 4,457 4,237 4,457 4,363
(Continued)
* This column must also be used by a qualifying surviving spouse.
116 Publication 17 (2023)

Page 119 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2023 Tax Table — Continued
If line 15
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa-
rately
Head of 
a 
house-
hold
Your tax is—
39,000
39,000 39,050 4,463 4,243 4,463 4,369
39,050 39,100 4,469 4,249 4,469 4,375
39,100 39,150 4,475 4,255 4,475 4,381
39,150 39,200 4,481 4,261 4,481 4,387
39,200 39,250 4,487 4,267 4,487 4,393
39,250 39,300 4,493 4,273 4,493 4,399
39,300 39,350 4,499 4,279 4,499 4,405
39,350 39,400 4,505 4,285 4,505 4,411
39,400 39,450 4,511 4,291 4,511 4,417
39,450 39,500 4,517 4,297 4,517 4,423
39,500 39,550 4,523 4,303 4,523 4,429
39,550 39,600 4,529 4,309 4,529 4,435
39,600 39,650 4,535 4,315 4,535 4,441
39,650 39,700 4,541 4,321 4,541 4,447
39,700 39,750 4,547 4,327 4,547 4,453
39,750 39,800 4,553 4,333 4,553 4,459
39,800 39,850 4,559 4,339 4,559 4,465
39,850 39,900 4,565 4,345 4,565 4,471
39,900 39,950 4,571 4,351 4,571 4,477
39,950 40,000 4,577 4,357 4,577 4,483
40,000
40,000 40,050 4,583 4,363 4,583 4,489
40,050 40,100 4,589 4,369 4,589 4,495
40,100 40,150 4,595 4,375 4,595 4,501
40,150 40,200 4,601 4,381 4,601 4,507
40,200 40,250 4,607 4,387 4,607 4,513
40,250 40,300 4,613 4,393 4,613 4,519
40,300 40,350 4,619 4,399 4,619 4,525
40,350 40,400 4,625 4,405 4,625 4,531
40,400 40,450 4,631 4,411 4,631 4,537
40,450 40,500 4,637 4,417 4,637 4,543
40,500 40,550 4,643 4,423 4,643 4,549
40,550 40,600 4,649 4,429 4,649 4,555
40,600 40,650 4,655 4,435 4,655 4,561
40,650 40,700 4,661 4,441 4,661 4,567
40,700 40,750 4,667 4,447 4,667 4,573
40,750 40,800 4,673 4,453 4,673 4,579
40,800 40,850 4,679 4,459 4,679 4,585
40,850 40,900 4,685 4,465 4,685 4,591
40,900 40,950 4,691 4,471 4,691 4,597
40,950 41,000 4,697 4,477 4,697 4,603
41,000
41,000 41,050 4,703 4,483 4,703 4,609
41,050 41,100 4,709 4,489 4,709 4,615
41,100 41,150 4,715 4,495 4,715 4,621
41,150 41,200 4,721 4,501 4,721 4,627
41,200 41,250 4,727 4,507 4,727 4,633
41,250 41,300 4,733 4,513 4,733 4,639
41,300 41,350 4,739 4,519 4,739 4,645
41,350 41,400 4,745 4,525 4,745 4,651
41,400 41,450 4,751 4,531 4,751 4,657
41,450 41,500 4,757 4,537 4,757 4,663
41,500 41,550 4,763 4,543 4,763 4,669
41,550 41,600 4,769 4,549 4,769 4,675
41,600 41,650 4,775 4,555 4,775 4,681
41,650 41,700 4,781 4,561 4,781 4,687
41,700 41,750 4,787 4,567 4,787 4,693
41,750 41,800 4,793 4,573 4,793 4,699
41,800 41,850 4,799 4,579 4,799 4,705
41,850 41,900 4,805 4,585 4,805 4,711
41,900 41,950 4,811 4,591 4,811 4,717
41,950 42,000 4,817 4,597 4,817 4,723
If line 15
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa-
rately
Head of 
a 
house-
hold
Your tax is—
42,000
42,000 42,050 4,823 4,603 4,823 4,729
42,050 42,100 4,829 4,609 4,829 4,735
42,100 42,150 4,835 4,615 4,835 4,741
42,150 42,200 4,841 4,621 4,841 4,747
42,200 42,250 4,847 4,627 4,847 4,753
42,250 42,300 4,853 4,633 4,853 4,759
42,300 42,350 4,859 4,639 4,859 4,765
42,350 42,400 4,865 4,645 4,865 4,771
42,400 42,450 4,871 4,651 4,871 4,777
42,450 42,500 4,877 4,657 4,877 4,783
42,500 42,550 4,883 4,663 4,883 4,789
42,550 42,600 4,889 4,669 4,889 4,795
42,600 42,650 4,895 4,675 4,895 4,801
42,650 42,700 4,901 4,681 4,901 4,807
42,700 42,750 4,907 4,687 4,907 4,813
42,750 42,800 4,913 4,693 4,913 4,819
42,800 42,850 4,919 4,699 4,919 4,825
42,850 42,900 4,925 4,705 4,925 4,831
42,900 42,950 4,931 4,711 4,931 4,837
42,950 43,000 4,937 4,717 4,937 4,843
43,000
43,000 43,050 4,943 4,723 4,943 4,849
43,050 43,100 4,949 4,729 4,949 4,855
43,100 43,150 4,955 4,735 4,955 4,861
43,150 43,200 4,961 4,741 4,961 4,867
43,200 43,250 4,967 4,747 4,967 4,873
43,250 43,300 4,973 4,753 4,973 4,879
43,300 43,350 4,979 4,759 4,979 4,885
43,350 43,400 4,985 4,765 4,985 4,891
43,400 43,450 4,991 4,771 4,991 4,897
43,450 43,500 4,997 4,777 4,997 4,903
43,500 43,550 5,003 4,783 5,003 4,909
43,550 43,600 5,009 4,789 5,009 4,915
43,600 43,650 5,015 4,795 5,015 4,921
43,650 43,700 5,021 4,801 5,021 4,927
43,700 43,750 5,027 4,807 5,027 4,933
43,750 43,800 5,033 4,813 5,033 4,939
43,800 43,850 5,039 4,819 5,039 4,945
43,850 43,900 5,045 4,825 5,045 4,951
43,900 43,950 5,051 4,831 5,051 4,957
43,950 44,000 5,057 4,837 5,057 4,963
44,000
44,000 44,050 5,063 4,843 5,063 4,969
44,050 44,100 5,069 4,849 5,069 4,975
44,100 44,150 5,075 4,855 5,075 4,981
44,150 44,200 5,081 4,861 5,081 4,987
44,200 44,250 5,087 4,867 5,087 4,993
44,250 44,300 5,093 4,873 5,093 4,999
44,300 44,350 5,099 4,879 5,099 5,005
44,350 44,400 5,105 4,885 5,105 5,011
44,400 44,450 5,111 4,891 5,111 5,017
44,450 44,500 5,117 4,897 5,117 5,023
44,500 44,550 5,123 4,903 5,123 5,029
44,550 44,600 5,129 4,909 5,129 5,035
44,600 44,650 5,135 4,915 5,135 5,041
44,650 44,700 5,141 4,921 5,141 5,047
44,700 44,750 5,147 4,927 5,147 5,053
44,750 44,800 5,158 4,933 5,158 5,059
44,800 44,850 5,169 4,939 5,169 5,065
44,850 44,900 5,180 4,945 5,180 5,071
44,900 44,950 5,191 4,951 5,191 5,077
44,950 45,000 5,202 4,957 5,202 5,083
If line 15
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa-
rately
Head of 
a 
house-
hold
Your tax is—
45,000
45,000 45,050 5,213 4,963 5,213 5,089
45,050 45,100 5,224 4,969 5,224 5,095
45,100 45,150 5,235 4,975 5,235 5,101
45,150 45,200 5,246 4,981 5,246 5,107
45,200 45,250 5,257 4,987 5,257 5,113
45,250 45,300 5,268 4,993 5,268 5,119
45,300 45,350 5,279 4,999 5,279 5,125
45,350 45,400 5,290 5,005 5,290 5,131
45,400 45,450 5,301 5,011 5,301 5,137
45,450 45,500 5,312 5,017 5,312 5,143
45,500 45,550 5,323 5,023 5,323 5,149
45,550 45,600 5,334 5,029 5,334 5,155
45,600 45,650 5,345 5,035 5,345 5,161
45,650 45,700 5,356 5,041 5,356 5,167
45,700 45,750 5,367 5,047 5,367 5,173
45,750 45,800 5,378 5,053 5,378 5,179
45,800 45,850 5,389 5,059 5,389 5,185
45,850 45,900 5,400 5,065 5,400 5,191
45,900 45,950 5,411 5,071 5,411 5,197
45,950 46,000 5,422 5,077 5,422 5,203
46,000
46,000 46,050 5,433 5,083 5,433 5,209
46,050 46,100 5,444 5,089 5,444 5,215
46,100 46,150 5,455 5,095 5,455 5,221
46,150 46,200 5,466 5,101 5,466 5,227
46,200 46,250 5,477 5,107 5,477 5,233
46,250 46,300 5,488 5,113 5,488 5,239
46,300 46,350 5,499 5,119 5,499 5,245
46,350 46,400 5,510 5,125 5,510 5,251
46,400 46,450 5,521 5,131 5,521 5,257
46,450 46,500 5,532 5,137 5,532 5,263
46,500 46,550 5,543 5,143 5,543 5,269
46,550 46,600 5,554 5,149 5,554 5,275
46,600 46,650 5,565 5,155 5,565 5,281
46,650 46,700 5,576 5,161 5,576 5,287
46,700 46,750 5,587 5,167 5,587 5,293
46,750 46,800 5,598 5,173 5,598 5,299
46,800 46,850 5,609 5,179 5,609 5,305
46,850 46,900 5,620 5,185 5,620 5,311
46,900 46,950 5,631 5,191 5,631 5,317
46,950 47,000 5,642 5,197 5,642 5,323
47,000
47,000 47,050 5,653 5,203 5,653 5,329
47,050 47,100 5,664 5,209 5,664 5,335
47,100 47,150 5,675 5,215 5,675 5,341
47,150 47,200 5,686 5,221 5,686 5,347
47,200 47,250 5,697 5,227 5,697 5,353
47,250 47,300 5,708 5,233 5,708 5,359
47,300 47,350 5,719 5,239 5,719 5,365
47,350 47,400 5,730 5,245 5,730 5,371
47,400 47,450 5,741 5,251 5,741 5,377
47,450 47,500 5,752 5,257 5,752 5,383
47,500 47,550 5,763 5,263 5,763 5,389
47,550 47,600 5,774 5,269 5,774 5,395
47,600 47,650 5,785 5,275 5,785 5,401
47,650 47,700 5,796 5,281 5,796 5,407
47,700 47,750 5,807 5,287 5,807 5,413
47,750 47,800 5,818 5,293 5,818 5,419
47,800 47,850 5,829 5,299 5,829 5,425
47,850 47,900 5,840 5,305 5,840 5,431
47,900 47,950 5,851 5,311 5,851 5,437
47,950 48,000 5,862 5,317 5,862 5,443
(Continued)
* This column must also be used by a qualifying surviving spouse.
Publication 17 (2023) 117

Page 120 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2023 Tax Table — Continued
If line 15
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa-
rately
Head of 
a 
house-
hold
Your tax is—
48,000
48,000 48,050 5,873 5,323 5,873 5,449
48,050 48,100 5,884 5,329 5,884 5,455
48,100 48,150 5,895 5,335 5,895 5,461
48,150 48,200 5,906 5,341 5,906 5,467
48,200 48,250 5,917 5,347 5,917 5,473
48,250 48,300 5,928 5,353 5,928 5,479
48,300 48,350 5,939 5,359 5,939 5,485
48,350 48,400 5,950 5,365 5,950 5,491
48,400 48,450 5,961 5,371 5,961 5,497
48,450 48,500 5,972 5,377 5,972 5,503
48,500 48,550 5,983 5,383 5,983 5,509
48,550 48,600 5,994 5,389 5,994 5,515
48,600 48,650 6,005 5,395 6,005 5,521
48,650 48,700 6,016 5,401 6,016 5,527
48,700 48,750 6,027 5,407 6,027 5,533
48,750 48,800 6,038 5,413 6,038 5,539
48,800 48,850 6,049 5,419 6,049 5,545
48,850 48,900 6,060 5,425 6,060 5,551
48,900 48,950 6,071 5,431 6,071 5,557
48,950 49,000 6,082 5,437 6,082 5,563
49,000
49,000 49,050 6,093 5,443 6,093 5,569
49,050 49,100 6,104 5,449 6,104 5,575
49,100 49,150 6,115 5,455 6,115 5,581
49,150 49,200 6,126 5,461 6,126 5,587
49,200 49,250 6,137 5,467 6,137 5,593
49,250 49,300 6,148 5,473 6,148 5,599
49,300 49,350 6,159 5,479 6,159 5,605
49,350 49,400 6,170 5,485 6,170 5,611
49,400 49,450 6,181 5,491 6,181 5,617
49,450 49,500 6,192 5,497 6,192 5,623
49,500 49,550 6,203 5,503 6,203 5,629
49,550 49,600 6,214 5,509 6,214 5,635
49,600 49,650 6,225 5,515 6,225 5,641
49,650 49,700 6,236 5,521 6,236 5,647
49,700 49,750 6,247 5,527 6,247 5,653
49,750 49,800 6,258 5,533 6,258 5,659
49,800 49,850 6,269 5,539 6,269 5,665
49,850 49,900 6,280 5,545 6,280 5,671
49,900 49,950 6,291 5,551 6,291 5,677
49,950 50,000 6,302 5,557 6,302 5,683
50,000
50,000 50,050 6,313 5,563 6,313 5,689
50,050 50,100 6,324 5,569 6,324 5,695
50,100 50,150 6,335 5,575 6,335 5,701
50,150 50,200 6,346 5,581 6,346 5,707
50,200 50,250 6,357 5,587 6,357 5,713
50,250 50,300 6,368 5,593 6,368 5,719
50,300 50,350 6,379 5,599 6,379 5,725
50,350 50,400 6,390 5,605 6,390 5,731
50,400 50,450 6,401 5,611 6,401 5,737
50,450 50,500 6,412 5,617 6,412 5,743
50,500 50,550 6,423 5,623 6,423 5,749
50,550 50,600 6,434 5,629 6,434 5,755
50,600 50,650 6,445 5,635 6,445 5,761
50,650 50,700 6,456 5,641 6,456 5,767
50,700 50,750 6,467 5,647 6,467 5,773
50,750 50,800 6,478 5,653 6,478 5,779
50,800 50,850 6,489 5,659 6,489 5,785
50,850 50,900 6,500 5,665 6,500 5,791
50,900 50,950 6,511 5,671 6,511 5,797
50,950 51,000 6,522 5,677 6,522 5,803
If line 15
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa-
rately
Head of 
a 
house-
hold
Your tax is—
51,000
51,000 51,050 6,533 5,683 6,533 5,809
51,050 51,100 6,544 5,689 6,544 5,815
51,100 51,150 6,555 5,695 6,555 5,821
51,150 51,200 6,566 5,701 6,566 5,827
51,200 51,250 6,577 5,707 6,577 5,833
51,250 51,300 6,588 5,713 6,588 5,839
51,300 51,350 6,599 5,719 6,599 5,845
51,350 51,400 6,610 5,725 6,610 5,851
51,400 51,450 6,621 5,731 6,621 5,857
51,450 51,500 6,632 5,737 6,632 5,863
51,500 51,550 6,643 5,743 6,643 5,869
51,550 51,600 6,654 5,749 6,654 5,875
51,600 51,650 6,665 5,755 6,665 5,881
51,650 51,700 6,676 5,761 6,676 5,887
51,700 51,750 6,687 5,767 6,687 5,893
51,750 51,800 6,698 5,773 6,698 5,899
51,800 51,850 6,709 5,779 6,709 5,905
51,850 51,900 6,720 5,785 6,720 5,911
51,900 51,950 6,731 5,791 6,731 5,917
51,950 52,000 6,742 5,797 6,742 5,923
52,000
52,000 52,050 6,753 5,803 6,753 5,929
52,050 52,100 6,764 5,809 6,764 5,935
52,100 52,150 6,775 5,815 6,775 5,941
52,150 52,200 6,786 5,821 6,786 5,947
52,200 52,250 6,797 5,827 6,797 5,953
52,250 52,300 6,808 5,833 6,808 5,959
52,300 52,350 6,819 5,839 6,819 5,965
52,350 52,400 6,830 5,845 6,830 5,971
52,400 52,450 6,841 5,851 6,841 5,977
52,450 52,500 6,852 5,857 6,852 5,983
52,500 52,550 6,863 5,863 6,863 5,989
52,550 52,600 6,874 5,869 6,874 5,995
52,600 52,650 6,885 5,875 6,885 6,001
52,650 52,700 6,896 5,881 6,896 6,007
52,700 52,750 6,907 5,887 6,907 6,013
52,750 52,800 6,918 5,893 6,918 6,019
52,800 52,850 6,929 5,899 6,929 6,025
52,850 52,900 6,940 5,905 6,940 6,031
52,900 52,950 6,951 5,911 6,951 6,037
52,950 53,000 6,962 5,917 6,962 6,043
53,000
53,000 53,050 6,973 5,923 6,973 6,049
53,050 53,100 6,984 5,929 6,984 6,055
53,100 53,150 6,995 5,935 6,995 6,061
53,150 53,200 7,006 5,941 7,006 6,067
53,200 53,250 7,017 5,947 7,017 6,073
53,250 53,300 7,028 5,953 7,028 6,079
53,300 53,350 7,039 5,959 7,039 6,085
53,350 53,400 7,050 5,965 7,050 6,091
53,400 53,450 7,061 5,971 7,061 6,097
53,450 53,500 7,072 5,977 7,072 6,103
53,500 53,550 7,083 5,983 7,083 6,109
53,550 53,600 7,094 5,989 7,094 6,115
53,600 53,650 7,105 5,995 7,105 6,121
53,650 53,700 7,116 6,001 7,116 6,127
53,700 53,750 7,127 6,007 7,127 6,133
53,750 53,800 7,138 6,013 7,138 6,139
53,800 53,850 7,149 6,019 7,149 6,145
53,850 53,900 7,160 6,025 7,160 6,151
53,900 53,950 7,171 6,031 7,171 6,157
53,950 54,000 7,182 6,037 7,182 6,163
If line 15
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa-
rately
Head of 
a 
house-
hold
Your tax is—
54,000
54,000 54,050 7,193 6,043 7,193 6,169
54,050 54,100 7,204 6,049 7,204 6,175
54,100 54,150 7,215 6,055 7,215 6,181
54,150 54,200 7,226 6,061 7,226 6,187
54,200 54,250 7,237 6,067 7,237 6,193
54,250 54,300 7,248 6,073 7,248 6,199
54,300 54,350 7,259 6,079 7,259 6,205
54,350 54,400 7,270 6,085 7,270 6,211
54,400 54,450 7,281 6,091 7,281 6,217
54,450 54,500 7,292 6,097 7,292 6,223
54,500 54,550 7,303 6,103 7,303 6,229
54,550 54,600 7,314 6,109 7,314 6,235
54,600 54,650 7,325 6,115 7,325 6,241
54,650 54,700 7,336 6,121 7,336 6,247
54,700 54,750 7,347 6,127 7,347 6,253
54,750 54,800 7,358 6,133 7,358 6,259
54,800 54,850 7,369 6,139 7,369 6,265
54,850 54,900 7,380 6,145 7,380 6,271
54,900 54,950 7,391 6,151 7,391 6,277
54,950 55,000 7,402 6,157 7,402 6,283
55,000
55,000 55,050 7,413 6,163 7,413 6,289
55,050 55,100 7,424 6,169 7,424 6,295
55,100 55,150 7,435 6,175 7,435 6,301
55,150 55,200 7,446 6,181 7,446 6,307
55,200 55,250 7,457 6,187 7,457 6,313
55,250 55,300 7,468 6,193 7,468 6,319
55,300 55,350 7,479 6,199 7,479 6,325
55,350 55,400 7,490 6,205 7,490 6,331
55,400 55,450 7,501 6,211 7,501 6,337
55,450 55,500 7,512 6,217 7,512 6,343
55,500 55,550 7,523 6,223 7,523 6,349
55,550 55,600 7,534 6,229 7,534 6,355
55,600 55,650 7,545 6,235 7,545 6,361
55,650 55,700 7,556 6,241 7,556 6,367
55,700 55,750 7,567 6,247 7,567 6,373
55,750 55,800 7,578 6,253 7,578 6,379
55,800 55,850 7,589 6,259 7,589 6,385
55,850 55,900 7,600 6,265 7,600 6,391
55,900 55,950 7,611 6,271 7,611 6,397
55,950 56,000 7,622 6,277 7,622 6,403
56,000
56,000 56,050 7,633 6,283 7,633 6,409
56,050 56,100 7,644 6,289 7,644 6,415
56,100 56,150 7,655 6,295 7,655 6,421
56,150 56,200 7,666 6,301 7,666 6,427
56,200 56,250 7,677 6,307 7,677 6,433
56,250 56,300 7,688 6,313 7,688 6,439
56,300 56,350 7,699 6,319 7,699 6,445
56,350 56,400 7,710 6,325 7,710 6,451
56,400 56,450 7,721 6,331 7,721 6,457
56,450 56,500 7,732 6,337 7,732 6,463
56,500 56,550 7,743 6,343 7,743 6,469
56,550 56,600 7,754 6,349 7,754 6,475
56,600 56,650 7,765 6,355 7,765 6,481
56,650 56,700 7,776 6,361 7,776 6,487
56,700 56,750 7,787 6,367 7,787 6,493
56,750 56,800 7,798 6,373 7,798 6,499
56,800 56,850 7,809 6,379 7,809 6,505
56,850 56,900 7,820 6,385 7,820 6,511
56,900 56,950 7,831 6,391 7,831 6,517
56,950 57,000 7,842 6,397 7,842 6,523
(Continued)
* This column must also be used by a qualifying surviving spouse.
118 Publication 17 (2023)

Page 121 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2023 Tax Table — Continued
If line 15
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa-
rately
Head of 
a 
house-
hold
Your tax is—
57,000
57,000 57,050 7,853 6,403 7,853 6,529
57,050 57,100 7,864 6,409 7,864 6,535
57,100 57,150 7,875 6,415 7,875 6,541
57,150 57,200 7,886 6,421 7,886 6,547
57,200 57,250 7,897 6,427 7,897 6,553
57,250 57,300 7,908 6,433 7,908 6,559
57,300 57,350 7,919 6,439 7,919 6,565
57,350 57,400 7,930 6,445 7,930 6,571
57,400 57,450 7,941 6,451 7,941 6,577
57,450 57,500 7,952 6,457 7,952 6,583
57,500 57,550 7,963 6,463 7,963 6,589
57,550 57,600 7,974 6,469 7,974 6,595
57,600 57,650 7,985 6,475 7,985 6,601
57,650 57,700 7,996 6,481 7,996 6,607
57,700 57,750 8,007 6,487 8,007 6,613
57,750 57,800 8,018 6,493 8,018 6,619
57,800 57,850 8,029 6,499 8,029 6,625
57,850 57,900 8,040 6,505 8,040 6,631
57,900 57,950 8,051 6,511 8,051 6,637
57,950 58,000 8,062 6,517 8,062 6,643
58,000
58,000 58,050 8,073 6,523 8,073 6,649
58,050 58,100 8,084 6,529 8,084 6,655
58,100 58,150 8,095 6,535 8,095 6,661
58,150 58,200 8,106 6,541 8,106 6,667
58,200 58,250 8,117 6,547 8,117 6,673
58,250 58,300 8,128 6,553 8,128 6,679
58,300 58,350 8,139 6,559 8,139 6,685
58,350 58,400 8,150 6,565 8,150 6,691
58,400 58,450 8,161 6,571 8,161 6,697
58,450 58,500 8,172 6,577 8,172 6,703
58,500 58,550 8,183 6,583 8,183 6,709
58,550 58,600 8,194 6,589 8,194 6,715
58,600 58,650 8,205 6,595 8,205 6,721
58,650 58,700 8,216 6,601 8,216 6,727
58,700 58,750 8,227 6,607 8,227 6,733
58,750 58,800 8,238 6,613 8,238 6,739
58,800 58,850 8,249 6,619 8,249 6,745
58,850 58,900 8,260 6,625 8,260 6,751
58,900 58,950 8,271 6,631 8,271 6,757
58,950 59,000 8,282 6,637 8,282 6,763
59,000
59,000 59,050 8,293 6,643 8,293 6,769
59,050 59,100 8,304 6,649 8,304 6,775
59,100 59,150 8,315 6,655 8,315 6,781
59,150 59,200 8,326 6,661 8,326 6,787
59,200 59,250 8,337 6,667 8,337 6,793
59,250 59,300 8,348 6,673 8,348 6,799
59,300 59,350 8,359 6,679 8,359 6,805
59,350 59,400 8,370 6,685 8,370 6,811
59,400 59,450 8,381 6,691 8,381 6,817
59,450 59,500 8,392 6,697 8,392 6,823
59,500 59,550 8,403 6,703 8,403 6,829
59,550 59,600 8,414 6,709 8,414 6,835
59,600 59,650 8,425 6,715 8,425 6,841
59,650 59,700 8,436 6,721 8,436 6,847
59,700 59,750 8,447 6,727 8,447 6,853
59,750 59,800 8,458 6,733 8,458 6,859
59,800 59,850 8,469 6,739 8,469 6,865
59,850 59,900 8,480 6,745 8,480 6,874
59,900 59,950 8,491 6,751 8,491 6,885
59,950 60,000 8,502 6,757 8,502 6,896
If line 15
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa-
rately
Head of 
a 
house-
hold
Your tax is—
60,000
60,000 60,050 8,513 6,763 8,513 6,907
60,050 60,100 8,524 6,769 8,524 6,918
60,100 60,150 8,535 6,775 8,535 6,929
60,150 60,200 8,546 6,781 8,546 6,940
60,200 60,250 8,557 6,787 8,557 6,951
60,250 60,300 8,568 6,793 8,568 6,962
60,300 60,350 8,579 6,799 8,579 6,973
60,350 60,400 8,590 6,805 8,590 6,984
60,400 60,450 8,601 6,811 8,601 6,995
60,450 60,500 8,612 6,817 8,612 7,006
60,500 60,550 8,623 6,823 8,623 7,017
60,550 60,600 8,634 6,829 8,634 7,028
60,600 60,650 8,645 6,835 8,645 7,039
60,650 60,700 8,656 6,841 8,656 7,050
60,700 60,750 8,667 6,847 8,667 7,061
60,750 60,800 8,678 6,853 8,678 7,072
60,800 60,850 8,689 6,859 8,689 7,083
60,850 60,900 8,700 6,865 8,700 7,094
60,900 60,950 8,711 6,871 8,711 7,105
60,950 61,000 8,722 6,877 8,722 7,116
61,000
61,000 61,050 8,733 6,883 8,733 7,127
61,050 61,100 8,744 6,889 8,744 7,138
61,100 61,150 8,755 6,895 8,755 7,149
61,150 61,200 8,766 6,901 8,766 7,160
61,200 61,250 8,777 6,907 8,777 7,171
61,250 61,300 8,788 6,913 8,788 7,182
61,300 61,350 8,799 6,919 8,799 7,193
61,350 61,400 8,810 6,925 8,810 7,204
61,400 61,450 8,821 6,931 8,821 7,215
61,450 61,500 8,832 6,937 8,832 7,226
61,500 61,550 8,843 6,943 8,843 7,237
61,550 61,600 8,854 6,949 8,854 7,248
61,600 61,650 8,865 6,955 8,865 7,259
61,650 61,700 8,876 6,961 8,876 7,270
61,700 61,750 8,887 6,967 8,887 7,281
61,750 61,800 8,898 6,973 8,898 7,292
61,800 61,850 8,909 6,979 8,909 7,303
61,850 61,900 8,920 6,985 8,920 7,314
61,900 61,950 8,931 6,991 8,931 7,325
61,950 62,000 8,942 6,997 8,942 7,336
62,000
62,000 62,050 8,953 7,003 8,953 7,347
62,050 62,100 8,964 7,009 8,964 7,358
62,100 62,150 8,975 7,015 8,975 7,369
62,150 62,200 8,986 7,021 8,986 7,380
62,200 62,250 8,997 7,027 8,997 7,391
62,250 62,300 9,008 7,033 9,008 7,402
62,300 62,350 9,019 7,039 9,019 7,413
62,350 62,400 9,030 7,045 9,030 7,424
62,400 62,450 9,041 7,051 9,041 7,435
62,450 62,500 9,052 7,057 9,052 7,446
62,500 62,550 9,063 7,063 9,063 7,457
62,550 62,600 9,074 7,069 9,074 7,468
62,600 62,650 9,085 7,075 9,085 7,479
62,650 62,700 9,096 7,081 9,096 7,490
62,700 62,750 9,107 7,087 9,107 7,501
62,750 62,800 9,118 7,093 9,118 7,512
62,800 62,850 9,129 7,099 9,129 7,523
62,850 62,900 9,140 7,105 9,140 7,534
62,900 62,950 9,151 7,111 9,151 7,545
62,950 63,000 9,162 7,117 9,162 7,556
If line 15
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa-
rately
Head of 
a 
house-
hold
Your tax is—
63,000
63,000 63,050 9,173 7,123 9,173 7,567
63,050 63,100 9,184 7,129 9,184 7,578
63,100 63,150 9,195 7,135 9,195 7,589
63,150 63,200 9,206 7,141 9,206 7,600
63,200 63,250 9,217 7,147 9,217 7,611
63,250 63,300 9,228 7,153 9,228 7,622
63,300 63,350 9,239 7,159 9,239 7,633
63,350 63,400 9,250 7,165 9,250 7,644
63,400 63,450 9,261 7,171 9,261 7,655
63,450 63,500 9,272 7,177 9,272 7,666
63,500 63,550 9,283 7,183 9,283 7,677
63,550 63,600 9,294 7,189 9,294 7,688
63,600 63,650 9,305 7,195 9,305 7,699
63,650 63,700 9,316 7,201 9,316 7,710
63,700 63,750 9,327 7,207 9,327 7,721
63,750 63,800 9,338 7,213 9,338 7,732
63,800 63,850 9,349 7,219 9,349 7,743
63,850 63,900 9,360 7,225 9,360 7,754
63,900 63,950 9,371 7,231 9,371 7,765
63,950 64,000 9,382 7,237 9,382 7,776
64,000
64,000 64,050 9,393 7,243 9,393 7,787
64,050 64,100 9,404 7,249 9,404 7,798
64,100 64,150 9,415 7,255 9,415 7,809
64,150 64,200 9,426 7,261 9,426 7,820
64,200 64,250 9,437 7,267 9,437 7,831
64,250 64,300 9,448 7,273 9,448 7,842
64,300 64,350 9,459 7,279 9,459 7,853
64,350 64,400 9,470 7,285 9,470 7,864
64,400 64,450 9,481 7,291 9,481 7,875
64,450 64,500 9,492 7,297 9,492 7,886
64,500 64,550 9,503 7,303 9,503 7,897
64,550 64,600 9,514 7,309 9,514 7,908
64,600 64,650 9,525 7,315 9,525 7,919
64,650 64,700 9,536 7,321 9,536 7,930
64,700 64,750 9,547 7,327 9,547 7,941
64,750 64,800 9,558 7,333 9,558 7,952
64,800 64,850 9,569 7,339 9,569 7,963
64,850 64,900 9,580 7,345 9,580 7,974
64,900 64,950 9,591 7,351 9,591 7,985
64,950 65,000 9,602 7,357 9,602 7,996
65,000
65,000 65,050 9,613 7,363 9,613 8,007
65,050 65,100 9,624 7,369 9,624 8,018
65,100 65,150 9,635 7,375 9,635 8,029
65,150 65,200 9,646 7,381 9,646 8,040
65,200 65,250 9,657 7,387 9,657 8,051
65,250 65,300 9,668 7,393 9,668 8,062
65,300 65,350 9,679 7,399 9,679 8,073
65,350 65,400 9,690 7,405 9,690 8,084
65,400 65,450 9,701 7,411 9,701 8,095
65,450 65,500 9,712 7,417 9,712 8,106
65,500 65,550 9,723 7,423 9,723 8,117
65,550 65,600 9,734 7,429 9,734 8,128
65,600 65,650 9,745 7,435 9,745 8,139
65,650 65,700 9,756 7,441 9,756 8,150
65,700 65,750 9,767 7,447 9,767 8,161
65,750 65,800 9,778 7,453 9,778 8,172
65,800 65,850 9,789 7,459 9,789 8,183
65,850 65,900 9,800 7,465 9,800 8,194
65,900 65,950 9,811 7,471 9,811 8,205
65,950 66,000 9,822 7,477 9,822 8,216
(Continued)
* This column must also be used by a qualifying surviving spouse.
Publication 17 (2023) 119

Page 122 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2023 Tax Table — Continued
If line 15
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa-
rately
Head of 
a 
house-
hold
Your tax is—
66,000
66,000 66,050 9,833 7,483 9,833 8,227
66,050 66,100 9,844 7,489 9,844 8,238
66,100 66,150 9,855 7,495 9,855 8,249
66,150 66,200 9,866 7,501 9,866 8,260
66,200 66,250 9,877 7,507 9,877 8,271
66,250 66,300 9,888 7,513 9,888 8,282
66,300 66,350 9,899 7,519 9,899 8,293
66,350 66,400 9,910 7,525 9,910 8,304
66,400 66,450 9,921 7,531 9,921 8,315
66,450 66,500 9,932 7,537 9,932 8,326
66,500 66,550 9,943 7,543 9,943 8,337
66,550 66,600 9,954 7,549 9,954 8,348
66,600 66,650 9,965 7,555 9,965 8,359
66,650 66,700 9,976 7,561 9,976 8,370
66,700 66,750 9,987 7,567 9,987 8,381
66,750 66,800 9,998 7,573 9,998 8,392
66,800 66,850 10,009 7,579 10,009 8,403
66,850 66,900 10,020 7,585 10,020 8,414
66,900 66,950 10,031 7,591 10,031 8,425
66,950 67,000 10,042 7,597 10,042 8,436
67,000
67,000 67,050 10,053 7,603 10,053 8,447
67,050 67,100 10,064 7,609 10,064 8,458
67,100 67,150 10,075 7,615 10,075 8,469
67,150 67,200 10,086 7,621 10,086 8,480
67,200 67,250 10,097 7,627 10,097 8,491
67,250 67,300 10,108 7,633 10,108 8,502
67,300 67,350 10,119 7,639 10,119 8,513
67,350 67,400 10,130 7,645 10,130 8,524
67,400 67,450 10,141 7,651 10,141 8,535
67,450 67,500 10,152 7,657 10,152 8,546
67,500 67,550 10,163 7,663 10,163 8,557
67,550 67,600 10,174 7,669 10,174 8,568
67,600 67,650 10,185 7,675 10,185 8,579
67,650 67,700 10,196 7,681 10,196 8,590
67,700 67,750 10,207 7,687 10,207 8,601
67,750 67,800 10,218 7,693 10,218 8,612
67,800 67,850 10,229 7,699 10,229 8,623
67,850 67,900 10,240 7,705 10,240 8,634
67,900 67,950 10,251 7,711 10,251 8,645
67,950 68,000 10,262 7,717 10,262 8,656
68,000
68,000 68,050 10,273 7,723 10,273 8,667
68,050 68,100 10,284 7,729 10,284 8,678
68,100 68,150 10,295 7,735 10,295 8,689
68,150 68,200 10,306 7,741 10,306 8,700
68,200 68,250 10,317 7,747 10,317 8,711
68,250 68,300 10,328 7,753 10,328 8,722
68,300 68,350 10,339 7,759 10,339 8,733
68,350 68,400 10,350 7,765 10,350 8,744
68,400 68,450 10,361 7,771 10,361 8,755
68,450 68,500 10,372 7,777 10,372 8,766
68,500 68,550 10,383 7,783 10,383 8,777
68,550 68,600 10,394 7,789 10,394 8,788
68,600 68,650 10,405 7,795 10,405 8,799
68,650 68,700 10,416 7,801 10,416 8,810
68,700 68,750 10,427 7,807 10,427 8,821
68,750 68,800 10,438 7,813 10,438 8,832
68,800 68,850 10,449 7,819 10,449 8,843
68,850 68,900 10,460 7,825 10,460 8,854
68,900 68,950 10,471 7,831 10,471 8,865
68,950 69,000 10,482 7,837 10,482 8,876
If line 15
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa-
rately
Head of 
a 
house-
hold
Your tax is—
69,000
69,000 69,050 10,493 7,843 10,493 8,887
69,050 69,100 10,504 7,849 10,504 8,898
69,100 69,150 10,515 7,855 10,515 8,909
69,150 69,200 10,526 7,861 10,526 8,920
69,200 69,250 10,537 7,867 10,537 8,931
69,250 69,300 10,548 7,873 10,548 8,942
69,300 69,350 10,559 7,879 10,559 8,953
69,350 69,400 10,570 7,885 10,570 8,964
69,400 69,450 10,581 7,891 10,581 8,975
69,450 69,500 10,592 7,897 10,592 8,986
69,500 69,550 10,603 7,903 10,603 8,997
69,550 69,600 10,614 7,909 10,614 9,008
69,600 69,650 10,625 7,915 10,625 9,019
69,650 69,700 10,636 7,921 10,636 9,030
69,700 69,750 10,647 7,927 10,647 9,041
69,750 69,800 10,658 7,933 10,658 9,052
69,800 69,850 10,669 7,939 10,669 9,063
69,850 69,900 10,680 7,945 10,680 9,074
69,900 69,950 10,691 7,951 10,691 9,085
69,950 70,000 10,702 7,957 10,702 9,096
70,000
70,000 70,050 10,713 7,963 10,713 9,107
70,050 70,100 10,724 7,969 10,724 9,118
70,100 70,150 10,735 7,975 10,735 9,129
70,150 70,200 10,746 7,981 10,746 9,140
70,200 70,250 10,757 7,987 10,757 9,151
70,250 70,300 10,768 7,993 10,768 9,162
70,300 70,350 10,779 7,999 10,779 9,173
70,350 70,400 10,790 8,005 10,790 9,184
70,400 70,450 10,801 8,011 10,801 9,195
70,450 70,500 10,812 8,017 10,812 9,206
70,500 70,550 10,823 8,023 10,823 9,217
70,550 70,600 10,834 8,029 10,834 9,228
70,600 70,650 10,845 8,035 10,845 9,239
70,650 70,700 10,856 8,041 10,856 9,250
70,700 70,750 10,867 8,047 10,867 9,261
70,750 70,800 10,878 8,053 10,878 9,272
70,800 70,850 10,889 8,059 10,889 9,283
70,850 70,900 10,900 8,065 10,900 9,294
70,900 70,950 10,911 8,071 10,911 9,305
70,950 71,000 10,922 8,077 10,922 9,316
71,000
71,000 71,050 10,933 8,083 10,933 9,327
71,050 71,100 10,944 8,089 10,944 9,338
71,100 71,150 10,955 8,095 10,955 9,349
71,150 71,200 10,966 8,101 10,966 9,360
71,200 71,250 10,977 8,107 10,977 9,371
71,250 71,300 10,988 8,113 10,988 9,382
71,300 71,350 10,999 8,119 10,999 9,393
71,350 71,400 11,010 8,125 11,010 9,404
71,400 71,450 11,021 8,131 11,021 9,415
71,450 71,500 11,032 8,137 11,032 9,426
71,500 71,550 11,043 8,143 11,043 9,437
71,550 71,600 11,054 8,149 11,054 9,448
71,600 71,650 11,065 8,155 11,065 9,459
71,650 71,700 11,076 8,161 11,076 9,470
71,700 71,750 11,087 8,167 11,087 9,481
71,750 71,800 11,098 8,173 11,098 9,492
71,800 71,850 11,109 8,179 11,109 9,503
71,850 71,900 11,120 8,185 11,120 9,514
71,900 71,950 11,131 8,191 11,131 9,525
71,950 72,000 11,142 8,197 11,142 9,536
If line 15
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa-
rately
Head of 
a 
house-
hold
Your tax is—
72,000
72,000 72,050 11,153 8,203 11,153 9,547
72,050 72,100 11,164 8,209 11,164 9,558
72,100 72,150 11,175 8,215 11,175 9,569
72,150 72,200 11,186 8,221 11,186 9,580
72,200 72,250 11,197 8,227 11,197 9,591
72,250 72,300 11,208 8,233 11,208 9,602
72,300 72,350 11,219 8,239 11,219 9,613
72,350 72,400 11,230 8,245 11,230 9,624
72,400 72,450 11,241 8,251 11,241 9,635
72,450 72,500 11,252 8,257 11,252 9,646
72,500 72,550 11,263 8,263 11,263 9,657
72,550 72,600 11,274 8,269 11,274 9,668
72,600 72,650 11,285 8,275 11,285 9,679
72,650 72,700 11,296 8,281 11,296 9,690
72,700 72,750 11,307 8,287 11,307 9,701
72,750 72,800 11,318 8,293 11,318 9,712
72,800 72,850 11,329 8,299 11,329 9,723
72,850 72,900 11,340 8,305 11,340 9,734
72,900 72,950 11,351 8,311 11,351 9,745
72,950 73,000 11,362 8,317 11,362 9,756
73,000
73,000 73,050 11,373 8,323 11,373 9,767
73,050 73,100 11,384 8,329 11,384 9,778
73,100 73,150 11,395 8,335 11,395 9,789
73,150 73,200 11,406 8,341 11,406 9,800
73,200 73,250 11,417 8,347 11,417 9,811
73,250 73,300 11,428 8,353 11,428 9,822
73,300 73,350 11,439 8,359 11,439 9,833
73,350 73,400 11,450 8,365 11,450 9,844
73,400 73,450 11,461 8,371 11,461 9,855
73,450 73,500 11,472 8,377 11,472 9,866
73,500 73,550 11,483 8,383 11,483 9,877
73,550 73,600 11,494 8,389 11,494 9,888
73,600 73,650 11,505 8,395 11,505 9,899
73,650 73,700 11,516 8,401 11,516 9,910
73,700 73,750 11,527 8,407 11,527 9,921
73,750 73,800 11,538 8,413 11,538 9,932
73,800 73,850 11,549 8,419 11,549 9,943
73,850 73,900 11,560 8,425 11,560 9,954
73,900 73,950 11,571 8,431 11,571 9,965
73,950 74,000 11,582 8,437 11,582 9,976
74,000
74,000 74,050 11,593 8,443 11,593 9,987
74,050 74,100 11,604 8,449 11,604 9,998
74,100 74,150 11,615 8,455 11,615 10,009
74,150 74,200 11,626 8,461 11,626 10,020
74,200 74,250 11,637 8,467 11,637 10,031
74,250 74,300 11,648 8,473 11,648 10,042
74,300 74,350 11,659 8,479 11,659 10,053
74,350 74,400 11,670 8,485 11,670 10,064
74,400 74,450 11,681 8,491 11,681 10,075
74,450 74,500 11,692 8,497 11,692 10,086
74,500 74,550 11,703 8,503 11,703 10,097
74,550 74,600 11,714 8,509 11,714 10,108
74,600 74,650 11,725 8,515 11,725 10,119
74,650 74,700 11,736 8,521 11,736 10,130
74,700 74,750 11,747 8,527 11,747 10,141
74,750 74,800 11,758 8,533 11,758 10,152
74,800 74,850 11,769 8,539 11,769 10,163
74,850 74,900 11,780 8,545 11,780 10,174
74,900 74,950 11,791 8,551 11,791 10,185
74,950 75,000 11,802 8,557 11,802 10,196
(Continued)
* This column must also be used by a qualifying surviving spouse.
120 Publication 17 (2023)

Page 123 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2023 Tax Table — Continued
If line 15
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa-
rately
Head of 
a 
house-
hold
Your tax is—
75,000
75,000 75,050 11,813 8,563 11,813 10,207
75,050 75,100 11,824 8,569 11,824 10,218
75,100 75,150 11,835 8,575 11,835 10,229
75,150 75,200 11,846 8,581 11,846 10,240
75,200 75,250 11,857 8,587 11,857 10,251
75,250 75,300 11,868 8,593 11,868 10,262
75,300 75,350 11,879 8,599 11,879 10,273
75,350 75,400 11,890 8,605 11,890 10,284
75,400 75,450 11,901 8,611 11,901 10,295
75,450 75,500 11,912 8,617 11,912 10,306
75,500 75,550 11,923 8,623 11,923 10,317
75,550 75,600 11,934 8,629 11,934 10,328
75,600 75,650 11,945 8,635 11,945 10,339
75,650 75,700 11,956 8,641 11,956 10,350
75,700 75,750 11,967 8,647 11,967 10,361
75,750 75,800 11,978 8,653 11,978 10,372
75,800 75,850 11,989 8,659 11,989 10,383
75,850 75,900 12,000 8,665 12,000 10,394
75,900 75,950 12,011 8,671 12,011 10,405
75,950 76,000 12,022 8,677 12,022 10,416
76,000
76,000 76,050 12,033 8,683 12,033 10,427
76,050 76,100 12,044 8,689 12,044 10,438
76,100 76,150 12,055 8,695 12,055 10,449
76,150 76,200 12,066 8,701 12,066 10,460
76,200 76,250 12,077 8,707 12,077 10,471
76,250 76,300 12,088 8,713 12,088 10,482
76,300 76,350 12,099 8,719 12,099 10,493
76,350 76,400 12,110 8,725 12,110 10,504
76,400 76,450 12,121 8,731 12,121 10,515
76,450 76,500 12,132 8,737 12,132 10,526
76,500 76,550 12,143 8,743 12,143 10,537
76,550 76,600 12,154 8,749 12,154 10,548
76,600 76,650 12,165 8,755 12,165 10,559
76,650 76,700 12,176 8,761 12,176 10,570
76,700 76,750 12,187 8,767 12,187 10,581
76,750 76,800 12,198 8,773 12,198 10,592
76,800 76,850 12,209 8,779 12,209 10,603
76,850 76,900 12,220 8,785 12,220 10,614
76,900 76,950 12,231 8,791 12,231 10,625
76,950 77,000 12,242 8,797 12,242 10,636
77,000
77,000 77,050 12,253 8,803 12,253 10,647
77,050 77,100 12,264 8,809 12,264 10,658
77,100 77,150 12,275 8,815 12,275 10,669
77,150 77,200 12,286 8,821 12,286 10,680
77,200 77,250 12,297 8,827 12,297 10,691
77,250 77,300 12,308 8,833 12,308 10,702
77,300 77,350 12,319 8,839 12,319 10,713
77,350 77,400 12,330 8,845 12,330 10,724
77,400 77,450 12,341 8,851 12,341 10,735
77,450 77,500 12,352 8,857 12,352 10,746
77,500 77,550 12,363 8,863 12,363 10,757
77,550 77,600 12,374 8,869 12,374 10,768
77,600 77,650 12,385 8,875 12,385 10,779
77,650 77,700 12,396 8,881 12,396 10,790
77,700 77,750 12,407 8,887 12,407 10,801
77,750 77,800 12,418 8,893 12,418 10,812
77,800 77,850 12,429 8,899 12,429 10,823
77,850 77,900 12,440 8,905 12,440 10,834
77,900 77,950 12,451 8,911 12,451 10,845
77,950 78,000 12,462 8,917 12,462 10,856
If line 15
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa-
rately
Head of 
a 
house-
hold
Your tax is—
78,000
78,000 78,050 12,473 8,923 12,473 10,867
78,050 78,100 12,484 8,929 12,484 10,878
78,100 78,150 12,495 8,935 12,495 10,889
78,150 78,200 12,506 8,941 12,506 10,900
78,200 78,250 12,517 8,947 12,517 10,911
78,250 78,300 12,528 8,953 12,528 10,922
78,300 78,350 12,539 8,959 12,539 10,933
78,350 78,400 12,550 8,965 12,550 10,944
78,400 78,450 12,561 8,971 12,561 10,955
78,450 78,500 12,572 8,977 12,572 10,966
78,500 78,550 12,583 8,983 12,583 10,977
78,550 78,600 12,594 8,989 12,594 10,988
78,600 78,650 12,605 8,995 12,605 10,999
78,650 78,700 12,616 9,001 12,616 11,010
78,700 78,750 12,627 9,007 12,627 11,021
78,750 78,800 12,638 9,013 12,638 11,032
78,800 78,850 12,649 9,019 12,649 11,043
78,850 78,900 12,660 9,025 12,660 11,054
78,900 78,950 12,671 9,031 12,671 11,065
78,950 79,000 12,682 9,037 12,682 11,076
79,000
79,000 79,050 12,693 9,043 12,693 11,087
79,050 79,100 12,704 9,049 12,704 11,098
79,100 79,150 12,715 9,055 12,715 11,109
79,150 79,200 12,726 9,061 12,726 11,120
79,200 79,250 12,737 9,067 12,737 11,131
79,250 79,300 12,748 9,073 12,748 11,142
79,300 79,350 12,759 9,079 12,759 11,153
79,350 79,400 12,770 9,085 12,770 11,164
79,400 79,450 12,781 9,091 12,781 11,175
79,450 79,500 12,792 9,097 12,792 11,186
79,500 79,550 12,803 9,103 12,803 11,197
79,550 79,600 12,814 9,109 12,814 11,208
79,600 79,650 12,825 9,115 12,825 11,219
79,650 79,700 12,836 9,121 12,836 11,230
79,700 79,750 12,847 9,127 12,847 11,241
79,750 79,800 12,858 9,133 12,858 11,252
79,800 79,850 12,869 9,139 12,869 11,263
79,850 79,900 12,880 9,145 12,880 11,274
79,900 79,950 12,891 9,151 12,891 11,285
79,950 80,000 12,902 9,157 12,902 11,296
80,000
80,000 80,050 12,913 9,163 12,913 11,307
80,050 80,100 12,924 9,169 12,924 11,318
80,100 80,150 12,935 9,175 12,935 11,329
80,150 80,200 12,946 9,181 12,946 11,340
80,200 80,250 12,957 9,187 12,957 11,351
80,250 80,300 12,968 9,193 12,968 11,362
80,300 80,350 12,979 9,199 12,979 11,373
80,350 80,400 12,990 9,205 12,990 11,384
80,400 80,450 13,001 9,211 13,001 11,395
80,450 80,500 13,012 9,217 13,012 11,406
80,500 80,550 13,023 9,223 13,023 11,417
80,550 80,600 13,034 9,229 13,034 11,428
80,600 80,650 13,045 9,235 13,045 11,439
80,650 80,700 13,056 9,241 13,056 11,450
80,700 80,750 13,067 9,247 13,067 11,461
80,750 80,800 13,078 9,253 13,078 11,472
80,800 80,850 13,089 9,259 13,089 11,483
80,850 80,900 13,100 9,265 13,100 11,494
80,900 80,950 13,111 9,271 13,111 11,505
80,950 81,000 13,122 9,277 13,122 11,516
If line 15
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa-
rately
Head of 
a 
house-
hold
Your tax is—
81,000
81,000 81,050 13,133 9,283 13,133 11,527
81,050 81,100 13,144 9,289 13,144 11,538
81,100 81,150 13,155 9,295 13,155 11,549
81,150 81,200 13,166 9,301 13,166 11,560
81,200 81,250 13,177 9,307 13,177 11,571
81,250 81,300 13,188 9,313 13,188 11,582
81,300 81,350 13,199 9,319 13,199 11,593
81,350 81,400 13,210 9,325 13,210 11,604
81,400 81,450 13,221 9,331 13,221 11,615
81,450 81,500 13,232 9,337 13,232 11,626
81,500 81,550 13,243 9,343 13,243 11,637
81,550 81,600 13,254 9,349 13,254 11,648
81,600 81,650 13,265 9,355 13,265 11,659
81,650 81,700 13,276 9,361 13,276 11,670
81,700 81,750 13,287 9,367 13,287 11,681
81,750 81,800 13,298 9,373 13,298 11,692
81,800 81,850 13,309 9,379 13,309 11,703
81,850 81,900 13,320 9,385 13,320 11,714
81,900 81,950 13,331 9,391 13,331 11,725
81,950 82,000 13,342 9,397 13,342 11,736
82,000
82,000 82,050 13,353 9,403 13,353 11,747
82,050 82,100 13,364 9,409 13,364 11,758
82,100 82,150 13,375 9,415 13,375 11,769
82,150 82,200 13,386 9,421 13,386 11,780
82,200 82,250 13,397 9,427 13,397 11,791
82,250 82,300 13,408 9,433 13,408 11,802
82,300 82,350 13,419 9,439 13,419 11,813
82,350 82,400 13,430 9,445 13,430 11,824
82,400 82,450 13,441 9,451 13,441 11,835
82,450 82,500 13,452 9,457 13,452 11,846
82,500 82,550 13,463 9,463 13,463 11,857
82,550 82,600 13,474 9,469 13,474 11,868
82,600 82,650 13,485 9,475 13,485 11,879
82,650 82,700 13,496 9,481 13,496 11,890
82,700 82,750 13,507 9,487 13,507 11,901
82,750 82,800 13,518 9,493 13,518 11,912
82,800 82,850 13,529 9,499 13,529 11,923
82,850 82,900 13,540 9,505 13,540 11,934
82,900 82,950 13,551 9,511 13,551 11,945
82,950 83,000 13,562 9,517 13,562 11,956
83,000
83,000 83,050 13,573 9,523 13,573 11,967
83,050 83,100 13,584 9,529 13,584 11,978
83,100 83,150 13,595 9,535 13,595 11,989
83,150 83,200 13,606 9,541 13,606 12,000
83,200 83,250 13,617 9,547 13,617 12,011
83,250 83,300 13,628 9,553 13,628 12,022
83,300 83,350 13,639 9,559 13,639 12,033
83,350 83,400 13,650 9,565 13,650 12,044
83,400 83,450 13,661 9,571 13,661 12,055
83,450 83,500 13,672 9,577 13,672 12,066
83,500 83,550 13,683 9,583 13,683 12,077
83,550 83,600 13,694 9,589 13,694 12,088
83,600 83,650 13,705 9,595 13,705 12,099
83,650 83,700 13,716 9,601 13,716 12,110
83,700 83,750 13,727 9,607 13,727 12,121
83,750 83,800 13,738 9,613 13,738 12,132
83,800 83,850 13,749 9,619 13,749 12,143
83,850 83,900 13,760 9,625 13,760 12,154
83,900 83,950 13,771 9,631 13,771 12,165
83,950 84,000 13,782 9,637 13,782 12,176
(Continued)
* This column must also be used by a qualifying surviving spouse.
Publication 17 (2023) 121

Page 124 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2023 Tax Table — Continued
If line 15
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa-
rately
Head of 
a 
house-
hold
Your tax is—
84,000
84,000 84,050 13,793 9,643 13,793 12,187
84,050 84,100 13,804 9,649 13,804 12,198
84,100 84,150 13,815 9,655 13,815 12,209
84,150 84,200 13,826 9,661 13,826 12,220
84,200 84,250 13,837 9,667 13,837 12,231
84,250 84,300 13,848 9,673 13,848 12,242
84,300 84,350 13,859 9,679 13,859 12,253
84,350 84,400 13,870 9,685 13,870 12,264
84,400 84,450 13,881 9,691 13,881 12,275
84,450 84,500 13,892 9,697 13,892 12,286
84,500 84,550 13,903 9,703 13,903 12,297
84,550 84,600 13,914 9,709 13,914 12,308
84,600 84,650 13,925 9,715 13,925 12,319
84,650 84,700 13,936 9,721 13,936 12,330
84,700 84,750 13,947 9,727 13,947 12,341
84,750 84,800 13,958 9,733 13,958 12,352
84,800 84,850 13,969 9,739 13,969 12,363
84,850 84,900 13,980 9,745 13,980 12,374
84,900 84,950 13,991 9,751 13,991 12,385
84,950 85,000 14,002 9,757 14,002 12,396
85,000
85,000 85,050 14,013 9,763 14,013 12,407
85,050 85,100 14,024 9,769 14,024 12,418
85,100 85,150 14,035 9,775 14,035 12,429
85,150 85,200 14,046 9,781 14,046 12,440
85,200 85,250 14,057 9,787 14,057 12,451
85,250 85,300 14,068 9,793 14,068 12,462
85,300 85,350 14,079 9,799 14,079 12,473
85,350 85,400 14,090 9,805 14,090 12,484
85,400 85,450 14,101 9,811 14,101 12,495
85,450 85,500 14,112 9,817 14,112 12,506
85,500 85,550 14,123 9,823 14,123 12,517
85,550 85,600 14,134 9,829 14,134 12,528
85,600 85,650 14,145 9,835 14,145 12,539
85,650 85,700 14,156 9,841 14,156 12,550
85,700 85,750 14,167 9,847 14,167 12,561
85,750 85,800 14,178 9,853 14,178 12,572
85,800 85,850 14,189 9,859 14,189 12,583
85,850 85,900 14,200 9,865 14,200 12,594
85,900 85,950 14,211 9,871 14,211 12,605
85,950 86,000 14,222 9,877 14,222 12,616
86,000
86,000 86,050 14,233 9,883 14,233 12,627
86,050 86,100 14,244 9,889 14,244 12,638
86,100 86,150 14,255 9,895 14,255 12,649
86,150 86,200 14,266 9,901 14,266 12,660
86,200 86,250 14,277 9,907 14,277 12,671
86,250 86,300 14,288 9,913 14,288 12,682
86,300 86,350 14,299 9,919 14,299 12,693
86,350 86,400 14,310 9,925 14,310 12,704
86,400 86,450 14,321 9,931 14,321 12,715
86,450 86,500 14,332 9,937 14,332 12,726
86,500 86,550 14,343 9,943 14,343 12,737
86,550 86,600 14,354 9,949 14,354 12,748
86,600 86,650 14,365 9,955 14,365 12,759
86,650 86,700 14,376 9,961 14,376 12,770
86,700 86,750 14,387 9,967 14,387 12,781
86,750 86,800 14,398 9,973 14,398 12,792
86,800 86,850 14,409 9,979 14,409 12,803
86,850 86,900 14,420 9,985 14,420 12,814
86,900 86,950 14,431 9,991 14,431 12,825
86,950 87,000 14,442 9,997 14,442 12,836
If line 15
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa-
rately
Head of 
a 
house-
hold
Your tax is—
87,000
87,000 87,050 14,453 10,003 14,453 12,847
87,050 87,100 14,464 10,009 14,464 12,858
87,100 87,150 14,475 10,015 14,475 12,869
87,150 87,200 14,486 10,021 14,486 12,880
87,200 87,250 14,497 10,027 14,497 12,891
87,250 87,300 14,508 10,033 14,508 12,902
87,300 87,350 14,519 10,039 14,519 12,913
87,350 87,400 14,530 10,045 14,530 12,924
87,400 87,450 14,541 10,051 14,541 12,935
87,450 87,500 14,552 10,057 14,552 12,946
87,500 87,550 14,563 10,063 14,563 12,957
87,550 87,600 14,574 10,069 14,574 12,968
87,600 87,650 14,585 10,075 14,585 12,979
87,650 87,700 14,596 10,081 14,596 12,990
87,700 87,750 14,607 10,087 14,607 13,001
87,750 87,800 14,618 10,093 14,618 13,012
87,800 87,850 14,629 10,099 14,629 13,023
87,850 87,900 14,640 10,105 14,640 13,034
87,900 87,950 14,651 10,111 14,651 13,045
87,950 88,000 14,662 10,117 14,662 13,056
88,000
88,000 88,050 14,673 10,123 14,673 13,067
88,050 88,100 14,684 10,129 14,684 13,078
88,100 88,150 14,695 10,135 14,695 13,089
88,150 88,200 14,706 10,141 14,706 13,100
88,200 88,250 14,717 10,147 14,717 13,111
88,250 88,300 14,728 10,153 14,728 13,122
88,300 88,350 14,739 10,159 14,739 13,133
88,350 88,400 14,750 10,165 14,750 13,144
88,400 88,450 14,761 10,171 14,761 13,155
88,450 88,500 14,772 10,177 14,772 13,166
88,500 88,550 14,783 10,183 14,783 13,177
88,550 88,600 14,794 10,189 14,794 13,188
88,600 88,650 14,805 10,195 14,805 13,199
88,650 88,700 14,816 10,201 14,816 13,210
88,700 88,750 14,827 10,207 14,827 13,221
88,750 88,800 14,838 10,213 14,838 13,232
88,800 88,850 14,849 10,219 14,849 13,243
88,850 88,900 14,860 10,225 14,860 13,254
88,900 88,950 14,871 10,231 14,871 13,265
88,950 89,000 14,882 10,237 14,882 13,276
89,000
89,000 89,050 14,893 10,243 14,893 13,287
89,050 89,100 14,904 10,249 14,904 13,298
89,100 89,150 14,915 10,255 14,915 13,309
89,150 89,200 14,926 10,261 14,926 13,320
89,200 89,250 14,937 10,267 14,937 13,331
89,250 89,300 14,948 10,273 14,948 13,342
89,300 89,350 14,959 10,279 14,959 13,353
89,350 89,400 14,970 10,285 14,970 13,364
89,400 89,450 14,981 10,291 14,981 13,375
89,450 89,500 14,992 10,300 14,992 13,386
89,500 89,550 15,003 10,311 15,003 13,397
89,550 89,600 15,014 10,322 15,014 13,408
89,600 89,650 15,025 10,333 15,025 13,419
89,650 89,700 15,036 10,344 15,036 13,430
89,700 89,750 15,047 10,355 15,047 13,441
89,750 89,800 15,058 10,366 15,058 13,452
89,800 89,850 15,069 10,377 15,069 13,463
89,850 89,900 15,080 10,388 15,080 13,474
89,900 89,950 15,091 10,399 15,091 13,485
89,950 90,000 15,102 10,410 15,102 13,496
If line 15
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa-
rately
Head of 
a 
house-
hold
Your tax is—
90,000
90,000 90,050 15,113 10,421 15,113 13,507
90,050 90,100 15,124 10,432 15,124 13,518
90,100 90,150 15,135 10,443 15,135 13,529
90,150 90,200 15,146 10,454 15,146 13,540
90,200 90,250 15,157 10,465 15,157 13,551
90,250 90,300 15,168 10,476 15,168 13,562
90,300 90,350 15,179 10,487 15,179 13,573
90,350 90,400 15,190 10,498 15,190 13,584
90,400 90,450 15,201 10,509 15,201 13,595
90,450 90,500 15,212 10,520 15,212 13,606
90,500 90,550 15,223 10,531 15,223 13,617
90,550 90,600 15,234 10,542 15,234 13,628
90,600 90,650 15,245 10,553 15,245 13,639
90,650 90,700 15,256 10,564 15,256 13,650
90,700 90,750 15,267 10,575 15,267 13,661
90,750 90,800 15,278 10,586 15,278 13,672
90,800 90,850 15,289 10,597 15,289 13,683
90,850 90,900 15,300 10,608 15,300 13,694
90,900 90,950 15,311 10,619 15,311 13,705
90,950 91,000 15,322 10,630 15,322 13,716
91,000
91,000 91,050 15,333 10,641 15,333 13,727
91,050 91,100 15,344 10,652 15,344 13,738
91,100 91,150 15,355 10,663 15,355 13,749
91,150 91,200 15,366 10,674 15,366 13,760
91,200 91,250 15,377 10,685 15,377 13,771
91,250 91,300 15,388 10,696 15,388 13,782
91,300 91,350 15,399 10,707 15,399 13,793
91,350 91,400 15,410 10,718 15,410 13,804
91,400 91,450 15,421 10,729 15,421 13,815
91,450 91,500 15,432 10,740 15,432 13,826
91,500 91,550 15,443 10,751 15,443 13,837
91,550 91,600 15,454 10,762 15,454 13,848
91,600 91,650 15,465 10,773 15,465 13,859
91,650 91,700 15,476 10,784 15,476 13,870
91,700 91,750 15,487 10,795 15,487 13,881
91,750 91,800 15,498 10,806 15,498 13,892
91,800 91,850 15,509 10,817 15,509 13,903
91,850 91,900 15,520 10,828 15,520 13,914
91,900 91,950 15,531 10,839 15,531 13,925
91,950 92,000 15,542 10,850 15,542 13,936
92,000
92,000 92,050 15,553 10,861 15,553 13,947
92,050 92,100 15,564 10,872 15,564 13,958
92,100 92,150 15,575 10,883 15,575 13,969
92,150 92,200 15,586 10,894 15,586 13,980
92,200 92,250 15,597 10,905 15,597 13,991
92,250 92,300 15,608 10,916 15,608 14,002
92,300 92,350 15,619 10,927 15,619 14,013
92,350 92,400 15,630 10,938 15,630 14,024
92,400 92,450 15,641 10,949 15,641 14,035
92,450 92,500 15,652 10,960 15,652 14,046
92,500 92,550 15,663 10,971 15,663 14,057
92,550 92,600 15,674 10,982 15,674 14,068
92,600 92,650 15,685 10,993 15,685 14,079
92,650 92,700 15,696 11,004 15,696 14,090
92,700 92,750 15,707 11,015 15,707 14,101
92,750 92,800 15,718 11,026 15,718 14,112
92,800 92,850 15,729 11,037 15,729 14,123
92,850 92,900 15,740 11,048 15,740 14,134
92,900 92,950 15,751 11,059 15,751 14,145
92,950 93,000 15,762 11,070 15,762 14,156
(Continued)
* This column must also be used by a qualifying surviving spouse.
122 Publication 17 (2023)

Page 125 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2023 Tax Table — Continued
If line 15
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa-
rately
Head of 
a 
house-
hold
Your tax is—
93,000
93,000 93,050 15,773 11,081 15,773 14,167
93,050 93,100 15,784 11,092 15,784 14,178
93,100 93,150 15,795 11,103 15,795 14,189
93,150 93,200 15,806 11,114 15,806 14,200
93,200 93,250 15,817 11,125 15,817 14,211
93,250 93,300 15,828 11,136 15,828 14,222
93,300 93,350 15,839 11,147 15,839 14,233
93,350 93,400 15,850 11,158 15,850 14,244
93,400 93,450 15,861 11,169 15,861 14,255
93,450 93,500 15,872 11,180 15,872 14,266
93,500 93,550 15,883 11,191 15,883 14,277
93,550 93,600 15,894 11,202 15,894 14,288
93,600 93,650 15,905 11,213 15,905 14,299
93,650 93,700 15,916 11,224 15,916 14,310
93,700 93,750 15,927 11,235 15,927 14,321
93,750 93,800 15,938 11,246 15,938 14,332
93,800 93,850 15,949 11,257 15,949 14,343
93,850 93,900 15,960 11,268 15,960 14,354
93,900 93,950 15,971 11,279 15,971 14,365
93,950 94,000 15,982 11,290 15,982 14,376
94,000
94,000 94,050 15,993 11,301 15,993 14,387
94,050 94,100 16,004 11,312 16,004 14,398
94,100 94,150 16,015 11,323 16,015 14,409
94,150 94,200 16,026 11,334 16,026 14,420
94,200 94,250 16,037 11,345 16,037 14,431
94,250 94,300 16,048 11,356 16,048 14,442
94,300 94,350 16,059 11,367 16,059 14,453
94,350 94,400 16,070 11,378 16,070 14,464
94,400 94,450 16,081 11,389 16,081 14,475
94,450 94,500 16,092 11,400 16,092 14,486
94,500 94,550 16,103 11,411 16,103 14,497
94,550 94,600 16,114 11,422 16,114 14,508
94,600 94,650 16,125 11,433 16,125 14,519
94,650 94,700 16,136 11,444 16,136 14,530
94,700 94,750 16,147 11,455 16,147 14,541
94,750 94,800 16,158 11,466 16,158 14,552
94,800 94,850 16,169 11,477 16,169 14,563
94,850 94,900 16,180 11,488 16,180 14,574
94,900 94,950 16,191 11,499 16,191 14,585
94,950 95,000 16,202 11,510 16,202 14,596
95,000
95,000 95,050 16,213 11,521 16,213 14,607
95,050 95,100 16,224 11,532 16,224 14,618
95,100 95,150 16,235 11,543 16,235 14,629
95,150 95,200 16,246 11,554 16,246 14,640
95,200 95,250 16,257 11,565 16,257 14,651
95,250 95,300 16,268 11,576 16,268 14,662
95,300 95,350 16,279 11,587 16,279 14,673
95,350 95,400 16,290 11,598 16,290 14,684
95,400 95,450 16,302 11,609 16,302 14,696
95,450 95,500 16,314 11,620 16,314 14,708
95,500 95,550 16,326 11,631 16,326 14,720
95,550 95,600 16,338 11,642 16,338 14,732
95,600 95,650 16,350 11,653 16,350 14,744
95,650 95,700 16,362 11,664 16,362 14,756
95,700 95,750 16,374 11,675 16,374 14,768
95,750 95,800 16,386 11,686 16,386 14,780
95,800 95,850 16,398 11,697 16,398 14,792
95,850 95,900 16,410 11,708 16,410 14,804
95,900 95,950 16,422 11,719 16,422 14,816
95,950 96,000 16,434 11,730 16,434 14,828
If line 15
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa-
rately
Head of 
a 
house-
hold
Your tax is—
96,000
96,000 96,050 16,446 11,741 16,446 14,840
96,050 96,100 16,458 11,752 16,458 14,852
96,100 96,150 16,470 11,763 16,470 14,864
96,150 96,200 16,482 11,774 16,482 14,876
96,200 96,250 16,494 11,785 16,494 14,888
96,250 96,300 16,506 11,796 16,506 14,900
96,300 96,350 16,518 11,807 16,518 14,912
96,350 96,400 16,530 11,818 16,530 14,924
96,400 96,450 16,542 11,829 16,542 14,936
96,450 96,500 16,554 11,840 16,554 14,948
96,500 96,550 16,566 11,851 16,566 14,960
96,550 96,600 16,578 11,862 16,578 14,972
96,600 96,650 16,590 11,873 16,590 14,984
96,650 96,700 16,602 11,884 16,602 14,996
96,700 96,750 16,614 11,895 16,614 15,008
96,750 96,800 16,626 11,906 16,626 15,020
96,800 96,850 16,638 11,917 16,638 15,032
96,850 96,900 16,650 11,928 16,650 15,044
96,900 96,950 16,662 11,939 16,662 15,056
96,950 97,000 16,674 11,950 16,674 15,068
97,000
97,000 97,050 16,686 11,961 16,686 15,080
97,050 97,100 16,698 11,972 16,698 15,092
97,100 97,150 16,710 11,983 16,710 15,104
97,150 97,200 16,722 11,994 16,722 15,116
97,200 97,250 16,734 12,005 16,734 15,128
97,250 97,300 16,746 12,016 16,746 15,140
97,300 97,350 16,758 12,027 16,758 15,152
97,350 97,400 16,770 12,038 16,770 15,164
97,400 97,450 16,782 12,049 16,782 15,176
97,450 97,500 16,794 12,060 16,794 15,188
97,500 97,550 16,806 12,071 16,806 15,200
97,550 97,600 16,818 12,082 16,818 15,212
97,600 97,650 16,830 12,093 16,830 15,224
97,650 97,700 16,842 12,104 16,842 15,236
97,700 97,750 16,854 12,115 16,854 15,248
97,750 97,800 16,866 12,126 16,866 15,260
97,800 97,850 16,878 12,137 16,878 15,272
97,850 97,900 16,890 12,148 16,890 15,284
97,900 97,950 16,902 12,159 16,902 15,296
97,950 98,000 16,914 12,170 16,914 15,308
98,000
98,000 98,050 16,926 12,181 16,926 15,320
98,050 98,100 16,938 12,192 16,938 15,332
98,100 98,150 16,950 12,203 16,950 15,344
98,150 98,200 16,962 12,214 16,962 15,356
98,200 98,250 16,974 12,225 16,974 15,368
98,250 98,300 16,986 12,236 16,986 15,380
98,300 98,350 16,998 12,247 16,998 15,392
98,350 98,400 17,010 12,258 17,010 15,404
98,400 98,450 17,022 12,269 17,022 15,416
98,450 98,500 17,034 12,280 17,034 15,428
98,500 98,550 17,046 12,291 17,046 15,440
98,550 98,600 17,058 12,302 17,058 15,452
98,600 98,650 17,070 12,313 17,070 15,464
98,650 98,700 17,082 12,324 17,082 15,476
98,700 98,750 17,094 12,335 17,094 15,488
98,750 98,800 17,106 12,346 17,106 15,500
98,800 98,850 17,118 12,357 17,118 15,512
98,850 98,900 17,130 12,368 17,130 15,524
98,900 98,950 17,142 12,379 17,142 15,536
98,950 99,000 17,154 12,390 17,154 15,548
If line 15
(taxable
income) is—
And you are—
At
least
But
less
than
Single Married 
filing 
jointly *
Married 
filing 
sepa-
rately
Head of 
a 
house-
hold
Your tax is—
99,000
99,000 99,050 17,166 12,401 17,166 15,560
99,050 99,100 17,178 12,412 17,178 15,572
99,100 99,150 17,190 12,423 17,190 15,584
99,150 99,200 17,202 12,434 17,202 15,596
99,200 99,250 17,214 12,445 17,214 15,608
99,250 99,300 17,226 12,456 17,226 15,620
99,300 99,350 17,238 12,467 17,238 15,632
99,350 99,400 17,250 12,478 17,250 15,644
99,400 99,450 17,262 12,489 17,262 15,656
99,450 99,500 17,274 12,500 17,274 15,668
99,500 99,550 17,286 12,511 17,286 15,680
99,550 99,600 17,298 12,522 17,298 15,692
99,600 99,650 17,310 12,533 17,310 15,704
99,650 99,700 17,322 12,544 17,322 15,716
99,700 99,750 17,334 12,555 17,334 15,728
99,750 99,800 17,346 12,566 17,346 15,740
99,800 99,850 17,358 12,577 17,358 15,752
99,850 99,900 17,370 12,588 17,370 15,764
99,900 99,950 17,382 12,599 17,382 15,776
99,950 100,000 17,394 12,610 17,394 15,788
   
$100,000
or over
use the T ax
Computation
Worksheet
   
* This column must also be used by a qualifying surviving spouse.
Publication 17 (2023) 123

Page 126 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2023 Tax Computation Worksheet—Line 16
CAUTION
!
See Line 16 in the Instructions for Form 1040 to see if you must use the worksheet below to figure your tax.
Note. If you’re required to use this worksheet to figure the tax on an amount from another form or worksheet, such as the Qualified 
Dividends and Capital Gain T ax Worksheet, the Schedule D T ax Worksheet, Schedule J, Form 8615, or the Foreign Earned Income T ax 
Worksheet, enter the amount from that form or worksheet in column (a) of the row that applies to the amount you’re looking up. Enter the 
result on the appropriate line of the form or worksheet that you’re completing.
Section A—Use if your filing status is Single. Complete the row below that applies to you.
Taxable income.
If line 15 is—
(a) 
Enter the amount from 
line 15.
(b) 
Multiplication 
amount
(c) 
Multiply
 (a) by (b)
(d) 
Subtraction amount
Tax. 
Subtract (d) from (c). 
Enter the result here and 
on Form 1040 or 
1040-SR, line 16.
At least $100,000 but not over $182,100  $  × 24% (0.24)  $  $ 6,600.00  $
Over $182,100 but not over $231,250  $  × 32% (0.32)  $  $ 21,168.00  $
Over $231,250 but not over $578,125  $  × 35% (0.35)  $  $ 28,105.50  $
Over $578,125  $ × 37% (0.37)  $ $ 39,668.00  $
Section B—Use if your filing status is Married filing jointly or Qualifying surviving spouse. Complete the row below that applies to you.
Taxable income.
If line 15 is—
(a) 
Enter the amount 
from line 15.
(b) 
Multiplication 
amount
(c) 
Multiply
 (a) by (b)
(d) 
Subtraction amount
Tax. 
Subtract (d) from (c). 
Enter the result here and 
on Form 1040 or 
1040-SR, line 16.
At least $100,000 but not over $190,750  $  × 22% (0.22)  $  $ 9,385.00  $
Over $190,750 but not over $364,200  $  × 24% (0.24)  $  $ 13,200.00  $
Over $364,200 but not over $462,500  $  × 32% (0.32)  $ $ 42,336.00  $
Over $462,500 but not over $693,750  $  × 35% (0.35)  $  $ 56,211.00  $
Over $693,750  $ × 37% (0.37)  $  $ 70,086.00  $
Section C—Use if your filing status is Married filing separately. Complete the row below that applies to you.
Taxable income.
If line 15 is—
(a) 
Enter the amount from 
line 15.
(b) 
Multiplication 
amount
(c) 
Multiply
 (a) by (b)
(d) 
Subtraction amount
Tax. 
Subtract (d) from (c). 
Enter the result here and 
on Form 1040 or 
1040-SR, line 16.
At least $100,000 but not over $182,100  $  × 24% (0.24)  $  $ 6,600.00  $
Over $182,100 but not over $231,250  $  × 32% (0.32)  $  $ 21,168.00  $
Over $231,250 but not over $346,875  $  × 35% (0.35)  $  $ 28,105.50  $
Over $346,875  $ × 37% (0.37)  $  $ 35,043.00  $
Section D—Use if your filing status is Head of household. Complete the row below that applies to you.
Taxable income.
If line 15 is—
(a) 
Enter the amount 
from line 15.
(b) 
Multiplication amount
(c) 
Multiply
 (a) by (b)
(d) 
Subtraction amount
Tax. 
Subtract (d) from (c). 
Enter the result here and 
on Form 1040 or 
1040-SR, line 16.
At least $100,000 but not over $182,100  $  × 24% (0.24)  $  $ 8,206.00  $
Over $182,100 but not over $231,250  $  × 32% (0.32)  $  $ 22,774.00  $
Over $231,250 but not over $578,100  $  × 35% (0.35)  $  $ 29,711.50  $
Over $578,100  $ × 37% (0.37)  $  $ 41,273.50  $
124 Publication 17 (2023)

Page 127 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2023 Tax Rate Schedules
CAUTION
!
The T ax Rate Schedules are shown so you can see the tax rate that applies to all levels of taxable income. Don’t use them to figure your tax. Instead, 
see chapter 13.
Schedule X—If your filing status is Single
If your taxable income is: The tax is:
Over— But not over— of the amount over—
$0 $11,000 - - - - - - - 10% $0
11,000 44,725 $1,100.00 + 12% 11,000
44,725 95,375 5,147.00 + 22% 44,725
95,375 182,100 16,290.00 + 24% 95,375
182,100 231,250 37,104.00 + 32% 182,100
231,250 578,125 52,832.00 + 35% 231,250
578,125 - - - - - - - 174,238.25 + 37% 578,125
Schedule Y-1—If your filing status is Married filing jointly or Qualifying surviving spouse
If your taxable income is: The tax is:
Over— But not over— of the amount over—
$0 $22,000 - - - - - - - 10% $0
22,000 89,450 $2,200.00 + 12% 22,000
89,450 190,750 10,294.00 + 22% 89,450
190,750 364,200 32,580.00 + 24% 190,750
364,200 462,500 74,208.00 + 32% 364,200
462,500 693,750 105,664.00 + 35% 462,500
693,750 - - - - - - - 186,601.50 + 37% 693,750
Schedule Y-2—If your filing status is Married filing separately
If your taxable income is: The tax is:
Over— But not over— of the amount over—
$0 $11,000 - - - - - - - 10% $0
11,000 44,725 $1,100.00 + 12% 11,000
44,725 95,375 5,147.00 + 22% 44,725
95,375 182,100 16,290.00 + 24% 95,375
182,100 231,250 37,104.00 + 32% 182,100
231,250 346,875 52,832.00 + 35% 231,250
346,875 - - - - - - - 93,300.75 + 37% 346,875
Schedule Z—If your filing status is Head of household
If your taxable income is: The tax is:
Over— But not over— of the amount over—
$0 $15,700 - - - - - - - 10% $0
15,700 59,850 $1,570.00 + 12% 15,700
59,850 95,350 6,868.00 + 22% 59,850
95,350 182,100 14,678.00 + 24% 95,350
182,100 231,250 35,498.00 + 32% 182,100
231,250 578,100 51,226.00 + 35% 231,250
578,100 - - - - - - - 172,623.50 + 37% 578,100
Publication 17 (2023) 125

Page 128 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Your Rights as a Taxpayer
This section explains your rights as 
a taxpayer and the processes for 
examination, appeal, collection, 
and refunds.
The Taxpayer Bill of 
Rights
1. The Right to Be Informed. 
T axpayers have the right to know 
what they need to do to comply 
with the tax laws. They are entitled 
to clear explanations of the laws 
and IRS procedures in all tax 
forms, instructions, publications, 
notices, and correspondence. 
They have the right to be informed 
of IRS decisions about their tax ac-
counts and to receive clear explan-
ations of the outcomes.
2. The Right to Quality Service. 
T axpayers have the right to receive 
prompt, courteous, and professio-
nal assistance in their dealings with 
the IRS, to be spoken to in a way 
they can easily understand, to re-
ceive clear and easily understand-
able communications from the IRS, 
and to speak to a supervisor about 
inadequate service.
3. The Right to Pay No More 
than the Correct Amount of Tax. 
T axpayers have the right to pay 
only the amount of tax legally due, 
including interest and penalties, 
and to have the IRS apply all tax 
payments properly.
4. The Right to Challenge the 
IRS’s Position and Be Heard. 
T axpayers have the right to raise 
objections and provide additional 
documentation in response to for-
mal IRS actions or proposed ac-
tions, to expect that the IRS will 
consider their timely objections 
and documentation promptly and 
fairly, and to receive a response if 
the IRS does not agree with their 
position.
5. The Right to Appeal an IRS 
Decision in an Independent Fo-
rum. T axpayers are entitled to a 
fair and impartial administrative ap-
peal of most IRS decisions, includ-
ing many penalties, and have the 
right to receive a written response 
regarding the IRS Independent Of-
fice of Appeals' decision. T axpay-
ers generally have the right to take 
their cases to court.
6. The Right to Finality.  T axpay-
ers have the right to know the max-
imum amount of time they have to 
challenge the IRS’s position as well 
as the maximum amount of time 
the IRS has to audit a particular tax 
year or collect a tax debt. T axpay-
ers have the right to know when the 
IRS has finished an audit.
7. The Right to Privacy.  T axpay-
ers have the right to expect that 
any IRS inquiry, examination, or 
enforcement action will comply 
with the law and be no more intru-
sive than necessary, and will re-
spect all due process rights, includ-
ing search and seizure protections, 
and will provide, where applicable, 
a collection due process hearing.
8. The Right to Confidentiality. 
T axpayers have the right to expect 
that any information they provide to 
the IRS will not be disclosed unless 
authorized by the taxpayer or by 
law. T axpayers have the right to ex-
pect appropriate action will be 
taken against employees, return 
preparers, and others who wrong-
fully use or disclose taxpayer return 
information.
9. The Right to Retain Repre-
sentation. T axpayers have the 
right to retain an authorized repre-
sentative of their choice to repre-
sent them in their dealings with the 
IRS. T axpayers have the right to 
seek assistance from a Low In-
come T axpayer Clinic if they cannot 
afford representation.
10. The Right to a Fair and Just 
Tax System. T axpayers have the 
right to expect the tax system to 
consider facts and circumstances 
that might affect their underlying li-
abilities, ability to pay, or ability to 
provide information timely. T axpay-
ers have the right to receive assis-
tance from the T axpayer Advocate 
Service if they are experiencing fi-
nancial difficulty or if the IRS has 
not resolved their tax issues prop-
erly and timely through its normal 
channels.
Examinations 
(Audits)
We accept most taxpayers’ returns 
as filed. If we inquire about your re-
turn or select it for examination, it 
does not suggest that you are dis-
honest. The inquiry or examination 
may or may not result in more tax. 
We may close your case without 
change; or, you may receive a re-
fund.
The process of selecting a re-
turn for examination usually begins 
in one of two ways. First, we use 
computer programs to identify re-
turns that may have incorrect 
amounts. These programs may be 
based on information returns, such 
as Forms 1099 and W -2, on stud-
ies of past examinations, or on cer-
tain issues identified by compli-
ance projects. Second, we use 
information from outside sources 
that indicates that a return may 
have incorrect amounts. These 
sources may include newspapers, 
public records, and individuals. If 
we determine that the information 
is accurate and reliable, we may 
use it to select a return for exami-
nation.
Pub. 556, Examination of Re-
turns, Appeal Rights, and Claims 
for Refund, explains the rules and 
procedures that we follow in exami-
nations. The following sections 
give an overview of how we con-
duct examinations.
By mail.  We handle many exami-
nations and inquiries by mail. We 
will send you a letter with either a 
request for more information or a 
reason why we believe a change to 
your return may be needed. Y ou 
can respond by mail or you can re-
quest a personal interview with an 
examiner. If you mail us the re-
quested information or provide an 
explanation, we may or may not 
agree with you, and we will explain 
the reasons for any changes. Do 
not hesitate to write to us about 
anything you do not understand.
By interview. If we notify you that 
we will conduct your examination 
through a personal interview, or 
you request such an interview, you 
have the right to ask that the ex-
amination take place at a reasona-
ble time and place that is conven-
ient for both you and the IRS. If our 
examiner proposes any changes to 
your return, they will explain the 
reasons for the changes. If you do 
not agree with these changes, you 
can meet with the examiner's su-
pervisor.
Repeat examinations.  If we ex-
amined your return for the same 
items in either of the 2 previous 
years and proposed no change to 
your tax liability, contact us as soon 
as possible so we can see if we 
should discontinue the examina-
tion.
Appeals
If you do not agree with the exam-
iner's proposed changes, you can 
appeal them to the IRS Independ-
ent Office of Appeals. Most differ-
ences can be settled without ex-
pensive and time -consuming court 
trials. Y our appeal rights are ex-
plained in detail in both Pub. 5, 
Y our Appeal Rights and How to 
Prepare a Protest if Y ou Don't 
Agree, and Pub. 556.
If you do not wish to use the 
IRS Independent Office of Appeals 
or disagree with its findings, you 
may be able to take your case to 
the U.S. T ax Court, U.S. Court of 
Federal Claims, or the U.S. District 
Court where you live. If you take 
your case to court, the IRS will 
have the burden of proving certain 
facts if you kept adequate records 
to show your tax liability, cooper-
ated with the IRS, and meet certain 
other conditions. If the court agrees 
with you on most issues in your 
case and finds that our position 
was largely unjustified, you may be 
able to recover some of your ad-
ministrative and litigation costs. 
Y ou will not be eligible to recover 
these costs unless you tried to re-
solve your case administratively, in-
cluding going through the appeals 
system, and you gave us the infor-
mation necessary to resolve the 
case.
Collections
Pub. 594, The IRS Collection Proc-
ess, explains your rights and re-
sponsibilities regarding payment of 
federal taxes. It describes the fol-
lowing.
• What to do when you owe 
taxes. It describes what to do 
if you get a tax bill and what to 
do if you think your bill is 
wrong. It also covers making 
installment payments, delay-
ing collection action, and sub-
mitting an offer in compro-
mise.
• IRS collection actions. It cov-
ers liens, releasing a lien, lev-
ies, releasing a levy, seizures 
and sales, and release of 
property.
• IRS certification to the State 
Department of a seriously de-
linquent tax debt, which will 
generally result in denial of a 
passport application and may 
lead to revocation of a pass-
port.
Y our collection appeal rights 
are explained in detail in Pub. 
1660, Collection Appeal Rights.
Innocent spouse relief.  Gener-
ally, both you and your spouse are 
each responsible for paying the full 
amount of tax, interest, and penal-
ties due on your joint return. How-
ever, if you qualify for innocent 
spouse relief, you may be relieved 
126 Publication 17 (2023)

Page 129 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
of part or all of the joint liability. T o 
request relief, you must file Form 
8857, Request for Innocent 
Spouse Relief. For more informa-
tion on innocent spouse relief, see 
Pub. 971, Innocent Spouse Relief, 
and Form 8857.
Potential third -party contacts. 
Generally, the IRS will deal directly 
with you or your duly authorized 
representative. However, we some-
times talk with other persons if we 
need information that you have 
been unable to provide, or to verify 
information we have received. If we 
do contact other persons, such as 
a neighbor, a bank, an employer, or 
employees, we will generally need 
to tell them limited information, 
such as your name. The law pro-
hibits us from disclosing any more 
information than is necessary to 
obtain or verify the information we 
are seeking. Our need to contact 
other persons may continue as 
long as there is activity in your 
case. If we do contact other per-
sons, you have a right to request a 
list of those contacted. Y our re-
quest can be made by telephone, 
in writing, or during a personal in-
terview.
Refunds
Y ou may file a claim for refund if 
you think you paid too much tax. 
Y ou must generally file the claim 
within 3 years from the date you 
filed your original return or 2 years 
from the date you paid the tax, 
whichever is later. The law gener-
ally provides for interest on your re-
fund if it is not paid within 45 days 
of the date you filed your return or 
claim for refund. Pub. 556, has 
more information on refunds.
If you were due a refund but you 
did not file a return, you must gen-
erally file your return within 3 years 
from the date the return was due 
(including extensions) to get that 
refund.
Taxpayer Advocate 
Service (TAS)
TAS is an independent organiza-
tion within the IRS that can help 
protect your taxpayer rights. They 
can offer you help if your tax prob-
lem is causing a hardship, or 
you've tried but haven't been able 
to resolve your problem with the 
IRS. If you qualify for their assis-
tance, which is always free, will do 
everything possible to help you. Go 
to T axpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov or 
call 877-777-4778.
Tax Information
The IRS provides the following 
sources for forms, publications, 
and additional information.
• Internet: IRS.gov.
• T ax Questions:
IRS.gov/Help/T ax-Law-
Questions and
How T o Get T ax Help.
• Forms and Publications:
IRS.gov/Forms and
IRS.gov/OrderForms.
• Small Business Ombudsman: 
A small business entity can 
participate in the regulatory 
process and comment on en-
forcement actions of the IRS 
by calling 888-REG-FAIR.
• T reasury Inspector General for 
T ax Administration: Y ou can 
confidentially report miscon-
duct, waste, fraud, or abuse 
by an IRS employee by calling 
800-366-4484. People who 
are deaf, hard of hearing, or 
have a speech disability and 
who have access to TTY/TDD 
equipment can call 
800-877-8339. Y ou can re-
main anonymous.
How To Get Tax Help
If you have questions about a tax 
issue; need help preparing your tax 
return; or want to download free 
publications, forms, or instructions, 
go to IRS.gov to find resources that 
can help you right away.
Preparing and filing your tax re-
turn.  After receiving all your wage 
and earnings statements (Forms 
W-2, W -2G, 1099 -R, 1099 -MISC, 
1099-NEC, etc.); unemployment 
compensation statements (by mail 
or in a digital format) or other gov-
ernment payment statements 
(Form 1099 -G); and interest, divi-
dend, and retirement statements 
from banks and investment firms 
(Forms 1099), you have several op-
tions to choose from to prepare 
and file your tax return. Y ou can 
prepare the tax return yourself, see 
if you qualify for free tax prepara-
tion, or hire a tax professional to 
prepare your return.
Free options for tax preparation. 
Y our options for preparing and fil-
ing your return online or in your lo-
cal community, if you qualify, in-
clude the following.
• Free File. This program lets 
you prepare and file your fed-
eral individual income tax re-
turn for free using software or 
Free File Fillable Forms. How-
ever, state tax preparation 
may not be available through 
Free File. Go to IRS.gov/
FreeFile to see if you qualify 
for free online federal tax 
preparation, e-filing, and di-
rect deposit or payment op-
tions.
• VITA. The Volunteer Income 
T ax Assistance (VITA) pro-
gram offers free tax help to 
people with low-to-moderate 
incomes, persons with disabil-
ities, and limited-Eng-
lish-speaking taxpayers who 
need help preparing their own 
tax returns. Go to IRS.gov/
VITA, download the free 
IRS2Go app, or call 
800-906-9887 for information 
on free tax return preparation.
• TCE. The T ax Counseling for 
the Elderly (TCE) program of-
fers free tax help for all tax-
payers, particularly those who 
are 60 years of age and older. 
TCE volunteers specialize in 
answering questions about 
pensions and retirement-rela-
ted issues unique to seniors. 
Go to IRS.gov/TCE or down-
load the free IRS2Go app for 
information on free tax return 
preparation.
• MilTax. Members of the U.S. 
Armed Forces and qualified 
veterans may use MilT ax, a 
free tax service offered by the 
Department of Defense 
through Military OneSource. 
For more information, go to 
MilitaryOneSource 
(MilitaryOneSource.mil/
MilT ax).
Also, the IRS offers Free 
Fillable Forms, which can be 
completed online and then 
e-filed regardless of income.
Using online tools to help pre-
pare your return.  Go to IRS.gov/
T ools for the following.
• The Earned Income T ax Credit 
Assistant (IRS.gov/
EITCAssistant) determines if 
you’re eligible for the earned 
income credit (EIC).
• The Online EIN Application 
(IRS.gov/EIN) helps you get 
an employer identification 
number (EIN) at no cost.
• The T ax Withholding 
Estimator (IRS.gov/W4App) 
makes it easier for you to esti-
mate the federal income tax 
you want your employer to 
withhold from your paycheck. 
This is tax withholding. See 
how your withholding affects 
your refund, take-home pay, or 
tax due.
• The First- Time Homebuyer 
Credit Account Look-up 
(IRS.gov/HomeBuyer) tool 
provides information on your 
repayments and account bal-
ance.
• The Sales T ax Deduction 
Calculator (IRS.gov/SalesT ax) 
figures the amount you can 
claim if you itemize deduc-
tions on Schedule A (Form 
1040).
Getting answers to your 
tax questions. On 
IRS.gov, you can get 
up-to-date information on current 
events and changes in tax law.
• IRS.gov/Help: A variety of 
tools to help you get answers 
to some of the most common 
tax questions.
• IRS.gov/ITA: The Interactive 
T ax Assistant, a tool that will 
ask you questions and, based 
on your input, provide an-
swers on a number of tax top-
ics.
• IRS.gov/Forms: Find forms, in-
structions, and publications. 
Y ou will find details on the 
most recent tax changes and 
interactive links to help you 
find answers to your ques-
tions.
• Y ou may also be able to ac-
cess tax information in your 
e-filing software.
Need someone to prepare your 
tax return?  There are various 
types of tax return preparers, in-
cluding enrolled agents, certified 
public accountants (CPAs), ac-
countants, and many others who 
don’t have professional credentials. 
If you choose to have someone 
prepare your tax return, choose 
Publication 17 (2023) 127

Page 130 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
that preparer wisely. A paid tax pre-
parer is:
• Primarily responsible for the 
overall substantive accuracy 
of your return,
• Required to sign the return, 
and
• Required to include their pre-
parer tax identification number 
(PTIN).
Although the tax preparer 
always signs the return, 
you're ultimately responsi-
ble for providing all the information 
required for the preparer to accu-
rately prepare your return and for 
the accuracy of every item reported 
on the return. Anyone paid to pre-
pare tax returns for others should 
have a thorough understanding of 
tax matters. For more information 
on how to choose a tax preparer, 
go to Tips for Choosing a T ax 
Preparer on IRS.gov.
Employers can register to use 
Business Services Online.  The 
Social Security Administration 
(SSA) offers online service at 
SSA.gov/employer for fast, free, 
and secure W -2 filing options to 
CPAs, accountants, enrolled 
agents, and individuals who proc-
ess Form W -2, Wage and T ax 
Statement, and Form W -2c, Cor-
rected Wage and T ax Statement.
IRS social media. Go to IRS.gov/
SocialMedia to see the various so-
cial media tools the IRS uses to 
share the latest information on tax 
changes, scam alerts, initiatives, 
products, and services. At the IRS, 
privacy and security are our high-
est priority. We use these tools to 
share public information with you. 
Don’t post your social security 
number (SSN) or other confidential 
information on social media sites. 
Always protect your identity when 
using any social networking site.
The following IRS Y ouT ube 
channels provide short, informative 
videos on various tax -related top-
ics in English, Spanish, and ASL.
• Y outube.com/irsvideos.
• Y outube.com/
irsvideosmultilingua.
• Y outube.com/irsvideosASL.
Watching IRS videos.  The IRS 
Video portal ( IRSVideos.gov) con-
tains video and audio presenta-
tions for individuals, small busi-
nesses, and tax professionals.
Online tax information in other 
languages. Y ou can find informa-
tion on IRS.gov/MyLanguage if 
English isn’t your native language.
CAUTION
!
Free Over-the-Phone Interpreter 
(OPI) Service.  The IRS is com-
mitted to serving taxpayers with 
limited-English proficiency (LEP) 
by offering OPI services. The OPI 
Service is a federally funded pro-
gram and is available at T axpayer 
Assistance Centers (TACs), most 
IRS offices, and every VITA/TCE 
tax return site. The OPI Service is 
accessible in more than 350 lan-
guages.
Accessibility Helpline available 
for taxpayers with disabilities. 
T axpayers who need information 
about accessibility services can 
call 833-690-0598. The Accessibil-
ity Helpline can answer questions 
related to current and future acces-
sibility products and services avail-
able in alternative media formats 
(for example, braille, large print, au-
dio, etc.). The Accessibility Help-
line does not have access to your 
IRS account. For help with tax law, 
refunds, or account -related issues, 
go to IRS.gov/LetUsHelp.
Note. Form 9000, Alternative 
Media Preference, or Form 
9000(SP) allows you to elect to re-
ceive certain types of written corre-
spondence in the following formats.
• Standard Print.
• Large Print.
• Braille.
• Audio (MP3).
• Plain T ext File (TXT).
• Braille Ready File (BRF).
Disasters. Go to IRS.gov/
DisasterRelief to review the availa-
ble disaster tax relief.
Getting tax forms and publica-
tions. Go to IRS.gov/Forms to 
view, download, or print all the 
forms, instructions, and publica-
tions you may need. Or, you can go 
to IRS.gov/OrderForms to place an 
order.
Getting tax publications and in-
structions in eBook format. 
Download and view most tax publi-
cations and instructions (including 
the Instructions for Form 1040) on 
mobile devices as eBooks at 
IRS.gov/eBooks.
IRS eBooks have been tested 
using Apple's iBooks for iPad. Our 
eBooks haven’t been tested on 
other dedicated eBook readers, 
and eBook functionality may not 
operate as intended.
Access your online account (in-
dividual taxpayers only).  Go to 
IRS.gov/Account to securely ac-
cess information about your federal 
tax account.
• View the amount you owe and 
a breakdown by tax year.
• See payment plan details or 
apply for a new payment plan.
• Make a payment or view 5 
years of payment history and 
any pending or scheduled 
payments.
• Access your tax records, in-
cluding key data from your 
most recent tax return, and 
transcripts.
• View digital copies of select 
notices from the IRS.
• Approve or reject authoriza-
tion requests from tax profes-
sionals.
• View your address on file or 
manage your communication 
preferences.
Get a transcript of your return. 
With an online account, you can 
access a variety of information to 
help you during the filing season. 
Y ou can get a transcript, review 
your most recently filed tax return, 
and get your adjusted gross in-
come. Create or access your on-
line account at IRS.gov/Account.
Tax Pro Account.  This tool lets 
your tax professional submit an au-
thorization request to access your 
individual taxpayer IRS online ac-
count. For more information, go to 
IRS.gov/T axProAccount.
Using direct deposit.  The safest 
and easiest way to receive a tax re-
fund is to e -file and choose direct 
deposit, which securely and elec-
tronically transfers your refund di-
rectly into your financial account. 
Direct deposit also avoids the pos-
sibility that your check could be 
lost, stolen, destroyed, or returned 
undeliverable to the IRS. Eight in 
10 taxpayers use direct deposit to 
receive their refunds. If you don’t 
have a bank account, go to 
IRS.gov/DirectDeposit for more in-
formation on where to find a bank 
or credit union that can open an ac-
count online.
Reporting and resolving your 
tax-related identity theft issues. 
• T ax-related identity theft hap-
pens when someone steals 
your personal information to 
commit tax fraud. Y our taxes 
can be affected if your SSN is 
used to file a fraudulent return 
or to claim a refund or credit.
• The IRS doesn’t initiate con-
tact with taxpayers by email, 
text messages (including 
shortened links), telephone 
calls, or social media chan-
nels to request or verify per-
sonal or financial information. 
This includes requests for per-
sonal identification numbers 
(PINs), passwords, or similar 
information for credit cards, 
banks, or other financial ac-
counts.
• Go to IRS.gov/IdentityTheft, 
the IRS Identity Theft Central 
webpage, for information on 
identity theft and data security 
protection for taxpayers, tax 
professionals, and busi-
nesses. If your SSN has been 
lost or stolen or you suspect 
you’re a victim of tax-related 
identity theft, you can learn 
what steps you should take.
• Get an Identity Protection PIN 
(IP PIN). IP PINs are six-digit 
numbers assigned to taxpay-
ers to help prevent the misuse 
of their SSNs on fraudulent 
federal income tax returns. 
When you have an IP PIN, it 
prevents someone else from 
filing a tax return with your 
SSN. T o learn more, go to 
IRS.gov/IPPIN.
Ways to check on the status of 
your refund. 
• Go to IRS.gov/Refunds.
• Download the official IRS2Go 
app to your mobile device to 
check your refund status.
• Call the automated refund hot-
line at 800-829-1954.
The IRS can’t issue re-
funds before mid-February 
for returns that claimed the 
EIC or the additional child tax 
credit (ACTC). This applies to the 
entire refund, not just the portion 
associated with these credits.
Making a tax payment.  Pay-
ments of U.S. tax must be remitted 
to the IRS in U.S. dollars. Digital 
assets are not accepted. Go to 
IRS.gov/Payments for information 
on how to make a payment using 
any of the following options.
• IRS Direct Pay: Pay your indi-
vidual tax bill or estimated tax 
payment directly from your 
checking or savings account 
at no cost to you.
• Debit Card, Credit Card, or 
Digital Wallet: Choose an ap-
proved payment processor to 
pay online or by phone.
• Electronic Funds Withdrawal: 
Schedule a payment when fil-
ing your federal taxes using 
tax return preparation soft-
ware or through a tax profes-
sional.
CAUTION
!
128 Publication 17 (2023)

Page 131 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Electronic Federal T ax 
Payment System: Best option 
for businesses. Enrollment is 
required.
• Check or Money Order: Mail 
your payment to the address 
listed on the notice or instruc-
tions.
• Cash: Y ou may be able to pay 
your taxes with cash at a par-
ticipating retail store.
• Same-Day Wire: Y ou may be 
able to do same-day wire from 
your financial institution. Con-
tact your financial institution 
for availability, cost, and time 
frames.
Note. The IRS uses the latest 
encryption technology to ensure 
that the electronic payments you 
make online, by phone, or from a 
mobile device using the IRS2Go 
app are safe and secure. Paying 
electronically is quick, easy, and 
faster than mailing in a check or 
money order.
What if I can’t pay now?  Go to 
IRS.gov/Payments for more infor-
mation about your options.
• Apply for an online payment 
agreement (IRS.gov/OPA) to 
meet your tax obligation in 
monthly installments if you 
can’t pay your taxes in full to-
day. Once you complete the 
online process, you will re-
ceive immediate notification of 
whether your agreement has 
been approved.
• Use the Offer in Compromise 
Pre-Qualifier to see if you can 
settle your tax debt for less 
than the full amount you owe. 
For more information on the 
Offer in Compromise program, 
go to IRS.gov/OIC.
Filing an amended return.  Go to 
IRS.gov/Form1040X for information 
and updates.
Checking the status of your 
amended return.  Go to IRS.gov/
WMAR to track the status of Form 
1040-X amended returns.
It can take up to 3 weeks 
from the date you filed 
your amended return for it 
to show up in our system, and pro-
cessing it can take up to 16 weeks.
CAUTION
!
Understanding an IRS notice or 
letter you’ve received.  Go to 
IRS.gov/Notices to find additional 
information about responding to an 
IRS notice or letter.
Responding to an IRS notice or 
letter. Y ou can now upload re-
sponses to all notices and letters 
using the Document Upload T ool. 
For notices that require additional 
action, taxpayers will be redirected 
appropriately on IRS.gov to take 
further action. T o learn more about 
the tool, go to IRS.gov/Upload.
Note. Y ou can use Sched-
ule LEP (Form 1040), Request for 
Change in Language Preference, 
to state a preference to receive no-
tices, letters, or other written com-
munications from the IRS in an al-
ternative language. Y ou may not 
immediately receive written com-
munications in the requested lan-
guage. The IRS’s commitment to 
LEP taxpayers is part of a 
multi-year timeline that began pro-
viding translations in 2023. Y ou will 
continue to receive communica-
tions, including notices and letters, 
in English until they are translated 
to your preferred language.
Contacting your local TAC. 
Keep in mind, many questions can 
be answered on IRS.gov without 
visiting a TAC. Go to IRS.gov/
LetUsHelp for the topics people 
ask about most. If you still need 
help, TACs provide tax help when a 
tax issue can’t be handled online or 
by phone. All TACs now provide 
service by appointment, so you’ll 
know in advance that you can get 
the service you need without long 
wait times. Before you visit, go to 
IRS.gov/TACLocator to find the 
nearest TAC and to check hours, 
available services, and appoint-
ment options. Or, on the IRS2Go 
app, under the Stay Connected 
tab, choose the Contact Us option 
and click on “Local Offices.”
The Taxpayer 
Advocate Service 
(TAS) Is Here To 
Help You
What Is TAS?
TAS is an independent organiza-
tion within the IRS that helps tax-
payers and protects taxpayer 
rights. TAS strives to ensure that 
every taxpayer is treated fairly and 
that you know and understand your 
rights under the T axpayer Bill of 
Rights.
How Can You Learn 
About Your Taxpayer 
Rights?
The T axpayer Bill of Rights de-
scribes 10 basic rights that all tax-
payers have when dealing with the 
IRS. Go to 
T axpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov to help 
you understand what these rights 
mean to you and how they apply. 
These are your rights. Know them. 
Use them.
What Can TAS Do for 
You?
TAS can help you resolve problems 
that you can’t resolve with the IRS. 
And their service is free. If you 
qualify for their assistance, you will 
be assigned to one advocate who 
will work with you throughout the 
process and will do everything pos-
sible to resolve your issue. TAS can 
help you if:
• Y our problem is causing finan-
cial difficulty for you, your fam-
ily, or your business;
• Y ou face (or your business is 
facing) an immediate threat of 
adverse action; or
• Y ou’ve tried repeatedly to con-
tact the IRS but no one has re-
sponded, or the IRS hasn’t re-
sponded by the date 
promised.
How Can You Reach TAS?
TAS has offices in every state, the 
District of Columbia, and Puerto 
Rico. T o find your advocate’s num-
ber:
• Go to 
T axpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov/
Contact-Us;
• Download Pub. 1546, The 
T axpayer Advocate Service Is 
Y our Voice at the IRS, availa-
ble at IRS.gov/pub/irs-pdf/
p1546.pdf;
• Call the IRS toll free at 
800-TAX-FORM 
(800-829-3676) to order a 
copy of Pub. 1546;
• Check your local directory; or
• Call TAS toll free at 
877-777-4778.
How Else Does TAS Help 
Taxpayers?
TAS works to resolve large -scale 
problems that affect many taxpay-
ers. If you know of one of these 
broad issues, report it to TAS at 
IRS.gov/SAMS. Be sure to not in-
clude any personal taxpayer infor-
mation.
Low Income 
Taxpayer Clinics 
(LITCs)
LITCs are independent from the 
IRS and TAS. LITCs represent indi-
viduals whose income is below a 
certain level and who need to re-
solve tax problems with the IRS. 
LITCs can represent taxpayers in 
audits, appeals, and tax collection 
disputes before the IRS and in 
court. In addition, LITCs can pro-
vide information about taxpayer 
rights and responsibilities in differ-
ent languages for individuals who 
speak English as a second lan-
guage. Services are offered for free 
or a small fee. For more information 
or to find an LITC near you, go to 
the LITC page at 
T axpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov/LITC or 
see IRS Pub. 4134, Low Income 
T axpayer Clinic List , at 
IRS.gov/pub/irs-pdf/p4134.pdf.
Publication 17 (2023) 129

Page 132 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
T o help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.
See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Index 
10% tax for early withdrawal from 
IRA or retirement plan 
(See Early withdrawal from 
deferred interest account, 
subheading: T ax on)
2023 Tax Rate Schedules 125
401(k) plans:
T ax treatment of contributions50
403(b) plans:
Rollovers 85, 91
529 plans (See Qualified tuition 
programs)
59 1/2 rule:
Age 59 1/2 rule 88
60-day rule 84
72 rule:
Age 72 rule 86
A
Abroad, citizens traveling or 
working 8, 52
(See also Foreign employment)
Absence, temporary 29, 34
Accelerated death benefits 70
Accident insurance 48
Cafeteria plans 53
Long-term care 48, 53
Accidental death benefits 49
Accounting methods 13
Accrual method (See Accrual 
method taxpayers)
Cash method (See Cash method 
taxpayers)
Accounting periods 13
Calendar year 11, 13, 48
Change in, standard deduction 
not allowed 93
Fiscal year 13, 42
Fringe benefits 48
Accrual method taxpayers 13
T axes paid during tax year, 
deduction of 97
Accuracy-related penalties 20
Activities not for profit 74
Address 17
Change of 18
Foreign 17
P .O. box17
Adjusted gross income (AGI):
Modified (See Modified adjusted 
gross income (MAGI))
Retirement savings contribution 
credit 23
Adjustments 108
Administrators, estate 
(See Executors and 
administrators)
Adopted child 28, 34, 37
Adoption:
ATIN 13
Child tax credit 110
Credits:
Married filing separately 23
Employer assistance 49
T axpayer identification 
number 13, 37
Age:
Children's investments 
(See Children, subheading: 
Investment income of child 
under age 18)
Gross income and filing 
requirements (T able 1-1)6
IRAs:
Distribution prior to age 
59 1/2 88
Distribution required at age 
72 86, 88
Roth IRAs 89, 92
Standard deduction for age 65 or 
older 93
Age test 28
Agents:
Income paid to 13
Signing return 15
Agricultural workers (See Farmers)
Agriculture (See Farming)
Alaska Permanent Fund 
dividends 74
Alaska Unemployment 
Compensation Fund 98
Alcoholic beverages:
IRA prohibited transactions in 87
Aliens:
Dual-status (See Dual-status 
taxpayers)
Filing required 8
Nonresident (See Nonresident 
aliens)
Resident (See Resident aliens)
Alimony:
Reporting of income 74
Alternative filing methods:
Electronic (See E-file)
Alternative minimum tax 
(AMT) 108
Ambulance service personnel:
Life insurance proceeds when 
death in line of duty 70
Amended returns 18, 19
(See also Form 1040-X)
Itemized deduction, change to 
standard deduction 95
Standard deduction, change to 
itemized deductions 95
American citizens abroad 8
(See also Citizens outside U.S.)
Employment (See Foreign 
employment)
American Indians (See Indians)
American Samoa:
Income from 8
Annuities:
Decedent's unrecovered 
investment in 14
IRAs as 79
Unrecovered investment 106
Withholding 14, 40
Annulled marriages:
Filing status 22
Anthrax incidents (See T errorist 
attacks)
Antiques (See Collectibles)
Appraisal fees 102
Archer MSAs 76
Contributions 48
Armed Forces:
Combat zone:
Extension to file return 12
Signing return for spouse 23
Dependency allotments 35
Disability pay 52
Disability pensions 53
GI Bill benefits 36
Military quarters allotments 35
Real estate taxes when receiving 
housing allowance 99
Rehabilitative program 
payments 52
Retiree's pay withholding 38
Retirees' pay:
T axable income52
Wages 52
Assistance (See T ax help)
Assistance, tax (See T ax help)
ATIN (Adoption taxpayer 
identification number) 13
Attachment of wages 13
Attachments to return 14
Attorney contingency fee:
As income 75
Attorney fees, whistleblower 
awards:
As income 75
Attorneys' fees 103, 104
Automatic extension of time to 
file 11
Form 4868 11
Awards (See Prizes and awards)
B
Babysitting 47
Back pay, award for 47
Emotional distress damages 
under title VII of Civil Rights 
Act of 1964 75
Backup withholding 40, 44, 55
Penalties 41
Bad debts:
Claim for refund 19
Recovery 71
Balance due 108
Bankruptcy:
Canceled debt not deemed to be 
income 69
Banks:
IRAs with 79
Barter income 67
Definition of bartering 67
Form 1099-B 68
Basis:
Cost basis:
IRAs for nondeductible 
contributions 83, 86
Beneficiaries 75
(See also Estate beneficiaries)
(See also T rust beneficiaries)
Bequests 75, 76
(See also Estate beneficiaries)
(See also Inheritance)
Birth of child 29
Head of household, qualifying 
person to file as 25
Social security number to be 
obtained 37
Birth of dependent 34
Blind persons:
Exemption from withholding 39
Standard deduction for 93, 94
Bonds:
Amortization of premium 105
Issued at discount 60
Original issue discount 60
Sale of 60
Savings 57
T ax-exempt60
Bonuses 39, 47, 77
Bookkeeping (See Recordkeeping 
requirements)
Breach of contract:
Damages as income 75
Bribes 74, 103
Brokers:
IRAs with 79
Commissions 79, 80
Burial:
Expenses 103
Business expenses:
Job search expenses 76
Reimbursements 39, 47
Returning excess business 
expenses 39
Business tax credits:
Claim for refund 20
C
Cafeteria plans 53
Calendar year taxpayers:
Accounting periods 11, 13, 48
Filing due date 11
California Nonoccupational 
Disability Benefit Fund 98
Campaign contributions 74
Presidential Election Campaign 
Fund 14
Campaign expenses 104
Canada:
Resident of 28, 34
Cancellation of debt 68
Exceptions to treatment as 
income 68
Capital assets:
Coal and iron ore 72
Capital expenses 36
Capital gains or losses:
Hobbies, sales from 
collections 76
Sale of personal items 77
Carpools 74
Carrybacks:
Business tax credit 
carrybacks 20
Cars 50, 77
(See also T ravel and transportation)
Personal property taxes on, 
deduction of 101
Cash:
Rebates 74
Cash method taxpayers 13
Real estate transactions, tax 
allocation 98
T axes paid during tax year, 
deduction of 97
Cash rebates 74
Casualty insurance:
Reimbursements from 74
Casualty losses 102, 105
Certificates of deposit (CDs) 61, 
78
(See also Individual retirement 
arrangements (IRAs))
Change of address 18
Change of name 13, 44
Chaplains:
Life insurance proceeds when 
death in line of duty 70
Charitable contributions:
Gifts to reduce public debt 17
Charitable distributions, 
qualified 86
Check-writing fees 104
Checks:
Constructive receipt of 13
Child and dependent care credit:
Married filing separately 23
Child born alive 29
Child care:
Babysitting 47
Care providers 47
Expenses 36
Child custody 29
Child support 75
Child tax credit 8, 27, 109-111
Claiming the credit 111
Limit on credit 111
130 Publication 17 (2023)

Page 133 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Child tax credit (Cont.)
Limits 23
Married filing separately 23
Child, qualifying 28
Children 49
(See also Adoption)
Additional child tax credit 111
Adoption (See Adopted child)
Babysitters 47
Birth of child:
Head of household, qualifying 
person to file as 25
Social security number to be 
obtained 37
Care providers 47
(See also Child care)
Credit for 8
(See also Child tax credit)
Custody of 29
Death of child:
Head of household, qualifying 
person to file as 25
Dividends of (See this heading: 
Investment income of child 
under age 18)
Earnings of 8
Filing requirements 8
As dependents (T able 1-2)7
Gifts to 55
Investment income of child under 
age 18:
Dependent filing requirements 
(T able 1-2)7
Interest and dividends 8
Parents' election to report on 
Form 1040 or 1040-SR 8
Kidnapped 29, 33
Signing return, parent for child 15
Standard deduction for 93, 94
Stillborn 29
Support of (See Child support)
T ax credit (See Child tax credit)
T ransporting school children77
Unearned income of 55
Chronic illness:
Accelerated payment of life 
insurance proceeds 
(See Accelerated death 
benefits)
Long-term care (See Long-term 
care insurance contracts)
Citizen or resident test 28
Citizens outside U.S.:
Earned income exclusion 3
Employment (See Foreign 
employment)
Extension of time to file 11
Filing requirements 8
Withholding from IRA 
distributions 87
Civil suits 75
(See also Damages from lawsuits)
Civil tax penalties (See Penalties)
Clergy 8
Housing 51
Real estate taxes when 
receiving housing 
allowance 99
Life insurance proceeds when 
chaplain died in line of 
duty 70
Pensions 51
Special income rules 51
Clerical help, deductibility of 102
Coal and iron ore 72
Collectibles:
IRA investment in 87
Colleges and universities:
Education costs 77
(See also Qualified tuition 
programs)
Combat zone:
Extension to file return 12
Signing return for spouse 23
Commissions 39
Advance 47
IRAs with brokers 79, 80
Sharing of (kickbacks) 76
Unearned, deduction for 
repayment of 47
Common law marriage 22
Community property 7, 58
IRAs 79
Married filing separately 24
Commuting expenses 104
Employer-provided commuter 
vehicle 50
Compensation 47
(See also Wages and salaries)
Defined for IRA purposes 79
Defined for Roth IRA 
purposes 89
Employee 47
Miscellaneous compensation 47
Nonemployee 75
Unemployment 73
Computation of tax 14
Equal amounts 14
Negative amounts 14
Rounding off dollars 14
Confidential information:
Privacy Act and paperwork 
reduction information 3
Constructive receipt of 
income 13, 61
Contributions 17, 74
(See also Campaign contributions)
(See also Charitable contributions)
Nontaxable combat pay 79
Political 104
Reservist repayments 79
Convenience fees 102
Conversion (See specific retirement 
or IRA plan)
Cooperative housing:
Real estate taxes, deduction 
of 98
T axes that are deductible 
(T able 11-1)100
Copyrights:
Infringement damages 75
Royalties 72
Corporations 71
(See also S corporations)
Director fees as self-employment 
income 75
Corrections (See Errors)
Cost basis:
IRAs for nondeductible 
contributions 83, 86
Cost-of-living allowances 48
Coupon bonds 61
Court awards and damages 
(See Damages from lawsuits)
Cousin 34
Credit cards:
Benefits, taxability of 
insurance 75
Payment of taxes 3
Credit for child and dependent 
care expenses 109
Credit for other dependents 109, 
111
Claiming the credit 111
Limit on credit 111
Qualifying person 111
Credit for the elderly or the 
disabled 109
Credit or debit cards:
Payment of taxes 11
Credits 107, 109
American opportunity 23
Child tax (See Child tax credit)
Credit for other dependents 109
Earned income (See Earned 
income credit)
Lifetime learning (See Lifetime 
learning credit)
Custodial fees 103
Custody of child 29
D
Damages from lawsuits 75
Dating your return 14
Daycare centers 47
(See also Child care)
De minimis benefits 49
Deadlines (See Due dates)
Death (See Decedents)
Death benefits:
Accelerated 70
Life insurance proceeds (See Life 
insurance)
Public safety officers who died or 
were killed in line of duty, tax 
exclusion 70
Death of child 29
Death of dependent 34
Debt instruments (See Bonds or 
Notes)
Debts 19, 71
(See also Bad debts)
Canceled (See Cancellation of 
debt)
Nonrecourse 68
Paid by another 13
Public, gifts to reduce 17
Recourse 68
Refund offset against 10, 15
Deceased taxpayers 
(See Decedents)
Decedents 7
(See also Executors and 
administrators)
Deceased spouse 7
Due dates 11
Filing requirements 7
Savings bonds 58
Spouse's death 22
Standard deduction 93
Declaration of rights of taxpayers:
IRS request for information 3
Deductions 71, 93
(See also Recovery of amounts 
previously deducted)
Casualty losses 105
Changing claim after filing, need 
to amend 19
Itemizing (See Itemized 
deductions)
Pass-through entities 103
Repayments 72
Social security and railroad 
retirement benefits 66
Standard deduction 93, 95
Student loan interest deduction 
(See Student loans)
Theft loss 105
Deferred compensation:
Limit 50
Nonqualified plans 48
Delinquent taxes:
Real estate transactions, tax 
allocation 99
Delivery services 11
Dependent taxpayer test 27
Dependents 8, 26
(See also Child tax credit)
Birth of 34
Born and died within year 13, 37
Death of 34
Filing requirements 8
Earned income, unearned 
income, and gross income 
levels (T able 1-2)7
Married, filing joint return 28, 30
Qualifying child 28
Qualifying relative 33
Social security number 13
Adoption taxpayer 
identification number 13, 
37
Alien dependents 37
Standard deduction for 94
Dependents not allowed to claim 
dependents 27
Depletion allowance 72
Deposits:
Loss on 103
Depreciation:
Home computer 103
Differential wage payments 48
Differential wages:
Wages for reservists:
Military reserves 52
Direct deposit of refunds 15
Directors' fees 75
Disabilities, persons with:
Accrued leave payment 53
Armed Forces 52
Blind (See Blind persons)
Cafeteria plans 53
Credit for (See Elderly or 
disabled, credit for)
Insurance costs 53
Military and government 
pensions 53
Public assistance benefits 73
Reporting of disability pension 
income 53
Retirement, pensions, and 
profit-sharing plans 53
Signing of return by 
court-appointed 
representative 15
Social security and railroad 
retirement benefits, 
deductions for 66
Workers' compensation 54
Disabled:
Child 29
Dependent 34
Disaster Assistance Act of 1988:
Withholding 40
Disaster relief 53, 74
(See also T errorist attacks)
Disaster Relief and Emergency 
Assistance Act:
Grants 74
Unemployment assistance 73
Grants or payments 74
Disclosure statement 20
Discount, bonds and notes issued 
at 60
Distributions:
Qualified charitable 86
Required minimum 
distributions 84, 86
(See also Individual retirement 
arrangements (IRAs))
Dividends:
Alaska Permanent Fund 
(See Alaska Permanent Fund 
dividends)
Fees to collect 103
Stockholder debts when canceled 
as 68
Divorced parents 29, 33
Divorced taxpayers 74
(See also Alimony)
Child custody 29
Estimated tax payments 45
Filing status 22
IRAs 80, 85
Real estate taxes, allocation 
of 99
Publication 17 (2023) 131

Page 134 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Domestic help:
Withholding 38
Domestic help, can’t be claimed 
as dependent 27
Donations (See Charitable 
contributions)
Down payment assistance 75
Dual-status taxpayers 8
Joint returns not available 23
Standard deduction 93
Due dates 10, 11
2023 dates (T able 1-5)11
Extension (See Extension of time 
to file)
Nonresident aliens' returns 11
Dues:
Club 104
Dwelling units:
Cooperative (See Cooperative 
housing)
E
E-file 3, 6, 8
Extensions of time to file 11
On time filing 11
Early withdrawal from deferred 
interest account:
Higher education expenses, 
exception from penalty 78
IRAs:
Early distributions, defined 88
Penalties 86, 88
Earned income:
Defined:
For purposes of standard 
deduction 94
Dependent filing requirements 
(T able 1-2)7
Earned income credit 109
Filing claim 8
Married filing separately 23
Education:
Savings bond program 59
Education credits:
Married filing separately 23
Education expenses:
Employer-provided 
(See Educational assistance)
T uition (See Qualified tuition 
programs)
Educational assistance:
Employer-provided 49
Scholarships (See Scholarships 
and fellowships)
T uition (See Qualified tuition 
programs)
EIC (See Earned income credit)
Elderly or disabled, credit for:
Married filing separately 23
Elderly persons:
Credit for (See Elderly or 
disabled, credit for)
Exemption from withholding 39
Home for the aged 35
Long-term care (See Long-term 
care insurance contracts)
Nutrition Program for the 
Elderly 74
Standard deduction for age 65 or 
older 93
T ax Counseling for the Elderly10
Election precinct officials:
Fees, reporting of 76
Elective deferrals:
Limits 50
Electronic filing (See E-file)
Electronic payment options 3
Electronic reporting:
Returns (See E-file)
Embezzlement:
Reporting embezzled funds 76
Emergency medical service 
personnel:
Life insurance proceeds when 
death in line of duty 70
Emotional distress damages 75
Employee benefits 48, 49
(See also Fringe benefits)
Employee business expenses:
Reimbursements 39, 47
Returning excess 39
Employee expenses:
Home computer 103
Miscellaneous 102
Employees 39, 48, 49
(See also Fringe benefits)
Awards for service 47
Business expenses 
(See Employee business 
expenses)
Form W-4 to be filled out when 
starting new job 39
Fringe benefits 39
Jury duty pay 76
Overseas employment 
(See Foreign employment)
Employers:
E-file options 10
Educational assistance from 
(See Educational assistance)
Form W-4, having new employees 
fill out 39
Overseas employment 
(See Foreign employment)
Withholding rules 39
Employment:
Agency fees 75
T axes48
(See also Social security and 
Medicare taxes)
FICA withholding 12
(See also Withholding)
Employment taxes 37, 38, 44
Endowment proceeds 70
Energy assistance 74
Energy conservation:
Measures and modifications 75
Subsidies 75
Utility rebates 78
Equitable relief (See Innocent 
spouse relief)
Errors:
Corrected wage and tax 
statement 44
Discovery after filing, need to 
amend return 18
Refunds 18
Escrow:
T axes placed in, when 
deductible 99
Estate beneficiaries:
IRAs (See Individual retirement 
arrangements (IRAs))
Losses of estate 75
Receiving income from estate 75
Estate tax:
Deduction 101
Estates 75
(See also Estate beneficiaries)
Income 75
T ax101, 105
(See also Estate tax)
Estimated:
Credit for 44
Payment vouchers 43
Estimated tax 37
Amount to pay to avoid 
penalty 42
Avoiding 41
Change in estimated tax 43
Credit for 37, 44
Definition 37
Divorced taxpayers 45
Figuring amount of tax 42
First period, no income subject to 
estimated tax in 42
Fiscal year taxpayers 42
Married taxpayers 42
Name change 44
Not required 41
Overpayment applied to 15
Payment vouchers 43
Payments 16, 43
Figuring amount of each 
payment 42
Schedule 42
When to start 42
Who must make 41
Penalty for underpayment 37, 43, 
45
Saturday, Sunday, holiday rule 42
Separate returns 44
Social security or railroad 
retirement benefits 64
State and local income taxes, 
deduction of 97
Unemployment compensation 73
Excise taxes 86
(See also Penalties)
Deductibility (T able 11-1)100
IRAs for failure to take minimum 
distributions 86
Roth IRAs 91
Exclusions from gross income:
Accelerated death benefits 70
Canceled debt 69
Commuting benefits for 
employees 50
De minimis benefits 49
Disability pensions of federal 
employees and military 53
Education Savings Bond 
Program 76
Educational assistance from 
employer 49
Elective deferrals, limit on 
exclusion 50
Employee awards 47
Energy conservation 
subsidies 75, 78
Foreign earned income 3
Frozen deposit interest 76
Group-term life insurance 50
Long-term care insurance 
contracts 53, 54
Parking fees, 
employer-provided 50
Public safety officers who died or 
were killed in line of duty, 
death benefits 70
Sale of home 77
Scholarships 77
Strike benefits 77
Executors and administrators 7
Exempt-interest dividends 56
Exemptions:
From withholding 39
Expenses paid by another 75
Extension of time to file 11
Automatic 11
Citizens outside U.S. 11
E-file options 11
Inclusion on return 11
F
Failure to comply with tax laws 
(See Penalties)
Fair rental value 36
Family 8, 110
(See also Child tax credit)
(See also Children)
Farmers:
Estimated tax 41
Withholding 38
Farming:
Activity not for profit 74
Canceled debt, treatment of 69
Federal employees:
Accrued leave payment 48
Cost-of-living allowances 48
Disability pensions 53
Based on years of service 53
Exclusion, conditions for 53
T errorist attack53
FECA payments 54
Federal Employees' 
Compensation Act (FECA) 
payments 54
Federal government:
Employees (See Federal 
employees)
Federal income tax:
Not deductible 101
Deductibility (T able 11-1)100
Federal judges:
Employer retirement plan 
coverage 80
Fees 75
(See also specific types of 
deductions and income)
Professional license 104
Fellowships (See Scholarships and 
fellowships)
FICA withholding 12, 37, 48
(See also Social security and 
Medicare taxes)
(See also Withholding)
Fiduciaries 7, 79, 80
(See also Executors and 
administrators)
(See also T rustees)
Fees for services 75
Prohibited transactions 87
Figuring taxes and credits 63, 107
(See also Worksheets)
Filing requirements 6-21, 23
(See also Married filing separately)
Calendar year filers 11
Citizens outside U.S. 8
Dependents 7, 8
Electronic (See E-file)
Extensions 11
Gross income levels 
(T able 1-1)6
Individual taxpayers 7
Joint filing 22, 23
(See also Joint returns)
Late filing penalties 
(See Penalties)
Most taxpayers (T able 1-1)6
Unmarried persons (See Single 
taxpayers)
When to file 11
Where to file 17
Who must file 7, 8
Filing status 7, 21-25
Annulled marriages 22
Change to, after time of filing 19
Divorced taxpayers 22
Head of household 22, 24
Qualifying person to file as 24
Joint returns 22
Married filing separately 23
Surviving spouse 22
Unmarried persons 7, 22
(See also Single taxpayers)
Final return for decedent:
Standard deduction 93
Financial institutions 79
(See also Banks)
Financially disabled persons 19
Fines 11, 20, 21
(See also Penalties)
132 Publication 17 (2023)

Page 135 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Fines (Cont.)
Deductibility 104
Firefighters:
Life insurance proceeds when 
death in line of duty 70
Volunteer firefighters:
IRAs 81
Fiscal year 13, 42
Fishermen:
Estimated tax 41
Indian fishing rights 76
Food benefits:
Nutrition program for the 
elderly 74
Food stamps 35
Foreign employment 8, 52
Employment abroad 52
Social security and Medicare 
taxes 52
U.S. citizen 52
Waiver of alien status 52
Foreign governments, employees 
of 52
Foreign income:
Earned income exclusion 3
Reporting of 3
Foreign income taxes:
Deduction of 98
Form 1116 to claim credit 101
Schedule A or Form 1040 or 
1040-SR reporting 101
Definition of 97
Foreign nationals (See Resident 
aliens)
Foreign students 28
Forgiveness of debt 
(See Cancellation of debt)
Form 11, 51, 63
1040 26, 109
Alien taxpayer identification 
numbers 37
Armed Forces' retirement 
pay 52
Child care providers 47
Clergy pension 51
Corporate director fees 75
Disability retirement pay 53
FECA benefits 54
Foster-care providers 76
Kickbacks 76
Notary fees 76
Oil, gas, or mineral interest 
royalties 72
Rental income and 
expenses 72
Wages and salary 
reporting 47
Workers' compensation 54
1040 or 1040-SR:
Address 17
Attachments to 14
IRAs 87, 89
Presidential Election 
Campaign Fund 14
Railroad retirement benefits, 
reporting on 64
Social security benefits, 
reporting on 64
Use of 22, 23
1040 or 1040-SR, Schedule A:
Charitable contributions 17
1040 or 1040-SR, 
Schedule SE 8
1040-NR:
Nonresident alien return 11
1040-X:
Amended individual return 19
Annulled marriages 22
Change of filing status 24
Completing 19
Filing 19
Itemized deduction, change to 
standard deduction 95
Standard deduction, change 
to itemized deductions 95
1040, Schedule A:
Unearned commission, 
deduction for repayment 
of 47
1040, Schedule C:
Barter income 67
Child care providers 47
Corporate director fees 75
Forgiveness of debts 68
Foster-care providers 76
Kickbacks 76
Notary fees 76
Oil, gas, or mineral interest 
royalties 72
Rental income and 
expenses 72
1040, Schedule E:
Royalties 72
1040, Schedule SE 51
1065:
Partnership income 70
1098:
Mortgage interest 
statement 71
1099:
T axable income report12
1099-B:
Barter income 68
1099-C:
Cancellation of debt 68
1099-DIV:
Dividend income 
statement 51
1099-G:
State tax refunds 71
1099-INT 55, 62
1099-MISC:
Nonemployee 
compensation 75
1099-OID 61
1099-R 59
IRA distributions 87, 89
Life insurance policy 
surrendered for cash 70
Retirement plan 
distributions 14
1120S:
S corporation income 71
2555 111
2848:
Power of attorney and 
declaration of 
representative 15, 23
3115 58
3800:
General business credit 20
4506 17
4506-T:
T ax return transcript 
request 17
4868 11, 37
Automatic extension of time to 
file 11, 37
Filing electronic form 11
Filing paper form 11
5329:
Required minimum 
distributions, failure to 
take 89
56:
Notice Concerning Fiduciary 
Relationship 15
6251 108
8275:
Disclosure statement 20
8275-R:
Regulation disclosure 
statement 21
8379:
Injured spouse claim 15
8606:
IRA contributions, 
Nondeductible 78, 83, 87
IRA contributions, 
Recharacterization of 86
8615 55
8814 55
8815 59
8818 60
8822:
Change of address 18
8839:
Qualified adoption 
expenses 49
8853:
Accelerated death 
benefits 70
Archer MSAs and long-term 
care insurance 
contracts 48
8857:
Innocent spouse relief 23
8879:
Authorization for E-file 
provider to use 
self-selected PIN 10
9465:
Installment agreement 
request 16
Form 8919:
Uncollected social security 
and Medicare tax on 
wages 47
RRB-1042S:
Railroad retirement benefits 
for nonresident aliens 63
RRB-1099:
Railroad retirement 
benefits 62, 63
SS-5:
Social security number 
request 13, 37
SSA-1042S:
Social security benefits for 
nonresident aliens 63
SSA-1099:
Social security benefits 62
W-2:
Election precinct officials' 
fees 76
Employer retirement plan 
participation indicated 80
Employer-reported income 
statement 12, 14, 47, 48, 
51
Fringe benefits 48, 49
W-2G:
Gambling winnings 
withholding statement 76
W-4V:
Voluntary withholding 
request 73
W-7:
Individual taxpayer 
identification number 
request 37
W-7A:
Adoption taxpayer 
identification number 
request 14, 37
Form 1040:
Estimated tax payments 44
Gambling winnings 40
Overpayment offset against next 
year's tax 43
Form 1040 or 1040-SR:
Foreign income taxes, deduction 
of 101
Schedule A:
State and local income taxes, 
deduction of 101
State benefit funds, 
mandatory contributions 
to 98
T axes, deduction of101
Schedule C:
Real estate or personal 
property taxes on property 
used in business, 
deduction of 101
Schedule E:
Real estate or personal 
property taxes on rental 
property, deduction of 101
Schedule F:
Real estate or personal 
property taxes on property 
used in business, 
deduction of 101
Self-employment tax, deduction 
of 101
Form 1040-ES:
Estimated tax 42, 44
Form 1099-K:
Payment card and third-party 
network transactions 77
Form 1099-MISC:
Withheld state and local taxes 97
Form 1099-NEC:
Withheld state and local taxes 97
Form 1099-R:
Withheld state and local taxes 
shown on 97
Form 1099-S:
Real estate transactions 
proceeds 99
Form 1116:
Foreign tax credit 101
Form 8332:
Release of exemption to 
noncustodial parent 30
Form W-2:
Employer-reported income 
statement 44
Filing with return 44
Separate form from each 
employer 44
Withheld state and local taxes 97
Form W-2c:
Corrected wage and tax 
statement 44
Form W-2G:
Gambling winnings withholding 
statement 40, 44
Withheld state and local taxes 
shown on 97
Form W-4:
Employee withholding allowance 
certificate 38, 39, 41
Form W-4S:
Sick pay withholding request 40
Form W-4V 40
Unemployment compensation, 
voluntary withholding 
request 40
Form(s) 1099 44
Foster care:
Care providers' payments 76
Child tax credit 110
Difficulty-of-care payments 76
Emergency foster care, 
maintaining space in home 
for 76
Foster care payments and 
expenses 30, 35
Foster child 28, 30, 34, 35
Foster Grandparent Program 52
Found property 76
Fraud:
Penalties 20, 39
Publication 17 (2023) 133

Page 136 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Fraud (Cont.)
Reporting anonymously to IRS 3
Fringe benefits:
Accident and health 
insurance 48
Accounting period 48
Adoption, employer 
assistance 49
Archer MSA contributions 48
De minimis benefits 49
Education assistance 49
Form W-2 48
Group-term life insurance 
premiums 49
Holiday gifts 49
Retirement planning services 50
T axable income48
T ransportation50
Withholding 39
Frozen deposits:
Interest on 76
IRA rollover period extension 84
Funeral expenses 36
Funerals:
Clergy, payment for 51
Expenses 103
G
Gains and losses 23
(See also Losses)
Claim for refund for loss 20
Gambling 105
Hobby losses 76
Passive activity 24
Gambling winnings and 
losses 76, 105
Withholding 40, 44
Garbage pickup:
Deductibility (T able 11-1)100
Garnishment and attachment 13
Gas royalties 72
Gems:
IRA prohibited transactions in 87
General due dates, estimated 
tax 42
GI Bill benefits 36
Gift taxes:
Not deductible 101
Gifts:
Holiday gifts 49
Not taxed 76
T o reduce the public debt17
Gold and silver:
IRA investments in 87
Government employees:
Federal (See Federal employees)
Grants, disaster relief 74
Gratuities (See Tip income)
Gross income:
Age, higher filing threshold after 
65 7
Defined 7
Filing requirements 
(T able 1-1)6
Dependent filing requirements 
(T able 1-2)7
Gross income test 34
Group-term life insurance:
Accidental death benefits 49
Definition 49
Exclusion from income 50
Limitation on 49
Permanent benefits 49
T axable cost, calculation of49
Guam:
Income from 8
H
HAMP:
Home affordable modification:
Pay-for-performance 74
Handicapped persons 
(See Disabilities, persons with)
Head of household 22, 24
Health:
Flexible spending 
arrangement 48
Health insurance 48
(See also Accident insurance)
Reimbursement arrangement 49
Savings account 49
Health coverage tax credit 8
Health insurance premiums 36
Health Spa 104
Help (See T ax help)
High income taxpayers:
Estimated tax 41
Hobbies 103
Activity not for profit 74
Losses 76
Holiday gifts 49
Holiday, deadline falling on 42
Home:
Aged, home for 35
Cost of keeping up 24
Worksheet 25
Security system 104
Homeowners' associations:
Charges 101
Deductibility (T able 11-1)100
Hope credit:
Married filing separately 23
Host 70
Household furnishings:
Antiques (See Collectibles)
Household members 22
(See also Head of household)
Household workers (See Domestic 
help)
Household workers, can’t claim as 
dependent 27
Housing 24
(See also Home)
Clergy 51
Cooperative (See Cooperative 
housing)
I
Icons, use of 3, 4
Identity theft 2, 21
Illegal activities:
Reporting of 76
Income 47, 67, 74
(See also Alimony)
(See also Wages and salaries)
Bartering 67
Canceled debts 68
Constructive receipt of 13, 61
Gross 34
Illegal activities 77
Interest 54
Jury duty pay 76
Life insurance proceeds 70
Nonemployee compensation 75
Paid to agent 13
Paid to third party 13
Partnership 70
Prepaid 13
Recovery 71
Royalties 72
S corporation 71
T ax exempt35
Underreported 19
Income taxes:
Federal (See Federal income tax)
Foreign (See Foreign income 
taxes)
State or local (See State or local 
income taxes)
Income-producing expenses 102
Indians:
Fishing rights 76
T axes collected by tribal 
governments, deduction of 97
Individual retirement 
arrangements (IRAs) 78, 84, 
89
(See also Rollovers)
(See also Roth IRAs)
Administrative fees 79, 80, 103
Age 59 1/2 for distribution 88
Exception to rule 88
Age 72:
Distributions required at 86, 
88
Compensation, defined 79
Contribution limits 79
Age 50 or older, 79
Under age 50, 79
Contributions 23, 24
Designating year for which 
contribution is made 80
Excess 87
Filing before contribution is 
made 80
Nondeductible 83
Not required annually 80
Roth IRA contribution for same 
year 90
Time of 80
Withdrawal before filing due 
date 86
Cost basis 83, 86
Deduction for 80
Participant covered by 
employer retirement plan 
(T able 9-1)81
Participant not covered by 
employer retirement plan 
(T able 9-2)81
Phaseout 81
Definition of 79
Distributions:
At age 59 1/2 88
Required minimum 
distributions (See this 
heading: Required 
distributions)
Divorced taxpayers 85
Early distributions (See Early 
withdrawal from deferred 
interest account)
Employer retirement plan 
participants 80, 81
Establishing account 79
Time of 79
Where to open account 79
Excess contributions 87
Figuring modified AGI (Worksheet 
9-1) 83
Forms to use:
Form 1099-R for reporting 
distributions 87
Form 8606 for nondeductible 
contributions 78
Inherited IRAs 76, 83, 84
Required distributions 86
Interest on, treatment of 78
Kay Bailey Hutchison Spousal 
IRAs 79-81
Married couples (See this 
heading: Kay Bailey Hutchison 
Spousal IRAs)
Modified adjusted gross income 
(MAGI):
Computation of 81
Effect on deduction if covered 
by employer retirement 
plan (T able 9-1)81
Effect on deduction if not 
covered by employer 
retirement plan 
(T able 9-2)81
Worksheet 9-1 83
Nondeductible contributions 83
Early withdrawal 88
T ax on earnings on83
Ordinary income, distributions 
as 86
Penalties 87
Early distributions (See Early 
withdrawal from deferred 
interest account)
Excess contributions 87
Form 8606 not filed for 
nondeductible 
contributions 78, 83
Overstatement of 
nondeductible 
contributions 83
Prohibited transactions 87
Required distributions, failure 
to take 86, 88
Prohibited transactions 87
Recharacterization of 
contribution 85
Reporting of:
Distributions 87
Recharacterization of 
contributions 86
Required distributions 84, 86
Excess accumulations 88
Retirement savings contribution 
credit 23
Self-employed persons 79
T axability88
Distributions 86
Time of taxation 79
T ransfers permitted84
T o Roth IRAs84, 85
T rustee administrative fees103
T rustee-to-trustee transfers84
IRA to Roth IRA 91
T ypes of79
Withdrawals 86, 87
Early (See Early withdrawal 
from deferred interest 
account)
Required (See this heading: 
Required distributions)
Withholding 14, 40, 87
Individual taxpayer identification 
number (ITIN) 14, 37
Individual taxpayers (See Single 
taxpayers)
Information returns 12, 14, 47, 48, 
51
(See also Form 1099)
(See also Form W-2)
Partnerships to provide 70
Inheritance 75
(See also Estate beneficiaries)
IRAs (See Individual retirement 
arrangements (IRAs))
Not taxed 76
Inheritance tax:
Deductibility of 101
Deduction 101
Injured spouse 15
Claim for refund 15
Innocent spouse relief:
Form 8857 23
Joint returns 23
Insolvency:
Canceled debt not deemed to be 
income 69
Installment agreements 16
134 Publication 17 (2023)

Page 137 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Insurance:
Accident (See Accident 
insurance)
Life 40, 49
(See also Group-term life 
insurance)
(See also Life insurance)
Reimbursements:
From casualty insurance 74
Insurance companies:
State delinquency proceedings, 
IRA distributions not made 
due to 88
Insurance premiums:
Life 36, 104
Medical 36
Paid in advance 56
Insurance proceeds:
Dividends, interest on 56
Installment payments 60
Life 60
Interest:
Fees to collect 103
Frozen deposits 56
Usurious 56
Interest income 54
Form 1099-INT 12
Frozen deposits, from 76
Recovery of income, on 71
Savings bonds 76
(See also U.S. savings bonds)
T ax refunds, from18
Interest payments 71
(See also Mortgages)
Canceled debt including 68
Student loans deduction 23
Interference with business 
operations:
Damages as income 75
Internal Revenue Service (IRS):
Fraud or misconduct of employee, 
reporting anonymously 3
International employment 
(See Foreign employment)
International organizations, 
employees of 52
Internet:
Electronic filing over (See E-file)
Investments:
Fees 103
Seminars 104
IRAs (See Individual retirement 
arrangements (IRAs))
Itemized deductions:
Changing from standard to 
itemized deduction (or vice 
versa) 95
Choosing to itemize 94
Form 1040 to be used 71
Married filing separately 23, 95
One spouse has itemized 93
Recovery 71
Standard deduction to be 
compared with 94
State tax, for 95
ITIN (See Individual taxpayer 
identification number (ITIN))
ITINs (See Individual taxpayer 
identification number (ITIN))
J
Job search:
Deduction of expenses for 
Interviews 76
Joint accounts 55
Joint return test 28, 30
Joint returns:
Accounting period 22
After separate return 24
Deceased spouse 22
Dependents on 34
Divorced taxpayers 22
Estimated tax 42
Extension for citizens outside 
U.S. 12
Filing status 22
Fraud penalty 21
Guardian of spouse, signing 
as 23
Injured spouse 15
Innocent spouse 23
Nonresident or dual-status alien 
spouse 23
Responsibility for 22
Separate return after joint 24
Signing 15, 23
Social security and railroad 
retirement benefits 67
State and local income taxes, 
deduction of 98
Judges, federal:
Employer retirement plan 
coverage 80
Jury duty pay 76
K
Kickbacks 76
Kiddie tax (See Children, 
subheading: Unearned income of)
Kidnapped children:
Qualifying child 29
Qualifying relative 33
L
Labor unions 40
Dues and fees 77
Sick pay withholding under union 
agreements 40
Strike and lockout benefits 77
Unemployment compensation 
payments from 73
Late filing 3
Penalties 11, 20
Late payment:
Penalties on tax payments 20
Law enforcement officers:
Life insurance proceeds when 
death in line of duty 70
Legal expenses 103, 104
Liability insurance:
Reimbursements from 74
License fees:
Deductibility of 101
Nondeductibility of 103
Life insurance 49, 70
(See also Accelerated death 
benefits)
(See also Group-term life insurance)
Form 1099-R for surrender of 
policy for cash 70
Premiums 104
Proceeds 60
As income 70
Public safety officers who died or 
were killed in line of duty, tax 
exclusion 70
Surrender of policy for cash 70
Withholding 40
Life insurance premiums 36
Lifetime learning credit:
Married filing separately 23
Limits:
Miscellaneous deductions 102
Loans 19
(See also Debts)
Lobbying expenses 104
Local assessments:
Deductibility of 100
Local income taxes, itemized 
deductions 95
Local law violated 34
Lockout benefits 77
Lodging 36
Long-term care insurance 
contracts 53
Chronically ill individual 54, 70
Exclusion, limit of 54
Qualified services defined 54
Losses 20, 24
(See also Gains and losses)
Capital 23
Casualty 102, 105
Gambling (See Gambling 
winnings and losses)
Theft 102, 105
Lost property 104
Lotteries and raffles 76
(See also Gambling winnings and 
losses)
M
MAGI (See Modified adjusted gross 
income (MAGI))
Mailing returns (See T ax returns)
Married dependents, filing joint 
return 28, 30
Married filing separately 23
Community property states 24
Credits, treatment of 23
Deductions:
Changing method from or to 
itemized deductions 95
T reatment of23
Earned income credit 23
How to file 23
Itemized deductions 23, 95
One spouse has itemized so 
other must as well 93
Joint state and local income taxes 
filed, but separate federal 
returns 97
Rollovers 23
Social security and railroad 
retirement benefits 64
State and local income taxes 97
T enants by the entirety, allocation 
of real estate taxes 99
Married taxpayers 22-24
(See also Joint returns)
(See also Married filing separately)
Age 65 or older spouse:
Standard deduction 94
Blind spouse:
Standard deduction 94
Deceased spouse 6, 7, 22
(See also Surviving spouse)
Dual-status alien spouse 23
Estimated tax 42
Filing status 6, 7, 22
IRAs 79, 80
Spouse covered by employer 
plan 80, 81
Living apart 22
Nonresident alien spouse 14, 23
Roth IRAs 89
Signatures when spouse unable 
to sign 15
Social security or railroad 
retirement benefits, 
taxability 63
Mass transit passes, 
employer-provided 50
Maximum age. The age restriction 
for contributions to a 
traditional IRA has been 
eliminated.:
T raditional IRA contributions78
Medical and dental expenses:
Reimbursements, treatment 
of 54
Medical insurance (See Accident 
insurance)
Medical insurance premiums 36
Medical savings accounts 
(MSAs) 48, 76
(See also Archer MSAs)
Medicare Advantage MSA 76
Medicare 48, 52
(See also Social security and 
Medicare taxes)
Benefits 74
Medicare Advantage MSA 
(See Medical savings 
accounts (MSAs))
Medicare taxes, not support 36
Member of household or 
relationship test 34
Mentally incompetent persons 53
(See also Disabilities, persons with)
Signing of return by 
court-appointed 
representative 15
Mexico:
Resident of 28, 34
Military (See Armed forces)
Mineral royalties 72
Ministers (See Clergy)
Miscellaneous deductions 101
Missing children:
Photographs of, included in IRS 
publications 3
Mistakes (See Errors)
Modified adjusted gross income 
(MAGI):
IRAs, computation for:
Effect on deduction if covered 
by employer retirement 
plan (T able 9-1)81, 83
Effect on deduction if not 
covered by employer 
retirement plan 
(T able 9-2)81
Worksheet 9-1 83
Roth IRAs, computation for 89
Phaseout (T able 9-3)89
Worksheet 9-2 89
Money market certificates 56
Mortgage:
Relief 68
Mortgages:
Assistance payments 74
Discounted mortgage loan 68
Interest:
Refund of 71
MSAs (See Medical savings 
accounts (MSAs))
Multiple support agreement 36
Municipal bonds 60
Mutual funds:
Nonpublicly offered 103
N
Name change 13, 44
National Housing Act:
Mortgage assistance 74
National of the United States 28
Native Americans (See Indians)
Negligence penalties 20
Net operating losses:
Refund of carryback 20
New Jersey Nonoccupational 
Disability Benefit Fund 98
New Jersey Unemployment 
Compensation Fund 98
New York Nonoccupational 
Disability Benefit Fund 98
Nobel Prize 77
Nominees 55, 61
Nonemployee compensation 75
Nonresident aliens 8
Due dates 11
Estimated tax 41
Publication 17 (2023) 135

Page 138 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Nonresident aliens (Cont.)
Individual taxpayer identification 
number (ITIN) 14
Spouse 14
Joint returns not available 23
Separated 24
Standard deduction 93
T axpayer identification 
number 37
Waiver of alien status 52
Northern Mariana Islands:
Income from 8
Not-for-profit activities 74
Notary fees 76
Notes:
Discounted 48, 60
Received for services 48
Nursing homes:
Insurance for care in (See Long-
term care insurance contracts)
Nutrition Program for the 
Elderly 74
O
OASDI 74
Occupational taxes:
Deduction of:
T axes that are deductible 
(T able 11-1)100
Office rent, deductibility of 102
Offset against debts 10, 15
Oil, gas, and minerals:
Future production sold 73
Royalties from 72
Schedule C or C-EZ 72
Sale of property interest 73
Options 51
Ordinary gain and loss (See Gains 
and losses)
Original issue discount (OID) 60
Other taxes 108
Outplacement services 48
Overpayment of tax 15
(See also T ax refunds)
Overseas work (See Foreign 
employment)
Overtime pay 39
P
Paper vs. electronic return (See E-
file)
Paperwork Reduction Act of 
1980 3
Parental responsibility 
(See Children)
Parents who never married 30
Parents, divorced or 
separated 29
Parking fees:
Employer-provided fringe benefit:
Exclusion from income 50
Partners and partnerships 103
Income 70
Pass-through entities 103
Passive activity:
Losses 24
Patents:
Infringement damages 75
Royalties 72
Payment of estimated tax 43
By check or money order 43
Credit an overpayment 43
Payment of tax 3, 10, 16, 19, 43
By credit or debit card 11
Delivery services 11
Estimated tax 16
Installment agreements 
(See Installment agreements)
Late payment penalties 20
Payments 108, 109
Disaster relief 74
Payroll deductions 101
Payroll taxes 48
(See also Social security and 
Medicare taxes)
Peace Corps allowances 52
Penalties 43, 45
Accuracy-related 20
Backup withholding 41
Civil penalties 20
Criminal 21
Deductibility 104
Defenses 20
Estimated tax (See this heading: 
Underpayment of estimated 
tax)
Failure to include social security 
number 14, 21
Failure to pay tax 20
Form 8606 not filed for 
nondeductible IRA 
contributions 78, 83
Fraud 20, 21
Frivolous tax submission 21
Interest on 16
IRAs 87
Early distributions 88
Excess contributions 87
Form 8606 not filed for 
nondeductible 
contributions 78, 83
Overstatement of 
nondeductible 
contributions 83
Required distributions, failure 
to take 86
Late filing 11, 20
Exception 20
Late payment 20
Negligence 20
Reportable transaction 
understatements 20
Roth IRAs:
Conversion contributions 
withdrawn in 5-year 
period 92
Excess contributions 91
Substantial understatement of 
income tax 20
T ax evasion21
Underpayment of estimated 
tax 37, 43, 45
Willful failure to file 21
Withholding 39, 41
Pennsylvania Unemployment 
Compensation Fund 98
Pensions 38, 62
(See also Railroad retirement 
benefits)
Clergy 51
Contributions:
Retirement savings 
contribution credit 23
T axation of50
Decedent's unrecovered 
investment in 14
Disability pensions 53
Elective deferral limitation 50
Employer plans:
Benefits from previous 
employer's plan 80
Rollover to IRA 85, 91
Situations in which no 
coverage 80
Inherited pensions 76
Military (See Armed Forces)
Unrecovered investment in 106
Withholding 14, 40
Per capita taxes:
Deductibility of 101
Personal exemption 37
Personal injury suits:
Damages from 75
Personal property:
Rental income from 72
Personal property taxes:
Deduction of 101
Schedule A, C, E, or F (Form 
1040) 101
T axes (See Personal property 
taxes)
Personal representatives 
(See Fiduciaries)
Persons with disabilities 
(See Disabilities, persons with)
Place for filing 17
Political campaign expenses 104
Political contributions 
(See Campaign contributions)
Power of attorney 15, 23
Premature distributions (See Early 
withdrawal from deferred interest 
account)
Prepaid:
Insurance 56
Preparers of tax returns 15
Presidential Election Campaign 
Fund 14
Price reduced after purchase 69
Principal residence (See Home)
Privacy Act and paperwork 
reduction information 3
Private delivery services 11
Prizes and awards 47, 77
(See also Bonuses)
Exclusion from income 47
Pulitzer, Nobel, and similar 
prizes 77
Scholarship prizes 77
Professional license fees 104
Professional Reputation 104
Profit-sharing plans:
Withholding 14, 40
Property:
Found 76
Stolen 77
Public assistance benefits 73
Public debt:
Gifts to reduce 17
Public transportation passes, 
employer-provided 50
Publications (See T ax help)
Puerto Rico:
Residents of 8
Pulitzer Prize 77
Punitive damages:
As income 75
Q
Qualified opportunity fund 77
Qualified plans 84
(See also Rollovers)
Qualified tuition programs 77
Qualifying child 28
Qualifying relative 33
R
Raffles 76
Railroad retirement 
benefits 62-67, 77
Deductions related to 66
Employer retirement plans 
different from 80
Equivalent tier 1 (social security 
equivalent benefit 
(SSEB)) 62, 77
Estimated tax 64
Form RRB-1042S for nonresident 
aliens 63
Form RRB-1099 62
Joint returns 67
Lump-sum election 64
Married filing separately 23, 64
Repayment of benefits 64
Reporting of 64
T axability of63, 64
Withholding 40
Not tax deductible 101
Withholding for 64
Railroad Unemployment 
Insurance Act 54
Real estate:
Canceled business debt, 
treatment of 69
Division of real estate taxes 98
Form 1099-S to report sale 
proceeds 99
Itemized charges for services not 
deductible 100
Real estate-related items not 
deductible 100
T ransfer taxes101
Real estate taxes:
Assessments (See Local 
assessments)
Cooperative housing 98
deduction of 98
Deduction of:
List of deductible taxes 
(T able 11-1)100
Schedule A, C, E, or F (Form 
1040) 101
Refund, treatment of 99
Rebates (See Refunds)
Recharacterization:
IRA contributions 85
Recordkeeping:
Gambling 105
Savings bonds used for 
education 60
Recordkeeping requirements 17
Basic records 17
Copies of returns 17
Electronic records 17
Gambling 76
Period of retention 18
Proof of payments 18
Why keep records 17
Recovery of amounts previously 
deducted 71
Itemized deductions 71
Mortgage interest refund 71
Over multiple years 71
T ax refunds71
Refunds 108
State tax 71
T axes (See T ax refunds)
Rehabilitative program 
payments 52
Reimbursement 71
(See also Recovery of amounts 
previously deducted)
Employee business expenses 47
Relationship test 28, 34
Relative, qualifying 33
Relief fund contributions 105
Religious organizations 8, 51
(See also Clergy)
Rental income and expenses:
Increase due to higher real estate 
taxes 101
Deductibility (T able 11-1)100
Losses from rental real estate 
activities 24
Personal property rental 72
Repayments 72
Amount previously included in 
income 106
Railroad retirement benefits 64
Social security benefits 64, 72
Unemployment compensation 73
136 Publication 17 (2023)

Page 139 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Reporting:
Rollovers 85
Required minimum 
distributions 84, 86
(See also Individual retirement 
arrangements (IRAs))
Rescue squad members:
Life insurance proceeds when 
death in line of duty 70
Reservists:
IRAs 80
Repayments 79
Residency:
Home outside U.S. (See Citizens 
outside U.S.)
Residency test 29
Resident aliens:
Estimated tax 41
IRA distributions, withholding 
from 87
Social security number (SSN) 13
Spouse treated as 24
Retired Senior Volunteer 
Program 52
Retirees:
Armed Forces:
T axable income52
Retirement planning services 50
Retirement plans 23, 38, 62
(See also Railroad retirement 
benefits)
(See also Roth IRAs)
Clergy 51
Contributions 50
Credit for (See Retirement 
savings contribution credit)
T axation of50
Decedent's unrecovered 
investment in 14
Disability pensions 53
Elective deferral limitation 50
Employer plans:
Benefits from previous 
employer's plan 80
Rollover to IRA 85, 91
Situations in which no 
coverage 80
Inherited pensions 76
IRAs (See Individual retirement 
arrangements (IRAs))
Military (See Armed Forces)
Withholding 14, 40
Retirement savings contribution 
credit:
Adjusted gross income limit 23
Returns, tax (See T ax returns)
Rewards 77
Rhode Island Temporary Disability 
Benefit Fund 98
Rollovers 84
Definition of 84
Excess due to incorrect rollover 
information 88
From 403 plan to IRA 84
From employer's plan to IRA 84, 
85
From IRA to IRA 84
From IRA to Roth IRA 91
From Roth IRA to Roth IRA 92
From section 457 plan to IRA 84
From SIMPLE IRA to Roth 
IRA 92
Inherited IRAs 84
Married filing separately 23
Partial rollovers 84
Reporting:
From employer's plan to 
IRA 85
IRA to IRA 84
T axability84, 89
Time limits (60-day rule) 84
T reatment of84
Waiting period between 84
Roth IRAs 89-92
(See also Rollovers)
Age:
Distributions after age 
59 1/2 92
No limit for contributions 89
No required distribution 
age 92
Compensation, defined 89
Contribution limits 90
Age 50 or older, 90
Under age 50, 90
Contributions 89
No deduction for 89
Roth IRA only 90
Time to make 91
T o traditional IRA for same 
year 90
Conversion 91
Definition of 89
Distributions:
Qualified distributions 92
Effect of modified AGI on 
contributions (T able 9-3)89
Establishing account 89
Excess contributions 91
IRA transfer to 84, 85
Modified adjusted gross income 
(MAGI) 89
Computation (Worksheet 
9-2) 89
Phaseout (T able 9-3)89
Penalties:
Conversion contributions 
withdrawn in 5-year 
period 92
Excess contributions 91
Recharacterizations 85
Spousal contributions 89
T axability92
Withdrawals 92
Excess contributions 91
Not taxable 92
Rounding off dollars 14
Royalties 72
S
S corporations 103
Shareholders 71
Safe deposit box 103
Salaries (See Wages and salaries)
Sale of home 77
Division of real estate taxes 98
Sale of property:
Personal items 77
Sales and exchanges:
Bonds 60
Saturday, deadline falling on 42
Savings:
Bonds 57, 62
Bonds used for education 59
Certificate 56, 61
Schedule 17, 47, 51, 54
(See also Form 1040)
(See also Form 1040 or 1040-SR)
Form 1040, A-F , R, SE (See Form 
1040)
K-1:
Partnership income 70
S corporation income 71
K-1, Form 1041 55
Schedule A (Form 1040):
Itemized deductions 95
Schedules A–F , R, SE (Form 1040) 
(See Form 1040)
Scholarships 30, 34, 36
Scholarships and fellowships:
Earned income including 94
Exclusion from gross income 77
T eaching or research 
fellowships 77
Section 457 deferred 
compensation plans:
Rollovers:
T o IRAs85, 91
Securities:
Claim for refund 20
Options 51
Stock appreciation rights 48
Self-employed persons 101
(See also Self-employment tax)
Corporate directors as 75
Definition 8
Foreign government or 
international organizations, 
U.S. citizens employed by 8
Gross income 7
IRAs 79
Ministers 8
Nonemployee compensation 75
Self-employment tax:
Deduction of 101
List of deductible taxes 
(T able 11-1)100
Seminars:
Investment-related 104
Senior Companion Program 52
Separate returns (See Married filing 
separately)
Separated parents 29, 33
Separated taxpayers 22
Filing status 23, 24
IRAs 80
Nonresident alien spouse 24
SEPs (See Simplified employee 
pensions (SEPs))
Series EE and E savings 
bonds 57
Series HH and H savings 
bonds 57
Series I savings bonds 57
Service charges 103
Service Corps of Retired 
Executives (SCORE) 52
Severance pay 48
Accrued leave payment 48
Outplacement services 48
Short tax year:
Change in annual accounting 
period 93
Sick pay:
Collective bargaining 
agreements 40
FECA payments 54
Income 48
Railroad Unemployment 
Insurance Act 54
Withholding 39, 40
Signatures 14
Agent, use of 15
Joint returns 23
Mentally incompetent 15
Parent for child 15
Physically disabled 15
Signing your return 9
Silver (See Gold and silver)
SIMPLE plans:
Rollover to Roth IRA 92
Simplified employee pensions 
(SEPs):
IRAs as 79
Single taxpayers 22
Filing requirements 7
Filing status 7, 22
Gross income filing requirements 
(T able 1-1)6
Social security and Medicare 
taxes:
Support, not included in 36
Social security benefits 35, 62, 67
Deductions related to 66
Employer retirement plans 
different from 80
Estimated tax 64
Foreign employer 52
Form SSA-1042S for nonresident 
aliens 63
Form SSA-1099 62
IRAs for recipients of benefits 81
Joint returns 67
Lump-sum election 64
Married filing separately 23, 64
Paid by employer 48
Repayment of benefits 64, 72
Repayments 103
Reporting of 64
T axability of63, 64
Withholding 40
Withholding for 64
Not deductible 101
Social security number (SSN) 13
Child's 2
Number to be obtained at 
birth 37
Correspondence with IRS, include 
SSN 14
Dependents 2, 13
Exception 13
Failure to include penalty 14
Form SS-5 to request number 13
Nonresident alien spouse 14
Resident aliens 13
Spouse 7, 14, 15, 22, 23, 70
(See also Married taxpayers)
Spouse's death 94
SSN (See Social security number 
(SSN))
Stamp taxes:
Real estate transactions and 101
Stamps (See Collectibles)
Standard deduction 93, 95
State:
Obligations, interest on 60
State or local governments:
Employees:
Unemployment 
compensation 73
State or local income taxes 95
Deduction of 97
List of deductible taxes 
(T able 11-1)100
Schedule A (Form 1040) 101
Electronic returns filed with 
federal 9
Exception to deduction 97
Federal changes, effect on 20
Form W-2 to show withheld 
taxes 97
Joint state and local returns but 
federal returns filed 
separately 97
Married filing separately 97
Refunds, treatment of 97, 98
State or local taxes:
Refunds 71
Statute of limitations:
Claim for refund 15
Claim for refunds 19
Stillborn child 29
Stock appreciation rights 48
Stock bonus plans 40
Stock options 51
Stockholders 20
(See also Securities)
Debts 68
Publication 17 (2023) 137

Page 140 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Stockholders' meeting 
expenses 105
Stocks 20
(See also Securities)
Stolen funds:
Reporting of 77
Stolen property 77
Strike benefits 77
Student loans:
Cancellation of debt 68
Interest deduction:
Married filing separately 23
Students:
Defined 28
Exemption from withholding 39
Foreign 28
Loans (See Student loans)
Scholarships (See Scholarships 
and fellowships)
T uition programs, qualified 
(See Qualified tuition 
programs)
Substitute forms 12
Sunday, deadline falling on 42
Supplemental wages 39
Support test:
Qualifying child 30
Qualifying relative 35
Surviving spouse:
Filing status 22
With dependent child 25
Gross income filing requirements 
(T able 1–1)6
Life insurance proceeds paid 
to 70
Single filing status 22
T ax (See Estate tax)
Surviving Spouse (See Surviving 
spouse)
T
Tables and figures:
Estimated tax, who must make 
payments (Figure 4-A) 42
Filing requirements:
Dependents (T able 1-2)7
Gross income levels 
(T able 1-1)6
Head of household, qualifying 
person (T able 2-1)24
Individual retirement 
arrangements (IRAs):
Figuring modified AGI 
(Worksheet 9-1) 83
Modified AGI, effect on 
deduction if covered by 
retirement plan at work 
(T able 9 -1)81
Modified AGI, effect on 
deduction if not covered by 
retirement plan at work 
(T able 9-2)81
Roth IRAs, effect of modified 
AGI on contributions 
(T able 9-3)89
Roth IRAs, modified AGI 
(Worksheet 9-2) 89
Roth IRA and modified adjusted 
gross income (MAGI) 
phaseout (T able 9-3)89
Standard deduction tables 96
T ax returns:
Due dates (T able 1-5)11
Steps to prepare 
(T able 1-6)12
T axes that are deductible 
(T able 11-1)100
Tax computation worksheet 124
Tax Counseling for the Elderly 10
Tax credits (See Credits)
Tax evasion 21
Tax figured by IRS 108
Tax help 3, 10, 127
T ax Counseling for the Elderly10
Volunteer counseling (Volunteer 
Income T ax Assistance 
program) 10, 52
Tax preference items 108
Tax rates 22
Married filing separately 
(Schedule Y-2) 23
Tax refunds:
Agreement with IRS extending 
assessment period, claim 
based on 20
Bad debts 19
Business tax credit 
carrybacks 20
Cashing check 15
Check's expiration date 15
Claim for 18, 20
Limitations period 19
Litigation 20
Direct deposit 15
Erroneous refunds 18
Federal income tax refunds 71
Financially disabled 19
Foreign tax paid or accrued 20
General rules 10
Inquiries 10
Interest on 18, 20, 56
Late filed returns 3
Limits 19
Exceptions 19
More or less than expected 15
Net operating loss carryback 20
Offset:
Against debts 10, 15
Against next year's tax 15
Offset against next year's tax 43
Past-due 10, 18
Real estate taxes, treatment 
of 99
Reduced 20
State and local income tax 
refunds 97, 98
State liability, effect on 20
Under $1 15
Withholding 8
Worthless securities 20
Tax returns 11, 14, 22
(See also Due dates)
(See also Joint Returns)
(See also Signatures)
Aliens 8
Amended 18, 19, 95
(See also Form 1040-X)
Attachments to returns 14
Child 15
Copies of 17
Dating of 14
Filing of 6
(See also Filing requirements)
Forms to use 8
Free preparation help 10
How to file 12
Mailing of 17
Paid preparer 15
Payment with 16
Private delivery services 11
Steps to prepare (T able 1-6)12
Third party designee 14
Who must file 7, 8
Tax Returns:
T ranscript of17
Tax table 112-123
Tax year 11-13
(See also Accounting periods)
Tax-exempt:
Bonds and other obligations 60
Income 105
Interest 60
Tax-exempt income 35
Taxes 38, 97-101, 107
Alternative minimum 108
Business taxes, deduction of 97
Deduction of 97
Schedules to use 101
T ypes of taxes deductible 
(T able 11-1)100
Estate (See Estate tax)
Excise (See Excise taxes)
Federal income taxes, not 
deductible 101
Foreign taxes 97
Income tax, deduction of 98
Gift taxes 101
How to figure
Income taxes, deduction of 97
Indian tribal government taxes, 
deduction of 97
Inheritance tax 101
Kiddie tax (See Children, 
subheading: Unearned 
income of)
Not deductible 101
Personal property taxes:
Deduction of 101
Real estate taxes (See Real 
estate taxes)
Taxes, not support 36
Taxpayer identification number 
(TIN):
Adoption (ATIN) 13
Individual (ITIN) 14, 37
Social security number 
(See Social security number 
(SSN))
Telephones 105
Fraud or misconduct of IRS 
employee, number for 
reporting anonymously 3
Temporary absences 29, 34
Tenants:
By the entirety 55
In common 55
Tenants by the entirety:
Real estate taxes, allocation when 
filing separately 99
Terminal illness:
Accelerated payment of life 
insurance proceeds 
(See Accelerated death 
benefits)
Viatical settlements 70
Terrorist attacks:
Disability pensions for federal 
employees 53
Theft losses 102, 105
Third parties:
Designee for IRS to discuss return 
with 14
Income from taxpayer's property 
paid to 13
Tiebreaker rules 32
Tip income:
Allocated tips 39
Withholding 39
Underwithholding 39
Total support 35
Tour guides:
Free tour for organizing tour 76
Trade Act of 1974:
T rade readjustment allowances 
under 73
Traditional IRAs (See Individual 
retirement arrangements (IRAs))
Transfer taxes:
Real estate transactions and 101
Transit passes 50
Travel and transportation 
expenses:
Commuting expenses:
Employer-provided commuter 
vehicle 50
Expenses paid for others 105
Fringe benefits 50
Job search expenses 76
Parking fees:
Employer-provided fringe 
benefit 50
School children, transporting 
of 77
T ransit pass50
Treasury bills, notes, and 
bonds 60
Treasury Inspector General:
T elephone number to report 
anonymously fraud or 
misconduct of IRS 
employee 3
Treasury notes 56
Trust beneficiaries:
Losses of trust 75
Receiving income from trust 75, 
76
Trustees:
Administrative fees 103
IRA 103
IRAs:
Fees 79, 80
T ransfer from trustee to 
trustee 84, 91
Trusts 75
(See also T rust beneficiaries)
Grantor trusts 75
Income 75
TTY/TDD information 127
Tuition:
Qualified programs 
(See Qualified tuition 
programs)
Tuition programs, qualified 
(See Qualified tuition programs)
Tuition, benefits under GI Bill 36
U
U.S. citizen or resident 28
U.S. national 28
U.S. obligations, interest 56, 57
U.S. savings bonds:
Education, used for 23
Interest on 76
U.S. territories:
Deduction of income tax paid 
to 98
Income from 8
U.S. Treasury bills, notes, and 
bonds 60
U.S. Virgin Islands:
Income from 8
Underpayment penalties 37, 43, 
45
IRS computation 45
Unearned income:
Children 55
Unearned income of child 
(See Children, subheading: 
Unearned income of)
Unemployment compensation 73
Credit card insurance paying 75
Mandatory contributions to state 
funds, deduction of 98
Private fund, from 73
Repayment of benefits 73
Reporting on Form 1040 73
Supplemental benefits 73
Voluntary benefit fund 
contributions 105
Withholding 40, 73
138 Publication 17 (2023)

Page 141 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Unions 40, 73, 77
(See also Labor unions)
Unmarried persons (See Single 
taxpayers)
Usurious interest 56
Utilities:
Energy conservation 
subsidies 75, 78
Rebates 78
V
Veterans benefits 52
Retroactive determination 53
Special statute of limitations. 53
Veterans' benefits:
Educational assistance 77
Viatical settlements 70
VISTA volunteers 52
Volunteer firefighters:
IRAs 81
Volunteer work 52
T ax counseling (Volunteer Income 
T ax Assistance program)10, 
52
Vouchers for payment of tax 43
W
W-2 form (See Form W-2)
Wages and salaries 12, 47-54
(See also Form W-2)
Accident and health 
insurance 48
Accrued leave payment 48
Adoption, employer 
assistance 49
Advance commissions 47
Allowances and 
reimbursements 39, 47
Archer MSA contributions 48
Awards and prizes 47
Babysitting 47
Back pay awards 47
Bonuses 47
Child care providers 47
Children's earnings 8
Clergy 51
De minimis benefits 49
Elective deferrals 50
Employee achievement award 47
Employee compensation 47
Farmworkers 38
Foreign employer 52
Form W-2 (See Form W-2)
Fringe benefits 48
Garnished 13
Government cost-of-living 
allowances 48
Household workers 38
Long-term care coverage 48
Military retirees 38, 52
Military service 52
Miscellaneous compensation 47
Note for services 48
Outplacement services 48
Religious orders 51
Restricted property 51
Dividends on restricted 
stock 51
Retirement plan contributions by 
employer 50
Severance pay 48
Sick pay 48, 54
Social security and Medicare 
taxes paid by employer 48
Stock appreciation rights 48
Stock options 51
Supplemental 39
Volunteer work 52
Withholding (See Withholding)
War zone (See Combat zone)
Washington State Supplemental 
Workmen's Compensation 
Fund 98
Welfare benefits 35, 73
What's new 1
Where to file 17
Winter energy payments 75
Withholding 12, 37
(See also Form W-2)
Agricultural Act of 1949 
payments 40
Changing amount withheld 38
For 2022 38
Checking amount of 38
Claim for refund 8
Commodity credit loans 40
Credit for 37, 44
Cumulative wage method 38
Definition 37
Determining amount to 
withhold 38
Disaster Assistance Act of 1988 
payments 40
Employers, rules for 39
Exemption from 39
Federal income taxes, not 
deductible 101
Form W-4:
Provided by employer 39
Fringe benefits 39
Gambling winnings 40, 44
General rules 37
Highest rate, employer must 
withhold at if no W-4 39
Incorrect form 44
IRA distributions 87
New job 38
Penalties 37, 39, 41
Pensions and annuities 14, 40
Railroad retirement benefits 40, 
64
Repaying withheld tax 39
Salaries and wages 37
Separate returns 44
Sick pay 40
Social security benefits 40, 64
State and local income taxes, 
deduction for 97
Supplemental wages 39
Tips (See Tip income)
Unemployment 
compensation 40, 73
Workers' compensation 54
Mandatory contributions to state 
funds, deduction of 98
Return to work 54
Worksheets:
Head of household status and 
cost of keeping up home 25
Individual retirement 
arrangements (IRAs), 
modified AGI computation 
(Worksheet 9-1) 83
Roth IRA modified adjusted gross 
income (MAGI), computation 
(Worksheet 9-2) 89
Social security or railroad 
retirement benefits, to figure 
taxability 63, 64
Support test 31
Wristwatch 105
Write-offs (See Cancellation of 
debt)
Publication 17 (2023) 139

Page 142 of 142  Fileid: … ations/p17/2023/a/xml/cycle04/source 8:00 - 18-Mar-2024
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Where To File
Mail your return to the address shown below that applies to you. If you want to use a private delivery service, see Private 
delivery services in chapter 1.
TIP
Envelopes without enough postage will be returned to you by the post office. Y our envelope may need 
additional postage if it contains more than five pages or is oversized (for example, it is over 1/4 inch thick). Also, include 
your complete return address.
IF you live in...
THEN send your return to the address 
below if you are requesting a refund or 
are NOT enclosing a payment...
OR send your return to the address 
below if you ARE enclosing a 
payment (check or money order)...
Alabama, Georgia, North Carolina, South Carolina, 
T ennessee
Department of the T reasury
Internal Revenue Service 
Austin, TX 73301-0002 
Internal Revenue Service
P .O. Box 1214
Charlotte, NC 28201-1214
Alaska, California, Colorado, Hawaii, Idaho, Kansas, 
Michigan, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, North Dakota, 
Ohio, Oregon, South Dakota, Utah, Washington, Wyoming
Department of the T reasury
Internal Revenue Service 
Ogden, UT 84201-0002
Internal Revenue Service
P .O. Box 802501
Cincinnati, OH 45280-2501
Arizona, New Mexico Department of the T reasury 
Internal Revenue Service 
Austin, TX 73301-0002
Internal Revenue Service
P .O. Box 802501
Cincinnati, OH 45280-2501
Arkansas, Oklahoma Department of the T reasury
Internal Revenue Service 
Austin, TX 73301-0002
Internal Revenue Service
P .O. Box 931000
Louisville, KY 40293-1000
Connecticut, Delaware, District of Columbia, Illinois, 
Indiana, Iowa, Kentucky, Maine, Maryland, 
Massachusetts, Minnesota, Missouri, New Hampshire, 
New Jersey, New Y ork, Rhode Island, Vermont, Virginia, 
West Virginia, Wisconsin
Department of the T reasury
Internal Revenue Service 
Kansas City, MO 64999-0002
Internal Revenue Service
P .O. Box 931000
Louisville, KY 40293-1000
Florida, Louisiana, Mississippi, T exas Department of the T reasury
Internal Revenue Service 
Austin, TX 73301-0002
Internal Revenue Service
P .O. Box 1214
Charlotte, NC 28201-1214
Pennsylvania Department of the T reasury
Internal Revenue Service 
Kansas City, MO 64999-0002
Internal Revenue Service
P .O. Box 802501
Cincinnati, OH 45280-2501
A foreign country, U.S. territory*, or use an APO or FPO 
address, or file Form 2555 or 4563, or are a dual-status 
alien
Department of the T reasury
Internal Revenue Service 
Austin, TX 73301-0215
Internal Revenue Service
P .O. Box 1303
Charlotte, NC 28201-1303
*If you live in American Samoa, Puerto Rico, Guam, the U.S. Virgin Islands, or the Northern Mariana Islands, see Pub. 570.
140 Publication 17 (2023)