Userid: SD_G74GB DTD tipx Leadpct: 0% Pt. size: 8 ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: T:\Pub 535\P535_2009_Flat-03-26-10-10.xml (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 49 of Publication 535 15:54 - 26-MAR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 535
Cat. No. 15065Z Contents
Introduction .................... . 1Department
of the What's New for 2009 .............. . 2Treasury Business
What's New for 2010 .............. . 2Internal
Revenue Reminders ..................... . 2ExpensesService
1. Deducting Business
Expenses .................. . 2
2. Employees' Pay .............. . 6For use in preparing
3. Rent Expense ................ . 8
2009 Returns 4. Interest .................... . 10
5. Taxes ..................... . 15
6. Insurance .................. . 17
7. Costs You Can Deduct or
Capitalize .................. . 20
8. Amortization ................ . 25
9. Depletion ................... . 32
10. Business Bad Debts ........... . 37
11. Other Expenses .............. . 40
12. How To Get Tax Help .......... . 46
Index ......................... . 48
Introduction
This publication discusses common business
expenses and explains what is and is not de-
ductible. The general rules for deducting busi-
ness expenses are discussed in the opening
chapter. The chapters that follow cover specific
expenses and list other publications and forms
you may need.
Comments and suggestions. We welcome
your comments about this publication and your
suggestions for future editions.
You can write to us at the following address:
Internal Revenue Service
Business Forms and Publications Branch
SE:W:CAR:MP:T:B
1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6526
Washington, DC 20224
We respond to many letters by telephone.
Therefore, it would be helpful if you would in-
clude your daytime phone number, including the
area code, in your correspondence.
You can email us at *taxforms@irs.gov. (The
asterisk must be included in the address.)
Please put ªPublications Commentº on the sub-
ject line. Although we cannot respond individu-
ally to each email, we do appreciate your
feedback and will consider your comments as
we revise our tax products.Get forms and other information
Ordering forms and publications. Visitfaster and easier by: www.irs.gov/formspubs to download forms and
publications, call 1-800-829-3676, or write to the
Internet www.irs.gov address below and receive a response within 10
days after your request is received.
Mar 09, 2010

Page 2 of 49 of Publication 535 15:54 - 26-MAR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form 1099 MISC. File Form 1099-MISC, Mis- ❏ 587 Business Use of Your Home
cellaneous Income, for each person to whom (Including Use by DaycareInternal Revenue Service
you have paid during the year in the course of Providers)1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorway
your trade or business at least $600 in rents,Bloomington, IL 61705-6613 ❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rulesservices (including parts and materials), prizes
❏ 936 Home Mortgage Interestand awards, other income payments, medicalTax questions. If you have a tax question, Deductionand health care payments, and crop insurancecheck the information available on www.irs.gov proceeds. See the Instructions for Form ❏ 946 How To Depreciate Propertyor call 1-800-829-4933. We cannot answer tax 1099-MISC for more information and additional
questions sent to either of the above addresses. reporting requirements. Form (and Instructions)
Photographs of missing children. The Inter- ❏ Sch A (Form 1040) Itemized Deductionsnal Revenue Service is a proud partner with the
❏ 5213 Election To PostponeNational Center for Missing and Exploited Chil-What's New for 2009 Determination as To Whether thedren. Photographs of missing children selected
Presumption Applies That anby the Center may appear in this publication onThe following items highlight some changes in Activity Is Engaged in for Profitpages that would otherwise be blank. You canthe tax law for 2009. help bring these children home by looking at the
See chapter 12 for information about gettingphotographs and calling 1-800-THE-LOSTStandard mileage rate. For 2009, the stan-
publications and forms.(1-800-843-5678) if you recognize a child.dard mileage rate for the cost of operating your
car, van, pickup, or panel truck for each mile of
business use is 55 cents per mile.
Marginal production of oil and gas.  For tax What Can I Deduct?
years beginning in 2009, the 100% taxable in-
come limit does not apply to percentage deple- To be deductible, a business expense must be
1.tion on the marginal production of oil and natural both ordinary and necessary. An ordinary ex-
pense is one that is common and accepted ingas. See chapter 9.
your industry. A necessary expense is one that
is helpful and appropriate for your trade or busi-
Deducting ness. An expense does not have to be indispen-
sable to be considered necessary.What's New for 2010 It is important to distinguish business ex-Business penses from:The following items highlight some changes in
the tax law for 2010. • The expenses used to figure cost of goodsExpenses sold,
Standard mileage rate. The standard mile-
• Capital expenses, andage rate for the cost of operating your car, van,
pickup, or panel truck in 2010 is 50 cents a mile • Personal expenses.Introductionfor all business miles.
This chapter covers the general rules for deduct-Environmental cleanup costs. The election Cost of Goods Solding business expenses. Business expenses are
to deduct qualified environmental cleanup costs the costs of carrying on a trade or business, and
If your business manufactures products orhas expired for costs paid or incurred after 2009. they are usually deductible if the business is
purchases them for resale, you generally mustIf it is extended, the change will be highlighted operated to make a profit.
value inventory at the beginning and end of eachunder What's Hot in forms and publications  at
tax year to determine your cost of goods sold.www.irs.gov/formspubs. See chapter 7. Topics Some of your business expenses may be in-This chapter discusses: cluded in figuring cost of goods sold. Cost of
goods sold is deducted from your gross receipts• What you can deduct to figure your gross profit for the year. If youReminders include an expense in the cost of goods sold,• How much you can deduct
you cannot deduct it again as a business ex-• When you can deduct pense.
IRS e-file (Electronic Filing) The following are types of expenses that go• Not-for-profit activities
into figuring cost of goods sold.
• The cost of products or raw materials, in-Useful Items
cluding freight.
You may want to see:
• Storage.
You can file your tax returns electronically using Publication • Direct labor (including contributions toan IRS e-file option. The benefits of IRS e-file pension or annuity plans) for workers who❏ 334 Tax Guide for Small Businessinclude faster refunds, increased accuracy, and produce the products.acknowledgment of IRS receipt of your return. ❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
You can use one of the following IRS e-file • Factory overhead.Expenses
options. ❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income Under the uniform capitalization rules, you• Use an authorized IRS e-file provider. must capitalize the direct costs and part of the❏ 529 Miscellaneous Deductions
• Use a personal computer. indirect costs for certain production or resale❏ 536 Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for activities. Indirect costs include rent, interest,• Visit a Volunteer Income Tax Assistance Individuals, Estates, and Trusts taxes, storage, purchasing, processing, repack-(VITA) or Tax Counseling for the Elderly aging, handling, and administrative costs.❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methods(TCE) site. This rule does not apply to personal property❏ 542 CorporationsFor details on these fast filing methods, see your you acquire for resale if your average annual
income tax package. ❏ 547 Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts gross receipts (or those of your predecessor) for
Page 2 Chapter 1 Deducting Business Expenses

Page 3 of 49 of Publication 535 15:54 - 26-MAR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the preceding 3 tax years are not more than $10 1. The costs you had before making a deci- Generally, repairs you make to your busi-
sion to acquire or begin a specific busi- ness vehicle are currently deductible. However,million.
ness. These costs are personal and amounts you pay to recondition and overhaul aFor more information, see the following
nondeductible. They include any costs in- business vehicle are capital expenses and aresources.
curred during a general search for, or pre- recovered through depreciation.
• Cost of goods soldÐchapter 6 of Publica- liminary investigation of, a business or
tion 334. Roads and driveways.  The cost of building ainvestment possibility.
private road on your business property and the• InventoriesÐPublication 538. 2. The costs you had in your attempt to ac- cost of replacing a gravel driveway with a con-
quire or begin a specific business. These• Uniform capitalization rulesÐPublication crete one are capital expenses you may be able
costs are capital expenses and you can to depreciate. The cost of maintaining a private538 and section 263A of the Internal Rev-
deduct them as a capital loss. road on your business property is a deductibleenue Code and the related regulations.
expense.If you are a corporation and your attempt to
go into a new trade or business is not success- Tools. Unless the uniform capitalization rulesCapital Expenses ful, you may be able to deduct all investigatory apply, amounts spent for tools used in yourcosts as a loss.You must capitalize, rather than deduct, some business are deductible expenses if the toolsThe costs of any assets acquired during yourcosts. These costs are a part of your investment have a life expectancy of less than 1 year or theirunsuccessful attempt to go into business are ain your business and are called ªcapital ex- cost is minor.part of your basis in the assets. You cannot takepenses.º Capital expenses are considered as- a deduction for these costs. You will recover the Machinery parts. Unless the uniform capitali-sets in your business. There are, in general, costs of these assets when you dispose of them. zation rules apply, the cost of replacingthree types of costs you capitalize.
short-lived parts of a machine to keep it in good
• Business start-up costs (See Tip below). working condition, but not add to its life, is aBusiness Assets deductible expense.• Business assets.
There are many different kinds of business as-• Improvements. Heating equipment. The cost of changingsets; for example, land, buildings, machinery, from one heating system to another is a capitalfurniture, trucks, patents, and franchise rights. expense.You can elect to deduct or amortize You must fully capitalize the cost of these as-
certain business start-up costs. See sets, including freight and installation charges. Personal versus Businesschapters 7 and 8. Certain property you produce for use in your
TIP
Expensestrade or business must be capitalized under the
uniform capitalization rules. See RegulationsCost recovery. Although you generally can- Generally, you cannot deduct personal, living, orsection 1.263A-2 for information on these rules.not take a current deduction for a capital ex- family expenses. However, if you have an ex-
pense, you may be able to recover the amount pense for something that is used partly for busi-
you spend through depreciation, amortization, ness and partly for personal purposes, divideImprovementsor depletion. These recovery methods allow you the total cost between the business and per-
to deduct part of your cost each year. In this sonal parts. You can deduct the business part.The costs of making improvements to a busi-
way, you are able to recover your capital ex- For example, if you borrow money and useness asset are capital expenses if the improve-
pense. See Amortization (chapter 8) and Deple- 70% of it for business and the other 30% for aments add to the value of the asset, appreciably
tion (chapter 9) in this publication. A taxpayer family vacation, you generally can deduct 70%lengthen the time you can use it, or adapt it to a
of the interest as a business expense. The re-can elect to deduct a portion of the costs of different use. Improvements are generally major
maining 30% is personal interest and generallyexpenditures. Some examples are: new electriccertain depreciable property as a section 179
is not deductible. See chapter 4 for informationwiring, a new roof, a new floor, new plumbing,deduction. A greater portion of these costs can
on deducting interest and the allocation rules.bricking up windows to strengthen a wall, andbe deducted if the property is qualified disaster
lighting improvements.assistance property. See Publication 946 for de- Business use of your home. If you use partHowever, you can currently deduct repairstails. of your home for business, you may be able tothat keep your property in a normal efficient
deduct expenses for the business use of youroperating condition as a business expense.
home. These expenses may include mortgageTreat as repairs amounts paid to replace parts ofGoing Into Business interest, insurance, utilities, repairs, and depre-a machine that only keep it in a normal operating
ciation.The costs of getting started in business, before condition.
To qualify to claim expenses for the businessyou actually begin business operations, are cap-
Restoration plan. Capitalize the cost of re- use of your home, you must meet both of theital expenses. These costs may include ex-
conditioning, improving, or altering your prop- following tests.penses for advertising, travel, or wages for
erty as part of a general restoration plan to maketraining employees. 1. The business part of your home must beit suitable for your business. This applies even if
used exclusively and regularly for yoursome of the work would by itself be classified asIf you go into business. When you go into trade or business.repairs.business, treat all costs you had to get your
2. The business part of your home must be:business started as capital expenses.
Capital versus DeductibleUsually you recover costs for a particular a. Your principal place of business, orExpensesasset through depreciation. Generally, you can-
b. A place where you meet or deal withnot recover other costs until you sell the busi-
To help you distinguish between capital and patients, clients, or customers in theness or otherwise go out of business. However, deductible expenses, different examples are normal course of your trade or busi-you can choose to amortize certain costs for given below. ness, orsetting up your business. See Starting a Busi-
ness in chapter 8 for more information on busi- Motor vehicles. You usually capitalize the c. A separate structure (not attached to
ness start-up costs. cost of a motor vehicle you use in your business. your home) used in connection with
You can recover its cost through annual deduc- your trade or business.
If you do not go into business. If you are an tions for depreciation.
individual and your attempt to go into business is There are dollar limits on the depreciation You generally do not have to meet the exclu-
not successful, the expenses you had in trying to you can claim each year on passenger automo- sive use test for the part of your home that you
establish yourself in business fall into two cate- biles used in your business. See Publication regularly use either for the storage of inventory
gories. 463. or product samples, or as a daycare facility.
Chapter 1 Deducting Business Expenses Page 3

Page 4 of 49 of Publication 535 15:54 - 26-MAR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Your home office qualifies as your principal deduct is limited to your out-of-pocket costs. Cash method. Under the cash method of ac-
place of business if you meet the following re- counting, you generally deduct business ex-You cannot deduct the cost of your own labor.
quirements. penses in the tax year you pay them.Similarly, if you pay a business expense in
goods or other property, you can deduct only• You use the office exclusively and regu- Accrual method. Under an accrual method ofwhat the property costs you. If these costs arelarly for administrative or management ac- accounting, you generally deduct business ex-
included in the cost of goods sold, do not deducttivities of your trade or business. penses when both of the following apply.
them as a business expense.
• You have no other fixed location where 1. The all-events test has been met. The test
you conduct substantial administrative or is met when:Limits on losses. If your deductions for anmanagement activities of your trade or investment or business activity are more thanbusiness. a. All events have occurred that fix the factthe income it brings in, you have a loss. There of liability, andmay be limits on how much of the loss you canIf you have more than one business location, deduct. b. The liability can be determined with rea-determine your principal place of business sonable accuracy.Not-for-profit limits. If you carry on yourbased on the following factors.
business activity without the intention of making• The relative importance of the activities 2. Economic performance has occurred.a profit, you cannot use a loss from it to offsetperformed at each location. other income. See Not-for-Profit Activities later. Economic performance. You generally• If the relative importance factor does not At-risk limits. Generally, a deductible loss cannot deduct or capitalize a business expensedetermine your principal place of busi- until economic performance occurs. If your ex-from a trade or business or other in-ness, consider the time spent at each lo- pense is for property or services provided to you,come-producing activity is limited to the invest-cation. or for your use of property, economic perform-ment you have ªat riskº in the activity. You are at
ance occurs as the property or services arerisk in any activity for the following.For more information, see Publication 587. provided, or the property is used. If your ex-
1. The money and adjusted basis of property pense is for property or services you provide toBusiness use of your car. If you use your car you contribute to the activity. others, economic performance occurs as youexclusively in your business, you can deduct car
provide the property or services.expenses. If you use your car for both business 2. Amounts you borrow for use in the activity
and personal purposes, you must divide your if: Example. Your tax year is the calendarexpenses based on actual mileage. Generally,
year. In December 2009, the Field Plumbinga. You are personally liable for repayment,commuting expenses between your home and
Company did some repair work at your place oforyour business location, within the area of your
business and sent you a bill for $600. You paid ittax home, are not deductible. b. You pledge property (other than prop- by check in January 2010. If you use the accrualYou can deduct actual car expenses, which erty used in the activity) as security for method of accounting, deduct the $600 on yourinclude depreciation (or lease payments), gas the loan. tax return for 2009 because all events haveand oil, tires, repairs, tune-ups, insurance, and
occurred to ªfixº the fact of liability (in this caseregistration fees. Or, instead of figuring the busi- For more information, see Publication 925. the work was completed), the liability can beness part of these actual expenses, you may be
determined, and economic performance oc-Passive activities. Generally, you are in aable to use the standard mileage rate to figure
curred in that year.passive activity if you have a trade or businessyour deduction. For 2009, the standard mileage
If you use the cash method of accounting,rate is 55 cents a mile for all business miles activity in which you do not materially partici-
deduct the expense on your 2010 return.driven before January 1, 2010. pate, or a rental activity. In general, deductions
If you are self-employed, you can also de- for losses from passive activities only offset in- Prepayment. You generally cannot deductduct the business part of interest on your car come from passive activities. You cannot use expenses in advance, even if you pay them inloan, state and local personal property tax on the any excess deductions to offset other income. In advance. This rule applies to both the cash andcar, parking fees, and tolls, whether or not you addition, passive activity credits can only offset accrual methods. It applies to prepaid interest,claim the standard mileage rate. the tax on net passive income. Any excess loss prepaid insurance premiums, and any other ex-For more information on car expenses and or credits are carried over to later years. Sus- pense paid far enough in advance to, in effect,the rules for using the standard mileage rate, pended passive losses are fully deductible in the create an asset with a useful life extending sub-see Publication 463. year you completely dispose of the activity. For stantially beyond the end of the current tax year.
more information, see Publication 925.
Example. In 2009, you sign a 10-year leaseNet operating loss. If your deductions are and immediately pay your rent for the first 3more than your income for the year, you mayHow Much Can I years. Even though you paid the rent for 2009,have a ªnet operating loss.º You can use a net 2010, and 2011, you can only deduct the rent foroperating loss to lower your taxes in other years.Deduct? 2009 on your 2009 tax return. You can deductSee Publication 536 for more information. the rent for 2010 and 2011 on your tax returnsSee Publication 542 for information aboutYou can deduct the cost of a business expense for those years.net operating losses of corporations.if it meets the criteria of ordinary and necessary
Contested liability. Under the cash method,and it is not a capital expense.
you can deduct a contested liability only in the
Recovery of amount deducted (tax benefit year you pay the liability. Under the accrual
rule). If you recover part of an expense in the method, you can deduct contested liabilitiesWhen Can Isame tax year in which you would have claimed such as taxes (except foreign or U.S. posses-
a deduction, reduce your current year expense sion income, war profits, and excess profitsDeduct an Expense?by the amount of the recovery. If you have a taxes) either in the tax year you pay the liability
recovery in a later year, include the recovered (or transfer money or other property to satisfyWhen you can deduct an expense depends onamount in income in that year. However, if part the obligation) or in the tax year you settle theyour accounting method. An accounting methodof the deduction for the expense did not reduce contest. However, to take the deduction in theis a set of rules used to determine when and howyour tax, you do not have to include that part of year of payment or transfer, you must meetincome and expenses are reported. The twothe recovered amount in income. certain conditions. See Contested Liability  inbasic methods are the cash method and theFor more information on recoveries and the Publication 538 for more information.accrual method. Whichever method you choosetax benefit rule, see Publication 525. must clearly reflect income. Related person. Under an accrual method of
For more information on accounting meth-Payments in kind. If you provide services to accounting, you generally deduct expenses
ods, see Publication 538.pay a business expense, the amount you can when you incur them, even if you have not yet
Page 4 Chapter 1 Deducting Business Expenses

Page 5 of 49 of Publication 535 15:54 - 26-MAR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
paid them. However, if you and the person you Using the presumption later. If you are start- deductions, such as those for advertising, insur-
owe are related and that person uses the cash ance premiums, interest, utilities, and wages,ing an activity and do not have 3 (or 2) years
method of accounting, you must pay the ex- belong in this category.showing a profit, you can elect to have the pre-
pense before you can deduct it. Your deduction sumption made after you have the 5 (or 7) years Category 3. Business deductions that de-is allowed when the amount is includible in in- of experience allowed by the test. crease the basis of property are allowed last, butcome by the related cash method payee. See You can elect to do this by filing Form 5213. only to the extent the gross income from theRelated Persons in Publication 538. Filing this form postpones any determination activity exceeds the deductions you take underthat your activity is not carried on for profit until 5 the first two categories. Deductions for deprecia-(or 7) years have passed since you started the tion, amortization, and the part of a casualty loss
activity. an individual could not deduct in category (1)
Not-for-Profit Activities The benefit gained by making this election is belong in this category. Where more than one
that the IRS will not immediately question asset is involved, allocate depreciation and
If you do not carry on your business or invest- whether your activity is engaged in for profit. these other deductions proportionally.
ment activity to make a profit, you cannot use a Accordingly, it will not restrict your deductions. Individuals must claim the amounts inloss from the activity to offset other income. Rather, you will gain time to earn a profit in the categories (2) and (3) as miscellane-Activities you do as a hobby, or mainly for sport required number of years. If you show 3 (or 2) ous deductions on Schedule A (Form
TIPor recreation, are often not entered into for profit. years of profit at the end of this period, your 1040). They are subject to thedeductions are not limited under these rules. IfThe limit on not-for-profit losses applies to 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit. See Publi-you do not have 3 (or 2) years of profit, the limitindividuals, partnerships, estates, trusts, and S cation 529 for information on this limit.can be applied retroactively to any year with acorporations. It does not apply to corporations
loss in the 5-year (or 7-year) period.other than S corporations.
Example. Ida is engaged in a not-for-profitFiling Form 5213 automatically extends theIn determining whether you are carrying on activity. The income and expenses of the activityperiod of limitations on any year in the 5-year (oran activity for profit, several factors are taken are as follows.7-year) period to 2 years after the due date ofinto account. No one factor alone is decisive.
the return for the last year of the period. TheAmong the factors to consider are whether: Gross income ................ . $3,200period is extended only for deductions of the• You carry on the activity in a businesslike Subtract:activity and any related deductions that might bemanner, Real estate taxes ....... . $700affected.
Home mortgage interest ... . 900• The time and effort you put into the activity You must file Form 5213 within 3 years Insurance ............ . 400indicate you intend to make it profitable, after the due date of your return (deter- Utilities .............. . 700
mined without extensions) for the year• You depend on the income for your liveli- Maintenance .......... . 200
TIP
in which you first carried on the activity, or, ifhood, Depreciation on an automobile 600
earlier, within 60 days after receiving written Depreciation on a machine . . 200 3,700• Your losses are due to circumstances be- notice from the Internal Revenue Service pro-yond your control (or are normal in the Loss ...................... . $(500)posing to disallow deductions attributable to thestart-up phase of your type of business), activity.
Ida must limit her deductions to $3,200, the• You change your methods of operation in
gross income she earned from the activity. Thean attempt to improve profitability, Limit on Deductions limit is reached in category (3), as follows.• You (or your advisors) have the knowl-
If your activity is not carried on for profit, takeedge needed to carry on the activity as a Limit on deduction ............ . $3,200deductions in the following order and only to thesuccessful business,
Category 1: Taxes andextent stated in the three categories. If you are• You were successful in making a profit in interest .............. . $1,600an individual, these deductions may be takensimilar activities in the past, Category 2: Insurance,only if you itemize. These deductions may be
utilities, and maintenance .. . 1,300 2,900taken on Schedule A (Form 1040).• The activity makes a profit in some years,
and Available for Category 3 ....... . $ 300
Category 1. Deductions you can take for per-• You can expect to make a future profit sonal as well as for business activities are al- The $800 of depreciation is allocated be-from the appreciation of the assets used in lowed in full. For individuals, all nonbusiness tween the automobile and machine as follows.the activity. deductions, such as those for home mortgage
$600 depreciation for theinterest, taxes, and casualty losses, belong in x $300 = $225Presumption of profit. An activity is pre- $800 automobilethis category. Deduct them on the appropriate
sumed carried on for profit if it produced a profit lines of Schedule A (Form 1040). For taxable
in at least 3 of the last 5 tax years, including the years beginning after Dec. 31, 2008, you can $200 depreciation for thex  $300 = $75current year. Activities that consist primarily of deduct a casualty loss on property you own for $800 machinebreeding, training, showing, or racing horses are personal use only to the extent it is more than The basis of each asset is reduced accord-presumed carried on for profit if they produced a $500 and exceeds 10% of your adjusted gross ingly.profit in at least 2 of the last 7 tax years, includ- income. The 10% AGI limitation does not apply Ida includes the $3,200 of gross income oning the current year. The activity must be sub- to net disaster losses resulting from federally line 22 (total income) of Form 1040. The $1,600stantially the same for each year within this declared disasters in 2008 and 2009 and individ- for category (1) is deductible in full on the appro-period. You have a profit when the gross income uals are allowed to claim the net disaster losses priate lines for taxes and interest on Schedule Afrom an activity exceeds the deductions. even if they do not itemize their deductions. The (Form 1040). Ida deducts the remaining $1,600If a taxpayer dies before the end of the reduction amount returns to $100 for taxable ($1,300 for category (2) and $300 for category5-year (or 7-year) period, the ªtestº period ends years beginning after Dec. 31, 2009. See Publi- (3)) as other miscellaneous deductions onon the date of the taxpayer's death. cation 547 for more information on casualty Schedule A (Form 1040) subject to thelosses. For the limits that apply to home mort-If your business or investment activity 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit.gage interest, see Publication 936.passes this 3- (or 2-) years-of-profit test, the IRS
will presume it is carried on for profit. This Partnerships and S corporations. If a part-
Category 2. Deductions that do not result inmeans the limits discussed here will not apply. nership or S corporation carries on a
an adjustment to the basis of property are al-You can take all your business deductions from not-for-profit activity, these limits apply at the
lowed next, but only to the extent your grossthe activity, even for the years that you have a partnership or S corporation level. They are re-
income from the activity is more than your de-loss. You can rely on this presumption unless flected in the individual shareholder's or part-
ductions under the first category. Most businessthe IRS later shows it to be invalid. ner's distributive shares.
Chapter 1 Deducting Business Expenses Page 5

Page 6 of 49 of Publication 535 15:54 - 26-MAR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
More than one activity. If you have several Useful Items Test 2ÐFor Services
undertakings, each may be a separate activity or You may want to see: Performedseveral undertakings may be combined. The
Publicationfollowing are the most significant facts and cir- You must be able to prove the payment was
cumstances in making this determination. made for services actually performed.❏ 15 (Circular E), Employer's Tax Guide
• The degree of organizational and eco- Employee-shareholder salaries. If a corpo-❏ 15-A Employer's Supplemental Taxnomic interrelationship of various under- ration pays an employee who is also a share-Guidetakings. holder a salary that is unreasonably high❏ 15-B Employer's Tax Guide to Fringe• The business purpose that is (or might be) considering the services actually performed, theBenefitsserved by carrying on the various under- excessive part of the salary may be treated as a
takings separately or together in a busi- constructive distribution to the em-See chapter 12 for information about gettingness or investment setting. ployee-shareholder. For more information onpublications and forms. corporate distributions to shareholders, see• The similarity of the undertakings. Publication 542, Corporations.
The IRS will generally accept your characteri-
zation if it is supported by facts and circum- Tests for
stances.
Kinds of PayDeducting PayIf you are carrying on two or more dif-
ferent activities, keep the deductions Some of the ways you may provide pay to yourTo be deductible, your employees' pay must beand income from each one separate. employees in addition to regular wages or sala-
TIPan ordinary and necessary expense and youFigure separately whether each is a ries are discussed next. For specialized andmust pay or incur it. These and other require-not-for-profit activity. Then figure the limit on detailed information on employees' pay and thements that apply to all business expenses aredeductions and losses separately for each activ- employment tax treatment of employees' pay,explained in chapter 1.ity that is not for profit. see Publication 15, Publication 15-A, and Publi-In addition, the pay must meet both of the cation 15-B.following tests.
• Test 1. It must be reasonable. Awards
• Test 2. It must be for services performed.
You can generally deduct amounts you pay to
The form or method of figuring the pay does not your employees as awards, whether paid in
affect its deductibility. For example, bonuses cash or property. If you give property to an2. and commissions based on sales or earnings, employee as an employee achievement award,
and paid under an agreement made before the your deduction may be limited.
services were performed, are both deductible.
Achievement awards. An achievementEmployees' Pay award is an item of tangible personal propertyTest 1ÐReasonableness
that meets all the following requirements.
You must be able to prove that the pay is rea- • It is given to an employee for length ofsonable. Base this determination on the circum-Introduction service or safety achievement.stances that exist when you contract for theYou can generally deduct the pay you give your services, not those that exist when the reasona- • It is awarded as part of a meaningful pres-employees for the services they perform. The bleness is questioned. If the pay is excessive, entation.pay may be in cash, property, or services. It may the excess is disallowed for deduction. • It is awarded under conditions and circum-include wages, salaries, or other compensation
stances that do not create a significantsuch as vacation allowances, bonuses, commis- Factors to consider. Determine the reasona-
likelihood of disguised pay.sions, and fringe benefits. For information about bleness of pay by the facts and circumstances.
deducting employment taxes see chapter 5. Generally, reasonable pay is the amount that
Length-of-service award. An award willlike enterprises pay for the same or similar serv-You can claim employment credits qualify as a length-of-service award only if eitherices.such as the following if you hire individ- of the following applies.To determine if pay is reasonable, also con-uals who meet certain requirements.
TIP sider the following items and any other pertinent • The employee receives the award after his• Empowerment zone and renewal commu- facts. or her first 5 years of employment.
nity employment credit (Form 8844). • The duties performed by the employee. • The employee did not receive another
• Indian employment credit (Form 8845). length-of-service award (other than one of• The volume of business handled.
very small value) during the same year or• Work opportunity credit (Form 5884). • The character and amount of responsibil- in any of the prior 4 years.• Credit for employer differential wage pay- ity.
ments (Form 8932). Safety achievement award. An award for• The complexities of your business.
safety achievement will qualify as an achieve-• Credit for affected Midwestern disaster • The amount of time required. ment award unless one of the following applies.area employers (Form 5884-A).
• The cost of living in the locality. 1. It is given to a manager, administrator,Reduce your deduction for employee wages • The ability and achievements of the indi- clerical employee, or other professionalby the amount of any employment credits you vidual employee performing the service. employee.claim. For more information about these credits,
see the form on which the credit is claimed. • The pay compared with the gross and net 2. During the tax year, more than 10% of
income of the business, as well as with your employees, excluding those listed in
distributions to shareholders if the busi- (1), have already received a safetyTopics ness is a corporation. achievement award (other than one of veryThis chapter discusses: small value).• Your policy regarding pay for all your em-
• Tests for deducting pay ployees. Deduction limit. Your deduction for the
• Kinds of pay • The history of pay for each employee. cost of employee achievement awards given to
Page 6 Chapter 2 Employees' Pay

Page 7 of 49 of Publication 535 15:54 - 26-MAR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
any one employee during the tax year is limited You may be able to exclude all or part of the • Life insurance coverage.
to the following. value of some fringe benefits from your employ- • Welfare benefit funds.ees' pay. You also may not owe employment• $400 for awards that are not qualified plan taxes on the value of the fringe benefits. See You can generally deduct amounts you spendawards. Table 2-1, Special Rules for Various Types of on employee benefit programs on the applicable• $1,600 for all awards, whether or not qual- Fringe Benefits, in Publication 15-B for details. line of your tax return. For example, if you pro-ified plan awards. Your deduction for the cost of fringe benefits vide dependent care by operating a dependent
for activities generally considered entertain- care facility for your employees, deduct yourA qualified plan award is an achievement ment, amusement, or recreation, or for a facility costs in whatever categories they fall (utilities,award given as part of an established written used in connection with such an activity (for salaries, etc.).plan or program that does not favor highly com- example, a company aircraft) for certain officers,
pensated employees as to eligibility or benefits. Life insurance coverage. You cannot de-directors, and more-than-10% shareholders is
duct the cost of life insurance coverage for you,A highly compensated employee for 2009 is limited.
an employee, or any person with a financialan employee who meets either of the following Certain fringe benefits are discussed next. interest in your business, if you are directly ortests. See Pub. 15-B for more details on these and indirectly the beneficiary of the policy. See Reg-other fringe benefits.1. The employee was a 5% owner at any ulations section 1.264-1 for more information.
time during the year or the preceding year. Welfare benefit funds. A welfare benefitMeals and lodging. You can usually deduct
2. The employee received more than fund is a funded plan (or a funded arrangementthe cost of furnishing meals and lodging to your
$110,000 in pay for the preceding year. having the effect of a plan) that provides welfareemployees. Deduct the cost in whatever cate-
benefits to your employees, independent con-gory the expense falls. For example, if you oper-You can choose to ignore test (2) if the em- tractors, or their beneficiaries. Welfare benefitsate a restaurant, deduct the cost of the mealsployee was not also in the top 20% of employees are any benefits other than deferred compensa-you furnish to employees as part of the cost ofranked by pay for the preceding year. tion or transfers of restricted property.goods sold. If you operate a nursing home,An award is not a qualified plan award if the motel, or rental property, deduct the cost of Your deduction for contributions to a welfareaverage cost of all the employee achievement
furnishing lodging to an employee as expenses benefit fund is limited to the fund's qualified costawards given during the tax year (that would be
for utilities, linen service, salaries, depreciation, for the tax year. If your contributions to the fundqualified plan awards except for this limit) is
etc. are more than its qualified cost, carry the excessmore than $400. To figure this average cost,
over to the next tax year.ignore awards of nominal value. Deduction limit on meals. You can gener-
Generally, the fund's ªqualified costº is theDeduct achievement awards as a nonwage ally deduct only 50% of the cost of furnishing
total of the following amounts, reduced by thebusiness expense on your return or business meals to your employees. However, you can
after-tax income of the fund.schedule. deduct the full cost of the following meals.
• The cost you would have been able toYou may not owe employment taxes • Meals whose value you include in an em-
deduct using the cash method of account-on the value of some achievement ployee's wages.
ing if you had paid for the benefits directly.awards you provide to an employee.
TIP • Meals that qualify as a de minimis fringeSee Publication 15-B. • The contributions added to a reserve ac-benefit as discussed in section 2 of Publi-
count that are needed to fund claims in-cation 15-B. This generally includes meals
curred but not paid as of the end of theBonuses you furnish to employees at your place of
year. These claims can be for supplemen-business if more than half of these em-
You can generally deduct a bonus paid to an tal unemployment benefits, severanceployees are provided the meals for your
employee if you intended the bonus as addi- pay, or disability, medical, or life insuranceconvenience.
tional pay for services, not as a gift, and the benefits.
• Meals you furnish to your employees atservices were performed. However, the total bo-
the work site when you operate a restau-nuses, salaries, and other pay must be reasona- For more information, see sections 419(c) and
rant or catering service.ble for the services performed. If the bonus is 419A of the Internal Revenue Code and the
paid in property, see Property, later. related regulations.• Meals you furnish to your employees as
part of the expense of providing recrea-
Gifts of nominal value. If, to promote em- tional or social activities, such as a com- Loans or Advances
ployee goodwill, you distribute food or merchan- pany picnic.
dise of nominal value to your employees at You generally can deduct as wages an advance• Meals you are required by federal law toholidays, you can deduct the cost of these items you make to an employee for services per-furnish to crew members of certain com-as a nonwage business expense. Your deduc- formed if you do not expect the employee tomercial vessels (or would be required totion for de minimis gifts of food or drink are not repay the advance. However, if the employeefurnish if the vessels were operated atsubject to the 50% deduction limit that generally performs no services, treat the amount you ad-sea). This does not include meals you fur-applies to meals. For more information on this vanced as a loan. If the employee does notnish on vessels primarily providing luxurydeduction limit, see Meals and lodging, later. repay the loan, treat it as income to the em-water transportation. ployee.
• Meals you furnish on an oil or gas platformEducation Expenses
Below-market interest rate loans. On cer-or drilling rig located offshore or in Alaska.
If you pay or reimburse education expenses for tain loans you make to an employee or share-This includes meals you furnish at a sup-
an employee, you can deduct the payments if holder, you are treated as having receivedport camp that is near and integral to an
they are part of a qualified educational assis- interest income and as having paid compensa-oil or gas drilling rig located in Alaska.
tance program. Deduct them on the ªEmployee tion or dividends equal to that interest. See Be-
benefit programsº or other appropriate line of low-Market Loans in chapter 4.Employee benefit programs. Employee ben-your tax return. For information on educational efit programs include the following.assistance programs, see Educational Assis- Property
tance in section 2 of Publication 15-B. • Accident and health plans.
If you transfer property (including your com-• Adoption assistance. pany's stock) to an employee as payment forFringe Benefits • Cafeteria plans. services, you can generally deduct it as wages.
A fringe benefit is a form of pay for the perform- The amount you can deduct is the property's fair• Dependent care assistance.ance of services. You can generally deduct the market value on the date of the transfer less any
• Educational assistance.cost of fringe benefits. amount the employee paid for the property.
Chapter 2 Employees' Pay Page 7

Page 8 of 49 of Publication 535 15:54 - 26-MAR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You can claim the deduction only for the tax 4. A grantor and a fiduciary of any trust.
year in which your employee includes the prop- 5. Fiduciaries of two separate trusts if the
erty's value in income. Your employee is same person is a grantor of both trusts.3.deemed to have included the value in income if
6. A fiduciary and a beneficiary of the sameyou report it on Form W-2 in a timely manner. trust.
 You treat the deductible amount as received
7. A fiduciary and a beneficiary of two sepa-in exchange for the property, and you must rec- Rent Expense rate trusts if the same person is a grantorognize any gain or loss realized on the transfer, of both trusts.unless it is the company's stock transferred as
8. A fiduciary of a trust and a corporation ifpayment for services. Your gain or loss is the Introduction the trust or a grantor of the trust owns,difference between the fair market value of the
This chapter discusses the tax treatment of rent directly or indirectly, more than 50% inproperty and its adjusted basis on the date of
or lease payments you make for property you value of the outstanding stock of the cor-transfer. use in your business but do not own. It also poration.
These rules also apply to property trans- discusses how to treat other kinds of payments 9. A person and a tax-exempt educational orferred to an independent contractor for services, you make that are related to your use of this charitable organization that is controlled di-generally reported on Form 1099-MISC. property. These include payments you make for rectly or indirectly by that person or bytaxes on the property, improvements to the members of the family of that person.property, and getting a lease. There is a discus-Restricted property. If the property you sion about capitalizing (including in the cost of 10. A corporation and a partnership if thetransfer for services is subject to restrictions that property) certain rent expenses at the end of the same persons own more than 50% inaffect its value, you generally cannot deduct it chapter. value of the outstanding stock of the cor-
and do not report gain or loss until it is substan- poration and more than 50% of the capital
tially vested in the recipient. However, if the or profits interest in the partnership.Topics
recipient pays for the property, you must report This chapter discusses: 11. Two S corporations or an S corporationany gain at the time of the transfer up to the and a regular corporation if the same per-amount paid. • The definition of rent sons own more than 50% in value of the
ªSubstantially vestedº means the property is outstanding stock of each corporation.• Taxes on leased property
not subject to a substantial risk of forfeiture. This 12. An executor of an estate and a beneficiary• The cost of getting a leasemeans that the recipient is not likely to have to of the estate unless the sale or exchange
give up his or her rights in the property in the • Improvements by the lessee is in satisfaction of a pecuniary bequest.
future. • Capitalizing rent expenses To determine whether an individual directly
or indirectly owns any of the outstanding stock ofReimbursements a corporation, see Related Persons in Publica-See chapter 12 for information about getting
for Business Expenses tion 542, Corporations. For rules that apply topublications and forms.
transactions between partners and partner-
You can generally deduct the amount you pay or ships, see Publication 541, Partnerships.
reimburse employees for business expenses in-
Rent on your home. If you rent your homecurred for your business. However, your deduc- Rent and use part of it as your place of business, yoution may be limited. may be able to deduct the rent you pay for thatIf you make the payment under an accounta- Rent is any amount you pay for the use of part. You must meet the requirements for busi-
ble plan, deduct it in the category of the expense property you do not own. In general, you can ness use of your home. For more information,
deduct rent as an expense only if the rent is forpaid. For example, if you pay an employee for see Business use of your home in chapter 1.
property you use in your trade or business. If youtravel expenses incurred on your behalf, deduct
Rent paid in advance. Generally, rent paid inhave or will receive equity in or title to the prop-this payment as a travel expense. If you make your trade or business is deductible in the yearerty, the rent is not deductible.the payment under a nonaccountable plan, de- paid or accrued. If you pay rent in advance, youduct it as wages and include it in the employee's can deduct only the amount that applies to yourUnreasonable rent. You cannot take a rentalW-2. use of the rented property during the tax year.deduction for unreasonable rent. Ordinarily, the
See Reimbursement of Travel, Meals, and You can deduct the rest of your payment onlyissue of reasonableness arises only if you and
over the period to which it applies.the lessor are related. Rent paid to a relatedEntertainment in chapter 11 for more informa-
person (defined below) is reasonable if it is thetion about deducting reimbursements and an
Example 1. You are a calendar year tax-same amount you would pay to a stranger forexplanation of accountable and nonaccountable
payer and you leased a building for 5 yearsuse of the same property. Rent is not unreason-plans. beginning July 1. Your rent is $12,000 per year.able just because it is figured as a percentage of
You paid the first year's rent ($12,000) on Junegross sales.Sick and Vacation Pay 30. You can deduct only $6,000 (6/12 ×  $12,000)Related persons. For this purpose, the fol- for the rent that applies to the first year.lowing are considered related persons.Sick pay. You can deduct amounts you pay to
your employees for sickness and injury, includ- Example 2. You are a calendar year tax-1. An individual and his or her brothers and payer. Last January you leased property for 3ing lump-sum amounts, as wages. However, sisters, half-brothers, half-sisters, spouse, years for $6,000 a year. You paid the fullyour deduction is limited to amounts not com- ancestors (parents, grandparents, etc.), $18,000 (3 ×  $6,000) during the first year of thepensated by insurance or other means. and lineal descendants (children, grand- lease. Each year you can deduct only $6,000,children, etc.). the part of the lease that applies to that year.
Vacation pay. Vacation pay is an employee 2. An individual and a corporation if the indi-
Canceling a lease. You generally can deductvidual owns, directly or indirectly, morebenefit. It includes amounts paid for unused
as rent an amount you pay to cancel a businessthan 50% in value of the outstanding stockvacation leave. You can deduct vacation pay
lease.of the corporation.only in the tax year in which the employee actu-
ally receives it. This rule applies regardless of 3. Two corporations that are members of the Lease or purchase. There may be instances
whether you use the cash or accrual method of same controlled group as defined in sec- in which you must determine whether your pay-
accounting. tion 267(f) of the Internal Revenue Code. ments are for rent or for the purchase of the
Page 8 Chapter 3 Rent Expense

Page 9 of 49 of Publication 535 15:54 - 26-MAR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
property. You must first determine whether your • The lessee may not have a contractual
agreement is a lease or a conditional sales con- right to buy the property from the lessor at Taxes on
tract. Payments made under a conditional sales less than fair market value when the right
contract are not deductible as rent expense. Leased Propertyis exercised.
Conditional sales contract. Whether an • The lessee may not invest in the property, If you lease business property, you can deductagreement is a conditional sales contract de- except as provided by Revenue Procedure as additional rent any taxes you have to pay topends on the intent of the parties. Determine 2001-28. or for the lessor. When you can deduct theseintent based on the provisions of the agreement taxes as additional rent depends on your ac-• The lessee may not lend any money to theand the facts and circumstances that exist when counting method.lessor to buy the property or guarantee theyou make the agreement. No single test, or
special combination of tests, always applies. loan used by the lessor to buy the prop- Cash method. If you use the cash method of
However, in general, an agreement may be con- erty. accounting, you can deduct the taxes as addi-
sidered a conditional sales contract rather than tional rent only for the tax year in which you pay• The lessor must show that it expects toa lease if any of the following is true. them.receive a profit apart from the tax deduc-
• The agreement applies part of each pay- tions, allowances, credits, and other tax Accrual method. If you use an accrualment toward an equity interest you will re- attributes. method of accounting, you can deduct taxes asceive. additional rent for the tax year in which you can
The IRS may charge you a user fee for issuing• You get title to the property after you make determine all the following.
a tax ruling. For more information, see Revenuea stated amount of required payments. • That you have a liability for taxes on theProcedure 2009-1, on page 1 of Internal Reve-• The amount you must pay to use the prop- leased property.nue Bulletin No. 2009-1. Internal Revenue Bulle-erty for a short time is a large part of the • How much the liability is.tin 2009-1 is available at www.irs.gov/pub/amount you would pay to get title to the
irs-irbs/irb09-01.pdf. • That economic performance occurred.property.
Leveraged leases of limited-use property.• You pay much more than the current fair The liability and amount of taxes are deter-The IRS will not issue advance rulings on lever-rental value of the property. mined by state or local law and the lease agree-aged leases of so-called limited-use property. ment. Economic performance occurs as you use• You have an option to buy the property at Limited-use property is property not expected to the property.a nominal price compared to the value of be either useful to or usable by a lessor at thethe property when you may exercise the
end of the lease term except for continued leas- Example 1. Oak Corporation is a calendaroption. Determine this value when you
ing or transfer to a lessee. See Revenue Proce- year taxpayer that uses an accrual method ofmake the agreement.
accounting. Oak leases land for use in its busi-dure 2001-28 for examples of limited-use• You have an option to buy the property at ness. Under state law, owners of real propertyproperty and property that is not limited-usea nominal price compared to the total become liable (incur a lien on the property) forproperty.amount you have to pay under the agree- real estate taxes for the year on January 1 ofment. that year. However, they do not have to pay
Leases over $250,000. Special rules are pro- these taxes until July 1 of the next year (18• The agreement designates part of the pay- vided for certain leases of tangible property. The months later) when tax bills are issued. Underments as interest, or that part is easy to
rules apply if the lease calls for total payments of the terms of the lease, Oak becomes liable forrecognize as interest.
the real estate taxes in the later year when themore than $250,000 and any of the following
tax bills are issued. If the lease ends before theapply.Leveraged leases. Leveraged lease trans-
tax bill for a year is issued, Oak is not liable foractions may not be considered leases. Lever- • Rents increase during the lease. the taxes for that year.aged leases generally involve three parties: a
Oak cannot deduct the real estate taxes as• Rents decrease during the lease.lessor, a lessee, and a lender to the lessor.
rent until the tax bill is issued. This is when Oak'sUsually the lease term covers a large part of the • Rents are deferred (rent is payable after liability under the lease becomes fixed.useful life of the leased property, and the the end of the calendar year following thelessee's payments to the lessor are enough to calendar year in which the use occurs and Example 2. The facts are the same as incover the lessor's payments to the lender. the rent is allocated). Example 1 except that, according to the terms ofIf you plan to take part in what appears to be the lease, Oak becomes liable for the real estatea leveraged lease, you may want to get an • Rents are prepaid (rent is payable before taxes when the owner of the property becomesadvance ruling. Revenue Procedure 2001-28 on the end of the calendar year preceding the liable for them. As a result, Oak will deduct thepage 1156 of Internal Revenue Bulletin 2001-19 calendar year in which the use occurs and real estate taxes as rent on its tax return for thecontains the guidelines the IRS will use to deter- the rent is allocated). earlier year. This is the year in which Oak'smine if a leveraged lease is a lease for federal liability under the lease becomes fixed.These rules do not apply if your lease specifiesincome tax purposes. Revenue Procedure
equal amounts of rent for each month in the2001-29 on page 1160 of the same Internal
lease term and all rent payments are due in theRevenue Bulletin provides the information re-
quired to be furnished in a request for an ad- calendar year to which the rent relates (or in the Cost ofvance ruling on a leveraged lease transaction. preceding or following calendar year).
Internal Revenue Bulletin 2001-19 is available at Getting a LeaseGenerally, if the special rules apply, you mustwww.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb01-19.pdf.
use an accrual method of accounting (and timeIn general, Revenue Procedure 2001-28 You may either enter into a new lease with thevalue of money principles) for your rental ex-provides that, for advance ruling purposes only, lessor of the property or get an existing leasepenses, regardless of your overall method ofthe IRS will consider the lessor in a leveraged from another lessee. Very often when you get anaccounting. In addition, in certain cases in whichlease transaction to be the owner of the property existing lease from another lessee, you mustthe IRS has determined that a lease was de-and the transaction to be a valid lease if all the pay the previous lessee money to get the lease,factors in the revenue procedure are met, in- signed to achieve tax avoidance, you must take besides having to pay the rent on the lease.cluding the following. rent and stated or imputed interest into account If you get an existing lease on property or
under a constant rental accrual method in which• The lessor must maintain a minimum un- equipment for your business, you generally
the rent is treated as accruing ratably over theconditional ªat riskº equity investment in must amortize any amount you pay to get that
entire lease term. For details, see section 467 ofthe property (at least 20% of the cost of lease over the remaining term of the lease. For
the property) during the entire lease term. the Internal Revenue Code. example, if you pay $10,000 to get a lease and
Chapter 3 Rent Expense Page 9

Page 10 of 49 of Publication 535 15:54 - 26-MAR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
there are 10 years remaining on the lease with bought solely to get a lease, the loss is a cost of However, these rules do not apply to the follow-
no option to renew, you can deduct $1,000 each getting the lease. You must capitalize the loss ing property.
year. and amortize it over the remaining term of the
1. Personal property you acquire for resale ifThe cost of getting an existing lease of tangi- lease.
your average annual gross receipts areble property is not subject to the amortization
$10 million or less for the 3 prior tax years.rules for section 197 intangibles discussed in
chapter 8. 2. Property you produce if you meet either of
the following conditions.ImprovementsOption to renew. The term of the lease for
amortization includes all renewal options plus a. Your indirect costs of producing theby Lesseeany other period for which you and the lessor property are $200,000 or less.reasonably expect the lease to be renewed. If you add buildings or make other permanent b. You use the cash method of accountingHowever, this applies only if less than 75% of improvements to leased property, depreciate and do not account for inventories.the cost of getting the lease is for the term the cost of the improvements using the modifiedremaining on the purchase date (not including accelerated cost recovery system (MACRS).any period for which you may choose to renew, Depreciate the property over its appropriate re- Example 1. You rent construction equip-extend, or continue the lease). Allocate the covery period. You cannot amortize the cost ment to build a storage facility. If you are subjectlease cost to the original term and any option over the remaining term of the lease. to the uniform capitalization rules, you must cap-term based on the facts and circumstances. In
If you do not keep the improvements when italize as part of the cost of the building the rentsome cases, it may be appropriate to make the
you end the lease, figure your gain or loss based you paid for the equipment. You recover yourallocation using a present value computation.
on your adjusted basis in the improvements at cost by claiming a deduction for depreciation onFor more information, see Regulations section
that time. the building.1.178-1(b)(5).
For more information, see the discussion of
Example 2. You rent space in a facility toExample 1. You paid $10,000 to get a lease MACRS in Publication 946, How To Depreciate
conduct your business of manufacturing tools. Ifwith 20 years remaining on it and two options to Property.
you are subject to the uniform capitalizationrenew for 5 years each. Of this cost, you paid
rules, you must include the rent you paid toAssignment of a lease. If a long-term lessee$7,000 for the original lease and $3,000 for the
occupy the facility in the cost of the tools youwho makes permanent improvements to landrenewal options. Because $7,000 is less than
produce.later assigns all lease rights to you for money75% of the total $10,000 cost of the lease (or
and you pay the rent required by the lease, the$7,500), you must amortize the $10,000 over 30
More information. For more information onamount you pay for the assignment is a capitalyears. That is the remaining life of your present
these rules, see Uniform Capitalization Rules ininvestment. If the rental value of the leased landlease plus the periods for renewal.
Publication 538 and the regulations under Inter-increased since the lease began, part of your
nal Revenue Code section 263A.capital investment is for that increase in theExample 2. The facts are the same as in
rental value. The rest is for your investment inExample 1, except that you paid $8,000 for the
the permanent improvements.original lease and $2,000 for the renewal op-
tions. You can amortize the entire $10,000 over The part that is for the increased rental value
the 20-year remaining life of the original lease. of the land is a cost of getting a lease, and you
The $8,000 cost of getting the original lease was amortize it over the remaining term of the lease.
not less than 75% of the total cost of the lease You can depreciate the part that is for your
4.(or $7,500). investment in the improvements over the recov-
ery period of the property as discussed earlier,Cost of a modification agreement. You may without regard to the lease term.have to pay an additional ªrentº amount over part
of the lease period to change certain provisions Interest
in your lease. You must capitalize these pay-
ments and amortize them over the remaining
Capitalizingperiod of the lease. You cannot deduct the pay-
Introductionments as additional rent, even if they are de-
Rent Expensesscribed as rent in the agreement. This chapter discusses the tax treatment of busi-
ness interest expense. Business interest ex-Under the uniform capitalization rules, you mustExample. You are a calendar year taxpayer pense is an amount charged for the use ofcapitalize the direct costs and part of the indirectand sign a 20-year lease to rent part of a building money you borrowed for business activities.costs for certain production or resale activities.starting on January 1. However, before you oc-
Include these costs in the basis of property youcupy it, you decide that you really need less Topicsproduce or acquire for resale, rather than claim-space. The lessor agrees to reduce your rent
This chapter discusses:ing them as a current deduction. You recover thefrom $7,000 to $6,000 per year and to release
costs through depreciation, amortization, or costthe excess space from the original lease. In
• Allocation of interestof goods sold when you use, sell, or otherwiseexchange, you agree to pay an additional rent
dispose of the property.amount of $3,000, payable in 60 monthly install- • Interest you can deduct
Indirect costs include amounts incurred forments of $50 each.
• Interest you cannot deductrenting or leasing equipment, facilities, or land.You must capitalize the $3,000 and amortize
it over the 20-year term of the lease. Your amor- • Capitalization of interest
Uniform capitalization rules. You may betization deduction each year will be $150 • When to deduct interestsubject to the uniform capitalization rules if you($3,000 ÷  20). You cannot deduct the $600 (12 ×
do any of the following, unless the property is$50) that you will pay during each of the first 5 • Below-market loans
produced for your use other than in a businessyears as rent.
or an activity carried on for profit.
Commissions, bonuses, and fees. Commis- Useful Items
sions, bonuses, fees, and other amounts you 1. Produce real property or tangible personal You may want to see:
pay to get a lease on property you use in your property. For this purpose, tangible per-
business are capital costs. You must amortize sonal property includes a film, sound re- Publication
these costs over the term of the lease. cording, video tape, book, or similar
❏ 537 Installment Salesproperty.Loss on merchandise and fixtures. If you
❏ 550 Investment Income and Expensessell at a loss merchandise and fixtures that you 2. Acquire property for resale.
Page 10 Chapter 4 Interest

Page 11 of 49 of Publication 535 15:54 - 26-MAR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
❏ 936 Home Mortgage Interest Deduction how the loan proceeds are used. For more infor- February 27 $700 used for passivemation, see Publication 936. activityForm (and Instructions)
June 19 $1,000 proceeds of Loan C Allocation period. The period for which a
❏ Sch A (Form 1040) Itemized Deductions depositedloan is allocated to a particular use begins on the
date the proceeds are used and ends on the November 20 $800 used for an❏ Sch E (Form 1040) Supplemental
earlier of the following dates. investmentIncome and Loss
• The date the loan is repaid. December 18 $600 used for personal❏ Sch K-1 (Form 1065) Partner's Share of
purposesIncome, Deductions, Credits, etc. • The date the loan is reallocated to another
use.❏ Sch K-1 (Form 1120S) Shareholder's Edith treats the $800 used for personal pur-
Share of Income, Deductions, poses as made from the $500 proceeds of Loan
Credits, etc. A and $300 of the proceeds of Loan B. SheProceeds not disbursed to borrower. Even
treats the $700 used for a passive activity asif the lender disburses the loan proceeds to a❏ 1098 Mortgage Interest Statement made from the remaining $200 proceeds ofthird party, the allocation of the loan is still based
❏ 3115 Application for Change in Loan B and $500 of unborrowed funds. Sheon your use of the funds. This applies whether
Accounting Method treats the $800 used for an investment as madeyou pay for property, services, or anything else
entirely from the proceeds of Loan C. She treatsby incurring a loan, or you take property subject❏ 4952 Investment Interest Expense the $600 used for personal purposes as madeto a debt.Deduction from the remaining $200 proceeds of Loan C
Proceeds deposited in borrower's account.❏ 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitations and $400 of unborrowed funds.
Treat loan proceeds deposited in an account as For the periods during which loan proceeds
property held for investment. It does not matterSee chapter 12 for information about getting are held in the account, Edith treats them as
whether the account pays interest. Any interestpublications and forms. property held for investment.
you pay on the loan is investment interest ex-
Payments from checking accounts. Gen-pense. If you withdraw the proceeds of the loan,
erally, you treat a payment from a checking oryou must reallocate the loan based on the use of
similar account as made at the time the check isthe funds.Allocation of Interest written if you mail or deliver it to the payee within
a reasonable period after you write it. You canExample. Connie, a calendar-year tax-The rules for deducting interest vary, depending treat checks written on the same day as writtenpayer, borrows $100,000 on January 4 and im-on whether the loan proceeds are used for busi- in any order.mediately uses the proceeds to open a checkingness, personal, or investment activities. If you
account. No other amounts are deposited in the Amounts paid within 30 days. If you re-use the proceeds of a loan for more than one
account during the year and no part of the loan ceive loan proceeds in cash or if the loan pro-type of expense, you must make an allocation to
principal is repaid during the year. On April 2, ceeds are deposited in an account, you can treatdetermine the interest for each use of the loan's
Connie uses $20,000 from the checking account any payment (up to the amount of the proceeds)proceeds.
for a passive activity expenditure. On Septem- made from any account you own, or from cash,Allocate your interest expense to the follow- ber 4, Connie uses an additional $40,000 from as made from those proceeds. This applies toing categories. the account for personal purposes. any payment made within 30 days before or• Nonpassive trade or business activity in- Under the interest allocation rules, the entire after the proceeds are received in cash or de-terest $100,000 loan is treated as property held for posited in your account.
investment for the period from January 4• Passive trade or business activity interest If the loan proceeds are deposited in anthrough April 1. From April 2 through September account, you can apply this rule even if the rules• Investment interest 3, Connie must treat $20,000 of the loan as used stated earlier under Order of funds spent wouldin the passive activity and $80,000 of the loan as• Portfolio interest otherwise require you to treat the proceeds asproperty held for investment. From September 4 used for other purposes. If you apply this rule to• Personal interest through December 31, she must treat $40,000 any payments, disregard those payments (andof the loan as used for personal purposes,In general, you allocate interest on a loan the the proceeds from which they are made) when$20,000 as used in the passive activity, andsame way you allocate the loan proceeds. You applying the rules stated under Order of funds$40,000 as property held for investment.allocate loan proceeds by tracing disburse- spent.
ments to specific uses. Order of funds spent. Generally, you treat If you received the loan proceeds in cash,
loan proceeds deposited in an account as used you can treat the payment as made on the date
The easiest way to trace disburse- (spent) before either of the following amounts. you received the cash instead of the date you
ments to specific uses is to keep the actually made the payment.• Any unborrowed amounts held in theproceeds of a particular loan separate
TIP same account.from any other funds. Example. Frank gets a loan of $1,000 on
• Any amounts deposited after these loan August 4 and receives the proceeds in cash.
Secured loan. The allocation of loan pro- proceeds. Frank deposits $1,500 in an account on August
ceeds and the related interest is not generally 18 and on August 28 writes a check on the
affected by the use of property that secures the account for a passive activity expense. Also,Example. On January 9, Edith opened aloan. Frank deposits his paycheck, deposits otherchecking account, depositing $500 of the pro- loan proceeds, and pays his bills during theceeds of Loan A and $1,000 of unborrowedExample. You secure a loan with property same period. Regardless of these other transac-funds. The following table shows the transac-used in your business. You use the loan pro- tions, Frank can treat $1,000 of the deposit hetions in her account during the tax year.ceeds to buy an automobile for personal use. made on August 18 as being paid on August 4
You must allocate interest expense on the loan from the loan proceeds. In addition, Frank canDate Transactionto personal use (purchase of the automobile) treat the passive activity expense he paid on
January 9 $500 proceeds of Loan Aeven though the loan is secured by business August 28 as made from the $1,000 loan pro-
and $1,000 unborrowedproperty. ceeds treated as deposited in the account.funds deposited
If the property that secures the loan is Optional method for determining date ofJanuary 14 $500 proceeds of Loan B your home, you generally do not allo- reallocation. You can use the followingdepositedcate the loan proceeds or the related method to determine the date loan proceeds are
TIP
interest. The interest is usually deductible as reallocated to another use. You can treat allFebruary 19 $800 used for personal
purposesqualified home mortgage interest, regardless of payments from loan proceeds in the account
Chapter 4 Interest Page 11

Page 12 of 49 of Publication 535 15:54 - 26-MAR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
during any month as taking place on the later of funds to distributions made to partners or share- If you receive a refund of interest you over-
the following dates. paid in an earlier year, this amount will be re-holders. The manner in which you report the
ported in box 3 of Form 1098. You cannotinterest expense associated with the distributed• The first day of that month. deduct this amount. For information on how todebt proceeds depends on your use of those
• The date the loan proceeds are deposited report this refund, see Refunds of interest laterproceeds.
in the account. in this chapter.How to report. If the proceeds were used in
Expenses paid to obtain a mortgage.However, you can use this optional method only a nonpassive trade or business activity, report
Certain expenses you pay to obtain a mortgageif you treat all payments from the account during the interest on Schedule E (Form 1040), line 28;
cannot be deducted as interest. These ex-the same calendar month in the same way. enter ªinterest expenseº and the name of the
penses, which include mortgage commissions,partnership or S corporation in column (a) andInterest on a segregated account. If you abstract fees, and recording fees, are capitalthe amount in column (h). If the proceeds werehave an account that contains only loan pro- expenses. If the property mortgaged is businessused in a passive activity, follow the Instructionsceeds and interest earned on the account, you or income-producing property, you can amortizefor Form 8582, Passive Activity Loss Limita-can treat any payment from that account as the costs over the life of the mortgage.tions, to determine the amount of interest ex-being made first from the interest. When the
pense that can be reported on Schedule E Prepayment penalty. If you pay off yourinterest earned is used up, any remaining pay-
(Form 1040), line 28; enter ªinterest expenseº mortgage early and pay the lender a penalty forments are from loan proceeds.
and the name of the partnership in column (a) doing this, you can deduct the penalty as inter-
and the amount in column (f). If the proceedsExample. You borrowed $20,000 and used est.
were used in an investment activity, enter thethe proceeds of this loan to open a new savings
Interest on employment tax deficiency. In-interest on Form 4952. If the proceeds are usedaccount. When the account had earned interest
terest charged on employment taxes assessedfor personal purposes, the interest is generallyof $867, you withdrew $20,000 for personal pur-
on your business is deductible.not deductible.poses. You can treat the withdrawal as coming
first from the interest earned on the account,
Original issue discount (OID). OID is a form$867, and then from the loan proceeds, $19,133
of interest. A loan (mortgage or other debt) gen-($20,000 − $867). All the interest charged on the
erally has OID when its proceeds are less thanloan from the time it was deposited in the ac- Interest You its principal amount. The OID is the differencecount until the time of the withdrawal is invest-
between the stated redemption price at maturityment interest expense. The interest charged on Can Deduct and the issue price of the loan.the part of the proceeds used for personal pur-
 A loan's stated redemption price at maturityposes ($19,133) from the time you withdrew it You can generally deduct as a business ex-
is the sum of all amounts (principal and interest)until you either repay it or reallocate it to another pense all interest you pay or accrue during the
payable on it other than qualified stated interest.use is personal interest expense. The interest tax year on debts related to your trade or busi-
Qualified stated interest is stated interest that ischarged on the loan proceeds you left in the ness. Interest relates to your trade or business if
unconditionally payable in cash or propertyaccount ($867) continues to be investment inter- you use the proceeds of the loan for a trade or (other than another loan of the issuer) at leastest expense until you either repay it or reallocate business expense. It does not matter what type annually over the term of the loan at a singleit to another use. of property secures the loan. You can deduct fixed rate.interest on a debt only if you meet all the follow-Loan repayment. When you repay any part of You generally deduct OID over the term ofing requirements.a loan allocated to more than one use, treat it as the loan. Figure the amount to deduct each yearbeing repaid in the following order. • You are legally liable for that debt. using the constant-yield method, unless the OID
on the loan is de minimis.1. Personal use. • Both you and the lender intend that the
debt be repaid. De minimis OID. The OID is de minimis if it2. Investments and passive activities (other
is less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025) of thethan those included in (3)). • You and the lender have a true
stated redemption price of the loan at maturitydebtor-creditor relationship.3. Passive activities in connection with a multiplied by the number of full years from the
rental real estate activity in which you ac- date of original issue to maturity (the term of the
tively participate. Partial liability. If you are liable for part of a loan).
business debt, you can deduct only your share If the OID is de minimis, you can choose one4. Former passive activities. of the total interest paid or accrued. of the following ways to figure the amount you5. Trade or business use and expenses for can deduct each year.certain low-income housing projects. Example. You and your brother borrow
• On a constant-yield basis over the term ofmoney. You are liable for 50% of the note. You
the loan.Line of credit (continuous borrowings). use your half of the loan in your business, and
The following rules apply if you have a line of you make one-half of the loan payments. You • On a straight-line basis over the term ofcredit or similar arrangement. can deduct your half of the total interest pay- the loan.ments as a business deduction.1. Treat all borrowed funds on which interest • In proportion to stated interest payments.
accrues at the same fixed or variable rate Mortgage. Generally, mortgage interest paid • In its entirety at maturity of the loan.as a single loan. or accrued on real estate you own legally or
You make this choice by deducting the OID in aequitably is deductible. However, rather than2. Treat borrowed funds or parts of borrowed manner consistent with the method chosen ondeducting the interest currently, you may havefunds on which interest accrues at different your timely filed tax return for the tax year into add it to the cost basis of the property asfixed or variable rates as different loans. which the loan is issued.Treat these loans as repaid in the order explained later under Capitalization of Interest.
shown on the loan agreement. Statement. If you paid $600 or more of Example. On January 1, 2009, you took out
mortgage interest (including certain points) dur- a $100,000 discounted loan and receivedLoan refinancing. Allocate the replacement ing the year on any one mortgage, you generally $98,500 in proceeds. The loan will mature onloan to the same uses to which the repaid loan will receive a Form 1098 or a similar statement. January 1, 2019 (a 10-year term), and thewas allocated. Make the allocation only to the You will receive the statement if you pay interest $100,000 principal is payable on that date. Inter-extent you use the proceeds of the new loan to to a person (including a financial institution or a est of $10,000 is payable on January 1 of eachrepay any part of the original loan. cooperative housing corporation) in the course year, beginning January 1, 2010. The $1,500
of that person's trade or business. A govern-Debt-financed distribution. A debt-financed OID on the loan is de minimis because it is less
mental unit is a person for purposes of furnishingdistribution occurs when a partnership or S cor- than $2,500 ($100,000 ×  .0025 ×  10). You
the statement.poration borrows funds and allocates those choose to deduct the OID on a straight-line basis
Page 12 Chapter 4 Interest

Page 13 of 49 of Publication 535 15:54 - 26-MAR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
over the term of the loan. Beginning in 2009, you The points reduce the issue price of the loan Interest on income tax. Interest charged on
and result in original issue discount, deductible income tax assessed on your individual incomecan deduct $150 each year for 10 years.
as explained in the preceding discussion. tax return is not a business deduction evenConstant-yield method. If the OID is not de though the tax due is related to income fromminimis, you must use the constant-yield Partial payments on a nontax debt. If you your trade or business. Treat this interest as amethod to figure how much you can deduct each make partial payments on a debt (other than a business deduction only in figuring a net operat-year. You figure your deduction for the first year debt owed the IRS), the payments are applied, ing loss deduction.using the following steps. in general, first to interest and any remainder to
Penalties. Penalties on underpaid deficien-principal. You can deduct only the interest. This
1. Determine the issue price of the loan. Gen- cies and underpaid estimated tax are not inter-rule does not apply when it can be inferred that
erally, this equals the proceeds of the loan. est. You cannot deduct them. Generally, youthe borrower and lender understood that a differ-
If you paid points on the loan (as dis- cannot deduct any fines or penalties.ent allocation of the payments would be made.
cussed later), the issue price generally is
Installment purchase. If you make an install-the difference between the proceeds and Interest on loans with respect to life insur-
ment purchase of business property, the con-the points. ance policies. You generally cannot deduct
tract between you and the seller generally interest on a debt incurred with respect to any2. Multiply the result in (1) by the yield to provides for the payment of interest. If no inter- life insurance, annuity, or endowment contractmaturity. est or a low rate of interest is charged under the that covers any individual unless that individual
contract, a portion of the stated principal amount3. Subtract any qualified stated interest pay- is a key person.
payable under the contract may be recharacter-ments from the result in (2). This is the If the policy or contract covers a key person,ized as interest (unstated interest). The amountOID you can deduct in the first year. you can deduct the interest on up to $50,000 ofrecharacterized as interest reduces your basis debt for that person. However, the deduction forTo figure your deduction in any subsequent in the property and increases your interest ex- any month cannot be more than the interestyear, follow the above steps, except determine pense. For more information on installment figured using Moody's Composite Yield on Sea-the adjusted issue price in step (1). To get the sales and unstated interest, see Publication soned Corporate Bonds (formerly known asadjusted issue price, add to the issue price any 537. Moody's Corporate Bond Yield Aver-OID previously deducted. Then follow steps (2) age-Monthly Average Corporates) (Moody'sand (3) above. rate) for that month.The yield to maturity is generally shown in
Who is a key person? A key person is anthe literature you receive from your lender. If you Interest You
officer or 20% owner. However, the number ofdo not have this information, consult your lender
individuals you can treat as key persons is lim-or tax advisor. In general, the yield to maturity is Cannot Deduct
ited to the greater of the following.the discount rate that, when used in computing
the present value of all principal and interest Certain interest payments cannot be deducted. • Five individuals.payments, produces an amount equal to the In addition, certain other expenses that may
• The lesser of 5% of the total officers andseem to be interest are not, and you cannotprincipal amount of the loan.
employees of the company or 20 individu-deduct them as interest.
als.Example. The facts are the same as in the You cannot currently deduct interest that
previous example, except that you deduct the must be capitalized, and you generally cannot
Exceptions for pre-June 1997 contracts.OID on a constant yield basis over the term of deduct personal interest.
You can generally deduct the interest if the con-the loan. The yield to maturity on your loan is Interest paid with funds borrowed from origi- tract was issued before June 9, 1997, and the10.2467%, compounded annually. For 2009, nal lender. If you use the cash method of covered individual is someone other than anyou can deduct $93 [($98,500 ×  .102467) − accounting, you cannot deduct interest you pay employee, officer, or someone financially inter-$10,000]. For 2010, you can deduct $103 with funds borrowed from the original lender ested in your business. If the contract was pur-[($98,593 ×  .102467) − $10,000]. through a second loan, an advance, or any other chased before June 21, 1986, you can generallyLoan or mortgage ends. If your loan or arrangement similar to a loan. You can deduct deduct the interest no matter who is covered bymortgage ends, you may be able to deduct any the interest expense once you start making pay- the contract.remaining OID in the tax year in which the loan ments on the new loan.
Interest allocated to unborrowed policyor mortgage ends. A loan or mortgage may end When you make a payment on the new loan,
cash value. Corporations and partnershipsdue to a refinancing, prepayment, foreclosure, you first apply the payment to interest and then
generally cannot deduct any interest expenseor similar event. to the principal. All amounts you apply to the
allocable to unborrowed cash values of life in-interest on the first loan are deductible, alongIf you refinance with the original lender, surance, annuity, or endowment contracts. Thiswith any interest you pay on the second loan,you generally cannot deduct the re- rule applies to contracts issued after June 8,subject to any limits that apply.maining OID in the year in which the
CAUTION
! 1997, that cover someone other than an officer,refinancing occurs, but you may be able to de- Capitalized interest. You cannot currently director, employee, or 20% owner. For moreduct it over the term of the new mortgage or deduct interest you are required to capitalize information, see section 264(f) of the Internalloan. See Interest paid with funds borrowed from under the uniform capitalization rules. See Capi- Revenue Code.original lender under Interest You Cannot De- talization of Interest, later. In addition, if you buy
duct, later. property and pay interest owed by the seller (for
example, by assuming the debt and any interest
accrued on the property), you cannot deduct thePoints. The term ªpointsº is used to describe Capitalizationinterest. Add this interest to the basis of thecertain of the charges paid, or treated as paid,
property.by a borrower to obtain a loan or a mortgage. of Interest
These charges are also called loan origination Commitment fees or standby charges.
fees, maximum loan charges, discount points, or Under the uniform capitalization rules, you gen-Fees you incur to have business funds available
premium charges. If any of these charges erally must capitalize interest on debt equal toon a standby basis, but not for the actual use of
(points) are solely for the use of money, they are your expenditures to produce real property orthe funds, are not deductible as interest pay-
interest. certain tangible personal property. The propertyments. You may be able to deduct them as
must be produced by you for use in your trade orBecause points are prepaid interest, you business expenses.
business or for sale to customers. You cannotgenerally cannot deduct the full amount in the If the funds are for inventory or certain prop-
capitalize interest related to property that youyear paid. However, you can choose to fully erty used in your business, the fees are indirect
acquire in any other manner.deduct points in the year paid if you meet certain costs and you generally must capitalize them
Interest you paid or incurred during the pro-tests. For exceptions to the general rule, see under the uniform capitalization rules. See Capi-
duction period must be capitalized if the propertyPublication 936. talization of Interest, later.
Chapter 4 Interest Page 13

Page 14 of 49 of Publication 535 15:54 - 26-MAR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
produced is designated property. Designated Cash method. Under the cash method, you • An additional payment in an amount equal
property is any of the following. can generally deduct only the interest you actu- to the forgone interest.
ally paid during the tax year. You cannot deduct• Real property. The additional payment is treated as a gift, divi-a promissory note you gave as payment be- dend, contribution to capital, payment of com-• Tangible personal property with a class life cause it is a promise to pay and not an actual pensation, or other payment, depending on theof 20 years or more. payment. substance of the transaction.
• Tangible personal property with an esti- Prepaid interest. You generally cannot de-
Forgone interest.mated production period of more than 2 duct any interest paid before the year it is due.
For any period, forgone interest is:years. Interest paid in advance can be deducted only in
the tax year in which it is due.• Tangible personal property with an esti- 1. The interest that would be payable for that
mated production period of more than 1 Discounted loan. If interest or a discount is period if interest accrued on the loan at the
year if the estimated cost of production is subtracted from your loan proceeds, it is not a applicable federal rate and was payable
more than $1 million. payment of interest and you cannot deduct it annually on December 31,
when you get the loan. For more information, minus
see Original issue discount (OID) under InterestProperty you produce. You produce property 2. Any interest actually payable on the loanYou Can Deduct, earlier.if you construct, build, install, manufacture, de- for the period.
velop, improve, create, raise, or grow it. Treat Refunds of interest. If you pay interest and
property produced for you under a contract as then receive a refund in the same tax year of any Applicable federal rates are published
produced by you up to the amount you pay or part of the interest, reduce your interest deduc- by the IRS each month in the Internal
incur for the property. tion by the refund. If you receive the refund in a Revenue Bulletin. Internal Revenue
TIP
later tax year, include the refund in your income Bulletins are available on the IRS web site at
to the extent the deduction for the interest re-Carrying charges. Carrying charges include www.irs.gov/irb. You can also contact an IRS
duced your tax.taxes you pay to carry or develop real estate or office to get these rates.
to carry, transport, or install personal property.
Accrual method. Under an accrual method,You can choose to capitalize carrying charges Loans subject to the rules. The rules for be-
you can deduct only interest that has accruednot subject to the uniform capitalization rules if low-market loans apply to the following.
during the tax year.they are otherwise deductible. For more infor-
1. Gift loans (below-market loans where themation, see chapter 7. Prepaid interest. See Prepaid interest, forgone interest is in the nature of a gift).above.
Capitalized interest. Treat capitalized inter- 2. Compensation-related loans (be-Discounted loan. See Discounted loan,est as a cost of the property produced. You low-market loans between an employerabove.recover your interest when you sell or use the and an employee or between an indepen-
property. If the property is inventory, recover dent contractor and a person for whom theTax deficiency. If you contest a federal in-
capitalized interest through cost of goods sold. If contractor provides services).come tax deficiency, interest does not accrue
the property is used in your trade or business, until the tax year the final determination of liabil- 3. Corporation-shareholder loans.recover capitalized interest through an adjust- ity is made. If you do not contest the deficiency,
ment to basis, depreciation, amortization, or 4. Tax avoidance loans (below-market loansthen the interest accrues in the year the tax was
other method. where the avoidance of federal tax is oneasserted and agreed to by you.
of the main purposes of the interest ar-However, if you contest but pay the pro-
Partnerships and S corporations. The inter- rangement).posed tax deficiency and interest, and you do
est capitalization rules are applied first at the not designate the payment as a cash bond, then 5. Loans to qualified continuing care facilitiespartnership or S corporation level. The rules are the interest is deductible in the year paid. under a continuing care contract (made af-then applied at the partners' or shareholders' ter October 11, 1985).Related person. If you use an accruallevel to the extent the partnership or S corpora- method, you cannot deduct interest owed to ation has insufficient debt to support the produc- Except as noted in (5) above, these rulesrelated person who uses the cash method untiltion or construction costs. apply to demand loans (loans payable in full atpayment is made and the interest is includible inIf you are a partner or a shareholder, you any time upon the lender's demand) outstandingthe gross income of that person. The relation-may have to capitalize interest you incur during after June 6, 1984, and to term loans (loans thatship is determined as of the end of the tax yearthe tax year for the production costs of the part- are not demand loans) made after that date.for which the interest would otherwise be de-nership or S corporation. You may also have to ductible. See section 267 of the Internal Reve- Treatment of gift and demand loans. If youcapitalize interest incurred by the partnership or nue Code for more information. receive a below-market gift loan or demandS corporation for your own production costs. To
loan, you are treated as receiving an additionalproperly capitalize interest under these rules,
payment (as a gift, dividend, etc.) equal to theyou must be given the required information in an
forgone interest on the loan. You are thenattachment to the Schedule K-1 you receive
Below-Market Loans treated as transferring this amount back to thefrom the partnership or S corporation.
lender as interest. These transfers are consid-
If you receive a below-market gift or demand ered to occur annually, generally on DecemberAdditional information. The procedures for loan and use the proceeds in your trade or 31. If you use the loan proceeds in your trade orapplying the uniform capitalization rules are be- business, you may be able to deduct the forgone business, you can deduct the forgone interestyond the scope of this publication. For more interest. See Treatment of gift and demand each year as a business interest expense. Theinformation, see sections 1.263A-8 through loans later in this discussion. lender must report it as interest income.1.263A-15 of the regulations and Notice 88-99. A below-market loan is a loan on which noNotice 88-99 is in Cumulative Bulletin 1988-2. Limit on forgone interest for gift loans ofinterest is charged or on which interest is $100,000 or less. For gift loans between indi-charged at a rate below the applicable federal viduals, forgone interest treated as transferredrate. A gift or demand loan that is a be- back to the lender is limited to the borrower's netlow-market loan generally is considered an investment income for the year. This limit ap-When To arm's-length transaction in which you, the bor- plies if the outstanding loans between the lenderrower, are considered as having received both and borrower total $100,000 or less. If the bor-Deduct Interest the following. rower's net investment income is $1,000 or less,
If the uniform capitalization rules, discussed • A loan in exchange for a note that requires it is treated as zero. This limit does not apply to a
under Capitalization of Interest,  earlier, do not the payment of interest at the applicable loan if the avoidance of any federal tax is one of
apply to you, deduct interest as follows. federal rate. the main purposes of the interest arrangement.
Page 14 Chapter 4 Interest

Page 15 of 49 of Publication 535 15:54 - 26-MAR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Exception for loans to qualified continuingTreatment of term loans. If you receive a
care facilities. The below-market interestbelow-market term loan other than a gift or de-
rules do not apply to a loan owed by a qualifiedmand loan, you are treated as receiving an addi-
5.continuing care facility under a continuing caretional cash payment (as a dividend, etc.) on the
contract if the lender or lender's spouse is agedate the loan is made. This payment is equal to
62 or older by the end of the calendar year.the loan amount minus the present value, at the
A qualified continuing care facility is one orapplicable federal rate, of all payments due Taxesmore facilities (excluding nursing homes) meet-under the loan. The same amount is treated as
ing the requirements listed below.original issue discount on the loan. See Original
issue discount (OID)  under Interest You Can
1. Designed to provide services under contin- IntroductionDeduct, earlier.
uing care contracts (defined below).
You can deduct various federal, state, local, andExceptions for loans of $10,000 or less. The 2. Includes an independent living unit, and foreign taxes directly attributable to your trade orrules for below-market loans do not apply to any either an assisted living or nursing facility, business as business expenses.day on which the total outstanding loans be- or both.tween the borrower and lender is $10,000 or You cannot deduct federal income
3. Substantially all of the independent livingless. This exception applies only to the follow- taxes, estate and gift taxes, or state
unit residents are covered by continuinging. inheritance, legacy, and succession
CAUTION
!
care contracts. taxes.1. Gift loans between individuals if the loan is
A continuing care contract is a written con-not directly used to buy or carry in-
tract between an individual and a qualified con- Topicscome-producing assets.
tinuing care facility that includes all of the This chapter discusses:
2. Compensation-related loans or corpora- following conditions.
tion-shareholder loans if the avoidance of • When to deduct taxes
1. The individual or individual's spouse mustany federal tax is not a principal purpose of
• Real estate taxesbe entitled to use the facility for the rest ofthe interest arrangement.
their life or lives. • Income taxesThis exception does not apply to a term loan
2. The individual or individual's spouse will bedescribed in (2) above that was previously sub- • Employment taxes
provided with housing, as appropriate forject to the below-market loan rules. Those rules
• Other taxesthe health of the individual or individual'swill continue to apply even if the outstanding
spouse in an:balance is reduced to $10,000 or less.
Useful ItemsExceptions for loans without significant tax a. independent living unit (which has addi- You may want to see:effect. The following loans are specifically ex- tional available facilities outside the unit
empted from the rules for below-market loans for the provision of meals and other per- Publicationbecause their interest arrangements do not sonal care), and
have a significant effect on the federal tax liabil- ❏ 15 (Circular E), Employer's Tax Guideb. assisted living or nursing facility avail-ity of the borrower or the lender. able in the continuing care facility. ❏ 334 Tax Guide for Small Business
1. Loans made available by lenders to the ❏ 510 Excise Taxes3. The individual or individual's spouse will begeneral public on the same terms and con-
provided with assisted living or nursingditions that are consistent with the lender's ❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methodscare available in the continuing care facil-customary business practices. ❏ 551 Basis of Assetsity, as required for the health of the individ-
2. Loans subsidized by a federal, state, or ual or the individual's spouse.
municipal government that are made avail- Form (and Instructions)For more information, see section 7872(h) ofable under a program of general applica-
the Internal Revenue Code. ❏ Sch A (Form 1040) Itemized Deductionstion to the public.
Sale or exchange of property. Different rules ❏ Sch SE (Form 1040) Self-Employment3. Certain employee-relocation loans.
generally apply to a loan connected with the sale Tax4. Certain loans to or from a foreign person, or exchange of property. If the loan does not ❏ 3115 Application for Change inunless the interest income would be effec- provide adequate stated interest, part of the Accounting Methodtively connected with the conduct of a U.S. principal payment may be considered interest.
trade or business and not exempt from However, there are exceptions that may require See chapter 12 for information about gettingU.S. tax under an income tax treaty. you to apply the below-market interest rate rules publications and forms.to these loans. See Unstated Interest and Origi-5. Any other loan if the taxpayer can show
nal Issue Discount (OID) in Publication 537.that the interest arrangement has no signif-
icant effect on the federal tax liability of the More information. For more information on
lender or the borrower. Whether an inter- below-market loans, see section 7872 of the When Toest arrangement has a significant effect on Internal Revenue Code and section 1.7872-5 of
the federal tax liability of the lender or the the regulations. Deduct Taxesborrower will be determined by all the facts
and circumstances. Consider all the follow- Generally, you can only deduct taxes in the yearing factors. you pay them. This applies whether you use the
cash method or an accrual method of account-a. Whether items of income and deduction
ing.generated by the loan offset each other.
Under an accrual method, you can deduct a
b. The amount of the items. tax before you pay it if you meet the exception
for recurring items discussed under Economicc. The cost of complying with the be-
Performance in Publication 538. You can alsolow-market loan provisions if they were
elect to ratably accrue real estate taxes as dis-to apply.
cussed later under Real Estate Taxes.
d. Any reasons, other than taxes, for
structuring the transaction as a be- Limit on accrual of taxes. A taxing jurisdic-
low-market loan. tion can require the use of a date for accruing
Chapter 5 Taxes Page 15

Page 16 of 49 of Publication 535 15:54 - 26-MAR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
taxes that is earlier than the date it originally and public parking facilities. You should in- Separate elections. You can elect to rata-
required. However, if you use an accrual crease the basis of your property by the amount bly accrue the taxes for each separate trade or
method, and can deduct the tax before you pay of the assessment. business and for nonbusiness activities if you
it, use the original accrual date for the year of You can deduct taxes for these local benefits account for them separately. Once you elect to
change and all future years to determine when only if the taxes are for maintenance, repairs, or ratably accrue real estate taxes, you must use
you can deduct the tax. interest charges related to those benefits. If part that method unless you get permission from the
of the tax is for maintenance, repairs, or interest, IRS to change. See Form 3115, later.
Example. Your state imposes a tax on per- you must be able to show how much of the tax is Making the election. If you elect to ratablysonal property used in a trade or business con- for these expenses to claim a deduction for that accrue the taxes for the first year in which youducted in the state. This tax is assessed and part of the tax. incur real estate taxes, attach a statement tobecomes a lien as of July 1 (accrual date). In your income tax return for that year. The state-2009, the state changed the assessment and Example. To improve downtown commer- ment should show all the following items.lien dates from July 1, 2010, to December 31, cial business, Waterfront City converted a down-
2009, for property tax year 2010. Use the origi- town business area street into an enclosed • The trades or businesses to which the
nal accrual date (July 1, 2010) to determine pedestrian mall. The city assessed the full cost election applies and the accounting
when you can deduct the tax. You must also use of construction, financed with 10-year bonds, method or methods used.
the July 1 accrual date for all future years to against the affected properties. The city is pay- • The period to which the taxes relate.determine when you can deduct the tax. ing the principal and interest with the annual
payments made by the property owners. • The computation of the real estate tax de-Uniform capitalization rules. Uniform capi- The assessments for construction costs are duction for that first year.talization rules apply to certain taxpayers who not deductible as taxes or as business ex-
produce real property or tangible personal prop- penses, but are depreciable capital expenses. Generally, you must file your return by the dueerty for use in a trade or business or for sale to The part of the payments used to pay the inter- date (including extensions). However, if youcustomers. They also apply to certain taxpayers est charges on the bonds is deductible as taxes. timely filed your return for the year without elect-who acquire property for resale. Under these ing to ratably accrue, you can still make theCharges for services. Water bills, sewerage,rules, you either include certain costs in inven- election by filing an amended return within 6and other service charges assessed againsttory or capitalize certain expenses related to the months after the due date of the return (exclud-your business property are not real estate taxes,property, such as taxes. For more information, ing extensions). Attach the statement to thebut are deductible as business expenses.see chapter 1. amended return and write ªFiled pursuant to
section 301.9100-2º on the statement. File thePurchase or sale of real estate. If real estateCarrying charges. Carrying charges include
amended return at the same address where youis sold, the real estate taxes must be allocatedtaxes you pay to carry or develop real estate or
filed the original return.between the buyer and the seller.to carry, transport, or install personal property.
The buyer and seller must allocate the realYou can elect to capitalize carrying charges not Form 3115. If you elect to ratably accrue
estate taxes according to the number of days insubject to the uniform capitalization rules if they real estate taxes for a year after the first year in
the real property tax year (the period to whichare otherwise deductible. For more information, which you incur real estate taxes, or if you want
the tax imposed relates) that each owned thesee chapter 7. to revoke your election to ratably accrue real
property. Treat the seller as paying the taxes up estate taxes, file Form 3115. For more informa-Refunds of taxes. If you receive a refund for to but not including the date of sale. Treat the tion, including applicable time frames for filing,any taxes you deducted in an earlier year, in- buyer as paying the taxes beginning with the see the instructions for Form 3115.clude the refund in income to the extent the date of sale. You can usually find this informa-
deduction reduced your federal income tax in tion on the settlement statement you received at
the earlier year. For more information, see Re- closing.
covery of amount deducted (tax benefit rule)  in If you (the seller) use an accrual method and Income Taxeschapter 1. have not elected to ratably accrue real estate
taxes, you are considered to have accrued yourYou must include in income any inter- This section discusses federal, state, local, andpart of the tax on the date you sell the property.est you receive on tax refunds. foreign income taxes.
TIP
Example. Al Green, a calendar year accrual
Federal income taxes. You cannot deductmethod taxpayer, owns real estate in Elm
federal income taxes.County. He has not elected to ratably accrue
property taxes. November 30 of each year is the
State and local income taxes. A corporationassessment and lien date for the current real
or partnership can deduct state and local in-Real Estate Taxes property tax year, which is the calendar year. He
come taxes imposed on the corporation or part-sold the property on June 30, 2009. Under his
nership as business expenses. An individualDeductible real estate taxes are any state, local, accounting method he would not be able to
can deduct state and local income taxes only asor foreign taxes on real estate levied for the claim a deduction for the taxes because the sale
an itemized deduction on Schedule A (Formgeneral public welfare. The taxing authority occurred before November 30. He is treated as
1040).must base the taxes on the assessed value of having accrued his part of the tax, 180/365  (Janu-
the real estate and charge them uniformly ary 1±June 29), on June 30, and he can deduct However, an individual can deduct a state
against all property under its jurisdiction. De- it for 2009. tax on gross income (as distinguished from net
ductible real estate taxes generally do not in- income) directly attributable to a trade or busi-
Electing to ratably accrue. If you use an ac-clude taxes charged for local benefits and ness as a business expense.
crual method, you can elect to accrue real estateimprovements that increase the value of the Accrual of contested income taxes. If youtax related to a definite period ratably over thatproperty. See Taxes for local benefits , later. use an accrual method, and you contest a stateperiod.If you use an accrual method, you generally or local income tax liability, you must accrue andcannot accrue real estate taxes until you pay deduct any contested amount in the tax year inExample. John Smith is a calendar yearthem to the government authority. However, you which the liability is finally determined.taxpayer who uses an accrual method. His realcan elect to ratably accrue the taxes during the
If additional state or local income taxes for aestate taxes for the real property tax year, July 1,year. See Electing to ratably accrue, later.
prior year are assessed in a later year, you can2008, to June 30, 2009, are $1,200. July 1 is the
deduct the taxes in the year in which they wereTaxes for local benefits. Generally, you can- assessment and lien date.
originally imposed (the prior year) if the tax liabil-not deduct taxes charged for local benefits and If John elects to ratably accrue the taxes,
ity is not contested. You cannot deduct them inimprovements that tend to increase the value of $600 will accrue in 2008 ($1,200 ×  6/12, July
the year in which the liability is finally deter-your property. These include assessments for 1±December 31) and the balance will accrue in
mined.streets, sidewalks, water mains, sewer lines, 2009.
Page 16 Chapter 5 Taxes

Page 17 of 49 of Publication 535 15:54 - 26-MAR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The filing of an income tax return is not necessary expenses of carrying on your trade or Topics
considered a contest and, in the ab- business. However, see Fuel taxes, later. This chapter discusses:
sence of an overt act of protest, you
TIP Franchise taxes. You can deduct corporatecan deduct the tax in the prior year. Also, you • Deductible premiumsfranchise taxes as a business expense.can deduct any additional taxes in the prior year
• Nondeductible premiumsif you do not show some affirmative evidence of Fuel taxes. Generally, taxes on gasoline, die-
denial of the liability. sel fuel, and other motor fuels that you use in • Capitalized premiums
your business are included as part of the cost ofHowever, if you consistently deduct addi- • When to deduct premiumsthe fuel. Do not deduct these taxes as a sepa-tional assessments in the year they are paid or
rate item.finally determined (including those for which
You may be entitled to a credit or refund forthere was no contest), you must continue to do Useful Items
federal excise tax you paid on fuels used forso. You cannot take a deduction in the earlier You may want to see:
certain purposes. For more information, seeyear unless you receive permission to change
Publication 510.your method of accounting. For more informa- Publication
tion on accounting methods, see When Can I Occupational taxes. You can deduct as a ❏ 15-B Employer's Tax Guide to FringeDeduct an Expense? in chapter 1. business expense an occupational tax charged Benefitsat a flat rate by a locality for the privilege ofForeign income taxes. Generally, you can
❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Incomeworking or conducting a business in the locality.take either a deduction or a credit for income
taxes imposed on you by a foreign country or a ❏ 538 Accounting Periods and MethodsPersonal property tax. You can deduct anyU.S. possession. However, an individual cannot tax imposed by a state or local government on ❏ 547 Casualties, Disasters, and Theftstake a deduction or credit for foreign income personal property used in your trade or busi-taxes paid on income that is exempt from U.S. ness. Form (and Instructions)tax under the foreign earned income exclusion
or the foreign housing exclusion. For information Sales tax. Treat any sales tax you pay on a ❏ 1040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Returnon these exclusions, see Publication 54, Tax service or on the purchase or use of property as
Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resident Aliens part of the cost of the service or property. If the See chapter 12 for information about gettingAbroad. For information on the foreign tax credit, service or the cost or use of the property is a publications and forms.see Publication 514, Foreign Tax Credit for Indi- deductible business expense, you can deduct
viduals. the tax as part of that service or cost. If the
property is merchandise bought for resale, the
sales tax is part of the cost of the merchandise. If
Deductible Premiumsthe property is depreciable, add the sales tax to
Employment Taxes the basis for depreciation. For more information
You generally can deduct premiums you pay foron basis, see Publication 551.
the following kinds of insurance related to yourIf you have employees, you must withhold vari- Do not deduct state and local sales trade or business. ous taxes from your employees' pay. Most em- taxes imposed on the buyer that youployers must withhold their employees' share of must collect and pay over to the state 1. Insurance that covers fire, storm, theft, ac-
CAUTION
!social security and Medicare taxes along with or local government. Also, do not include these cident, or similar losses.state and federal income taxes. You may also taxes in gross receipts or sales.need to pay certain employment taxes from your 2. Credit insurance that covers losses from
own funds. These include your share of social business bad debts.Self-employment tax. You can deductsecurity and Medicare taxes as an employer, one-half of your self-employment tax as a busi- 3. Group hospitalization and medical insur-along with unemployment taxes. ness expense in figuring your adjusted gross ance for employees, including long-termYour deduction for wages paid is not re- income. This deduction only affects your income care insurance.duced by the social security, medicare, and in- tax. It does not affect your net earnings fromcome taxes you withhold from your employees. self-employment or your self-employment tax. a. If a partnership pays accident andYou can deduct the employment taxes you must To deduct the tax, enter on Form 1040, line health insurance premiums for its part-pay from your own funds as taxes. 27, the amount shown on the Deduction for ners, it generally can deduct them as
one-half of self-employment tax line of Schedule guaranteed payments to partners.Example. You pay your employee $18,000 SE (Form 1040).a year. However, after you withhold various b. If an S corporation pays accident andFor more information on self-employmenttaxes, your employee receives $14,500. You health insurance premiums for itstax, see Publication 334.also pay an additional $1,500 in employment more-than-2% shareholder-employees,
taxes. You should deduct the full $18,000 as it generally can deduct them, but must
wages. You can deduct the $1,500 you pay from also include them in the shareholder's
your own funds as taxes. wages subject to federal income tax
For more information on employment taxes, withholding. See Publication 15-B.
see Publication 15 (Circular E).
4. Liability insurance.6.Unemployment fund taxes. As an employer,
you may have to make payments to a state 5. Malpractice insurance that covers your
unemployment compensation fund or to a state personal liability for professional negli-
disability benefit fund. Deduct these payments gence resulting in injury or damage to pa-Insuranceas taxes. tients or clients.
6. Workers' compensation insurance set by
state law that covers any claims for bodilyIntroduction injuries or job-related diseases suffered byOther Taxes You generally can deduct the ordinary and nec- employees in your business, regardless of
essary cost of insurance as a business expense fault.The following are other taxes you can deduct if if it is for your trade, business, or profession.you incur them in the ordinary course of your a. If a partnership pays workers' compen-However, you may have to capitalize certaintrade or business. sation premiums for its partners, it gen-insurance costs under the uniform capitalization
erally can deduct them as guaranteedExcise taxes. You can deduct as a business rules. For more information, see Capitalized
payments to partners.expense all excise taxes that are ordinary and Premiums, later.
Chapter 6 Insurance Page 17

Page 18 of 49 of Publication 535 15:54 - 26-MAR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
b. If an S corporation pays workers' com- payments to be included in your gross in- would be reimbursed under Medicare, ex-
cept where Medicare is a secondary payercome. However, if the policy is in yourpensation premiums for its
or the contract makes per diem or othername and you pay the premiums yourself,more-than-2% shareholder-employees,
periodic payments without regard to ex-the partnership must reimburse you andit generally can deduct them, but must
penses.report the premium amounts on Schedulealso include them in the shareholder's
K-1 (Form 1065) as guaranteed paymentswages.
Qualified long-term care services. Quali-to be included in your gross income. Oth-
fied long-term care services are:7. Contributions to a state unemployment in- erwise, the insurance plan will not be con-
surance fund are deductible as taxes if sidered to be established under your • Necessary diagnostic, preventive, thera-
they are considered taxes under state law. business. peutic, curing, treating, mitigating, and re-
habilitative services, and8. Overhead insurance that pays for business • For more-than-2% shareholders, a policy
can be either in the name of the S corpo-overhead expenses you have during long • Maintenance or personal care services.
ration or in the name of the shareholder.periods of disability caused by your injury The services must be required by a chronically illYou can either pay the premiums yourselfor sickness. individual and prescribed by a licensed healthor your S corporation can pay them and9. Car and other vehicle insurance that cov- care practitioner.report the premium amounts on Form W-2ers vehicles used in your business for lia- as wages to be included in your gross Chronically ill individual. A chronically illbility, damages, and other losses. If you individual is a person who has been certified asincome. However, if the policy is in youroperate a vehicle partly for personal use, one of the following.name and you pay the premiums yourself,deduct only the part of the insurance pre- the S corporation must reimburse you and • An individual who has been unable, due tomium that applies to the business use of report the premium amounts on Form W-2 loss of functional capacity for at least 90the vehicle. If you use the standard mile- as wages to be included in your gross days, to perform at least two activities ofage rate to figure your car expenses, you income. Otherwise, the insurance plan will daily living without substantial assistancecannot deduct any car insurance premi- not be considered to be established under from another individual. Activities of dailyums. your business. living are eating, toileting, transferring
10. Life insurance covering your officers and (general mobility), bathing, dressing, and
employees if you are not directly or indi- continence.Medicare Part B premiums are not con-rectly a beneficiary under the contract. sidered medical insurance premiums • An individual who requires substantial su-
for purposes of the self-employed11. Business interruption insurance that pays
TIP pervision to be protected from threats to
health insurance deduction.for lost profits if your business is shut down health and safety due to severe cognitive
due to a fire or other cause. Take the deduction on Form 1040, line 29. impairment.
The certification must have been made by aQualified long-term care insurance. You licensed health care practitioner within the previ-Self-Employed Health can include premiums paid on a qualified ous 12 months.Insurance Deduction long-term care insurance contract for you, your
Benefits received. For information on ex-spouse, or your dependents when figuring yourYou may be able to deduct premiums paid for cluding benefits you receive from a long-termdeduction. But, for each person covered, youmedical and dental insurance and qualified care contract from gross income, see Publica-can include only the smaller of the followinglong-term care insurance for you, your spouse, tion 525.amounts.and your dependents if you are one of the follow-
Other coverage. You cannot take the deduc-ing. 1. The amount paid for that person.
tion for any month you were eligible to partici-• A self-employed individual with a net profit 2. The amount shown below. Use the per- pate in any employer (including your spouse's)
reported on Schedule C (Form 1040), son's age at the end of the tax year. subsidized health plan at any time during that
Profit or Loss From Business; Schedule month, even if you did not actually participate.a. Age 40 or younger±$320C-EZ (Form 1040), Net Profit From Busi- This rule is applied separately to plans that pro-
ness; or Schedule F (Form 1040), Profit or vide long-term care insurance and plans that dob. Age 41 to 50±$600
Loss From Farming. not provide long-term care insurance. However,c. Age 51 to 60±$1,190 any medical insurance payments not deductible• A partner with net earnings from
on Form 1040, line 29, can be included as medi-d. Age 61 to 70±$3,180self-employment reported on Schedule cal expenses on Schedule A (Form 1040), Item-K-1 (Form 1065), Partner's Share of In- e. Age 71 or older±$3,980 ized Deductions, if you itemize deductions.come, Deductions, Credits, etc., box 14,
code A. Effect on itemized deductions. Subtract theQualified long-term care insurance con-
health insurance deduction from your medical• A shareholder owning more than 2% of tract. A qualified long-term care insurance
insurance when figuring medical expenses onthe outstanding stock of an S corporation contract is an insurance contract that only pro-
Schedule A (Form 1040) if you itemize deduc-with wages from the corporation reported vides coverage of qualified long-term care serv-
tions.on Form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement. ices. The contract must meet all the following
requirements. Effect on self-employment tax. Do not sub-The insurance plan must be established, or tract the health insurance deduction when figur-• It must be guaranteed renewable.considered to be established as discussed in the ing net earnings for your self-employment tax.following bullets, under your business. • It must provide that refunds, other than
refunds on the death of the insured or How to figure the deduction. Generally, you• For self-employed individuals filing a complete surrender or cancellation of the can use the worksheet in the Form 1040 instruc-Schedule C, C-EZ, or F, a policy can be contract, and dividends under the contract tions to figure your deduction. However, if any ofeither in the name of the business or in the may be used only to reduce future premi- the following apply, you must use Worksheetname of the individual. ums or increase future benefits. 6-A in this chapter.
• For partners, a policy can be either in the • It must not provide for a cash surrender • You had more than one source of incomename of the partnership or in the name of value or other money that can be paid, subject to self-employment tax.the partner. You can either pay the premi- assigned, pledged, or borrowed.ums yourself or your partnership can pay • You file Form 2555, Foreign Earned In-
them and report the premium amounts on • It generally must not pay or reimburse ex- come, or Form 2555-EZ, Foreign Earned
Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) as guaranteed penses incurred for services or items that Income Exclusion.
Page 18 Chapter 6 Insurance

Page 19 of 49 of Publication 535 15:54 - 26-MAR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• You are using amounts paid for qualified Worksheet 6-A. Self-Employed
long-term care insurance to figure the de- Health Insurance Deduction
duction. Worksheet Keep for Your Records
If you are claiming the health coverage tax
1. Enter total payments made during the year for health insurancecredit, complete Form 8885, Health Coverage
coverage established under your business for you, your spouse, andTax Credit, before you figure this deduction.
your dependents. Do not include payments for any month you were
Health coverage tax credit. You may be eligible to participate in a health plan subsidized by your or your
able to take this credit only if you were an eligible spouse's employer or:
trade adjustment assistance (TAA) recipient, al- • Any amounts paid from retirement plan distributions that were
ternative TAA (ATAA) recipient, reemployment nontaxable because you are a retired public safety officer,
trade adjustment assistance (RTAA) recipient, • Any amounts you included on Form 8885, line 4,
or Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation pen- • Any qualified health insurance premiums you paid to ªU.S.
sion recipient. Use Form 8885 to figure the Treasury-HCTC,º or
amount, if any, of this credit. • Any health coverage tax credit advance payments shown in box 1
When figuring the amount to enter on line 1 of Form 1099-H.
Also, do not include payments for qualified long-term careof Worksheet 6-A, do not include the following.
insurance. ....................................... . 1.• Any amounts paid from retirement plan 2. For coverage under a qualified long-term care insurance contract,distributions that were nontaxable be- enter for each person covered the smaller of the following amounts.cause you are a retired public safety of- a) Total payments made for that person during the year.ficer. b) The amount shown below. Use the person's age at the end of the
tax year.• Any amounts you included on Form 8885,
 $320Ðif that person is age 40 or youngerline 4.
$600Ðif age 41 to 50• Any qualified health insurance premiums $1,190Ðif age 51 to 60you paid to ªU.S. Treasury-HCTC.º $3,180Ðif age 61 to 70
$3,980Ðif age 71 or older• Any health coverage tax credit advance
Do not include payments for any month you were eligible topayments shown in box 1 of Form 1099-H,
participate in a long-term care insurance plan subsidized by yourHealth Coverage Tax Credit (HCTC) Ad-
or your spouse's employer even if you did not actually participate.vance Payments.
If more than one person is covered, figure separately the amount
to enter for each person. Then enter the total of those amounts . . 2.More than one health plan and business.
3. Add the total of lines 1 and 2 ........................... . 3.If you have more than one health plan during the
4. Enter your net profit* and any other earned income** from the trade oryear and each plan is established under a differ- business under which the insurance plan is established. If theent business, you must use separate work- business is an S corporation, skip to line 11 ................. . 4.sheets (Worksheet 6-A) to figure each plan's net 5. Enter the total of all net profits* from: Schedule C (Form 1040), lineearnings limit. Include the premium you paid 31; Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040), line 3; Schedule F (Form 1040), lineunder each plan on line 1 or line 2 of that sepa- 36; or Schedule K-1 (Form 1065), box 14, code A; plus any otherrate worksheet and your net profit (or wages) income allocable to the profitable businesses. See the Instructions for
from that business on line 4 (or line 11). For a Schedule SE (Form 1040). Do not include any net losses shown on
plan that provides long-term care insurance, the these schedules. ................................... . 5.
total of the amounts entered for each person on 6. Divide line 4 by line 5 ................................ . 6.
line 2 of all worksheets cannot be more than the 7. Multiply Form 1040, line 27, by the percentage on line 6 ......... . 7.
appropriate limit shown on line 2 for that person. 8. Subtract line 7 from line 4 ............................. . 8.
9. Enter the amount, if any, from Form 1040, line 28, attributable to the
same trade or business in which the insurance plan is established .. . 9.
10. Subtract line 9 from line 8 ............................. . 10.
11. Enter your Medicare wages (Form W-2, box 5) from an S corporationNondeductible
in which you are a more-than-2% shareholder and in which the
insurance plan is established ........................... . 11.Premiums
12. Enter the amount from Form 2555, line 45, attributable to the amount
entered on line 4 or 11 above, or the amount from Form 2555-EZ, lineYou cannot deduct premiums on the following
18, attributable to the amount entered on line 11 above ......... . 12.kinds of insurance.
13. Subtract line 12 from line 10 or 11, whichever applies .......... . 13.
1. Self-insurance reserve funds.  You cannot 14. Compare the amounts on lines 3 and 13 above. Enter the smaller of
deduct amounts credited to a reserve set the two amounts here and on Form 1040, line 29. Do not include this
up for self-insurance. This applies even if amount when figuring a medical expense deduction on Schedule A
(Form 1040). ...................................... . 14.you cannot get business insurance cover-
age for certain business risks. However,
* If you used either optional method to figure your net earnings from self-employment from any business, doyour actual losses may be deductible. See
not enter your net profit from the business. Instead, enter the amount attributable to that business fromPublication 547. Schedule SE (Form 1040), line 4b.
* *Earned income includes net earnings and gains from the sale, transfer, or licensing of property you2. Loss of earnings. You cannot deduct pre-
created. However, it does not include capital gain income.miums for a policy that pays for lost earn-
ings due to sickness or disability. However,
see the discussion on overhead insurance,
item (8), under Deductible Premiums, ear- an employee, or any person with a fi- policy. A person has a financial interest
lier. nancial interest in your business if you in your business if the person is an
are directly or indirectly a beneficiary of owner or part owner of the business or3. Certain life insurance and annuities.
the policy. You are included among has lent money to the business.
a. For contracts issued before June 9, possible beneficiaries of the policy if the
1997, you cannot deduct the premiums policy owner is obligated to repay a
on a life insurance policy covering you, loan from you using the proceeds of the
Chapter 6 Insurance Page 19

Page 20 of 49 of Publication 535 15:54 - 26-MAR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
b. For contracts issued after June 8, 1997, More information. For more information on
these rules, see Uniform Capitalization Rules inyou generally cannot deduct the premi-
Publication 538 and the regulations under Inter-ums on any life insurance policy, en-
7.nal Revenue Code section 263A.dowment contract, or annuity contract if
you are directly or indirectly a benefi-
ciary. The disallowance applies without
regard to whom the policy covers. Costs YouWhen To Deductc. Partners. If, as a partner in a partner-
ship, you take out an insurance policy Premiums Can Deducton your own life and name your part-
ners as beneficiaries to induce them to You can usually deduct insurance premiums inretain their investments in the partner- or Capitalizethe tax year to which they apply.ship, you are considered a beneficiary.
Cash method. If you use the cash method ofYou cannot deduct the insurance premi-
accounting, you generally deduct insurance pre-ums.
What's Newmiums in the tax year you actually paid them,
even if you incurred them in an earlier year.4. Insurance to secure a loan. If you take out
However, see Prepayment, later. Environmental cleanup costs. The electiona policy on your life or on the life of an-
to deduct qualified environmental cleanup costsother person with a financial interest in Accrual method. If you use an accrual
has expired for costs paid or incurred after 2009.your business to get or protect a business method of accounting, you cannot deduct insur-
If it is extended, the change will be highlightedloan, you cannot deduct the premiums as ance premiums before the tax year in which you
under What's Hot in forms and publications  ata business expense. Nor can you deduct incur a liability for them. In addition, you cannot
www.irs.gov/formspubs.the premiums as interest on business deduct insurance premiums before the tax year
loans or as an expense of financing loans. in which you actually pay them (unless the ex-
In the event of death, the proceeds of the ception for recurring items applies). For more
policy are generally not taxed as income information about the accrual method of ac-
Introductioncounting, see chapter 1. For information abouteven if they are used to liquidate the debt.
the exception for recurring items, see Publica- This chapter discusses costs you can elect totion 538. deduct or capitalize.
Prepayment. You cannot deduct expenses in You generally deduct a cost as a current
advance, even if you pay them in advance. This business expense by subtracting it from yourCapitalized Premiums rule applies to any expense paid far enough in income in either the year you incur it or the year
advance to, in effect, create an asset with a you pay it.Under the uniform capitalization rules, you must useful life extending substantially beyond the If you capitalize a cost, you may be able tocapitalize the direct costs and part of the indirect end of the current tax year. recover it over a period of years through periodiccosts for certain production or resale activities. Expenses such as insurance are generally deductions for amortization, depletion, or depre-Include these costs in the basis of property you allocable to a period of time. You can deduct ciation. When you capitalize a cost, you add it toproduce or acquire for resale, rather than claim- insurance expenses for the year to which they the basis of property to which it relates.ing them as a current deduction. You recover the are allocable. A partnership, corporation, estate, or trustcosts through depreciation, amortization, or cost
makes the election to deduct or capitalize theof goods sold when you use, sell, or otherwise Example. In 2009, you signed a 3-year in- costs discussed in this chapter except for explo-dispose of the property. surance contract. Even though you paid the pre- ration costs for mineral deposits. Each individualIndirect costs include premiums for insur- miums for 2009, 2010, and 2011 when you partner, shareholder, or beneficiary electsance on your plant or facility, machinery, equip- signed the contract, you can only deduct the whether to deduct or capitalize explorationment, materials, property produced, or property premium for 2009 on your 2009 tax return. You costs.acquired for resale. can deduct in 2010 and 2011 the premium allo-
You may be subject to the alternativecable to those years.
minimum tax (AMT) if you deduct re-Uniform capitalization rules. You may be Dividends received. If you receive dividends search and experimental, intangiblesubject to the uniform capitalization rules if you
CAUTION
! from business insurance and you deducted the drilling, exploration, development, circulation,do any of the following, unless the property is premiums in prior years, at least part of the and business organizational costs.produced for your use other than in a business dividends generally are income. For more infor-or an activity carried on for profit. For more information on the alternative mini-mation, see Recovery of amount deducted (tax mum tax, see the instructions for one of thebenefit rule) in chapter 1 under How Much Can I1. Produce real property or tangible personal following forms.Deduct?property. For this purpose, tangible per-
• Form 6251, Alternative Minimum TaxÐIn-sonal property includes a film, sound re-
dividuals.cording, video tape, book, or similar
property. • Form 4626, Alternative Minimum TaxÐ
Corporations.2. Acquire property for resale.
However, these rules do not apply to the follow- Topicsing property. This chapter discusses:
1. Personal property you acquire for resale if
• Carrying chargesyour average annual gross receipts are
$10 million or less for the 3 prior tax years. • Research and experimental costs
2. Property you produce if you meet either of • Intangible drilling costs
the following conditions.
• Exploration costs
a. Your indirect costs of producing the • Development costsproperty are $200,000 or less.
• Circulation costsb. You use the cash method of accounting
and do not account for inventories. • Environmental cleanup costs
Page 20 Chapter 7 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize

Page 21 of 49 of Publication 535 15:54 - 26-MAR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
IF you . . . THEN . . .• Qualified disaster expenses
• Business start-up and organizational costs Elect to deduct research and Deduct all research and experimental costs in the
experimental costs as a current first year you pay or incur the costs and all later• Reforestation costs business expense years.
• Retired asset removal costs Do not deduct research and If you meet the requirements, amortize them over at
experimental costs as a current least 60 months, starting with the month you first• Barrier removal costs
business expense receive an economic benefit from the research. See• Film and television production costs Research and Experimental Costs in chapter 8.
Useful Items
• Quality control testing.You may want to see:
Research and • Research in connection with literary, his-Publication torical, or similar projects.
Experimental Costs❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of • The acquisition of another's patent, model,
Assets production, or process.The costs of research and experimentation are
generally capital expenses. However, you canForm (and Instructions) elect to deduct these costs as a current business When and how to elect. You make the elec-
expense. Your election to deduct these costs is tion to deduct research and experimental costs❏ 3468 Investment Credit binding for the year it is made and for all later by deducting them on your tax return for the year❏ 8826 Disabled Access Credit years unless you get IRS approval to make a in which you first pay or incur research and
change. experimental costs. If you do not make the elec-See chapter 12 for information about getting If you meet certain requirements, you may tion to deduct research and experimental costspublications and forms. elect to defer and amortize research and experi- in the first year in which you pay or incur the
mental costs. For information on electing to de- costs, you can deduct the costs in a later year
fer and amortize these costs, see Research and only with approval from the IRS.
Experimental Costs  in chapter 8.
Carrying Charges Research credit. If you pay or incur qualified
Research and experimental costs defined. research expenses, you may be able to take the
Research and experimental costs are reasona-Carrying charges include the taxes and interest research credit. For more information about the
ble costs you incur in your trade or business foryou pay to carry or develop real property or to research credit, see the instructions to Form
activities intended to provide information thatcarry, transport, or install personal property. 6765, Credit for Increasing Research Activities.
would eliminate uncertainty about the develop-Certain carrying charges must be capitalized
ment or improvement of a product. Uncertaintyunder the uniform capitalization rules. (For infor-
exists if the information available to you does notmation on capitalization of interest, see chapter
establish how to develop or improve a product or4.) You can elect to capitalize carrying charges Intangible the appropriate design of a product. Whethernot subject to the uniform capitalization rules,
costs qualify as research and experimentalbut only if they are otherwise deductible. Drilling Costs
costs depends on the nature of the activity toYou can elect to capitalize carrying charges
which the costs relate rather than on the natureseparately for each project you have and for The costs of developing oil, gas, or geothermal
of the product or improvement being developedeach type of carrying charge. For unimproved wells are ordinarily capital expenditures. You
or the level of technological advancement.and unproductive real property, your election is can usually recover them through depreciation
The costs of obtaining a patent, includinggood for only 1 year. You must decide whether or depletion. However, you can elect to deduct
attorneys' fees paid or incurred in making andto capitalize carrying charges each year the intangible drilling costs (IDCs) as a current busi-
perfecting a patent application, are research andproperty remains unimproved and unproductive. ness expense. These are certain drilling and
experimental costs. However, costs paid or in-For other real property, your election to capital- development costs for wells in the United States
curred to obtain another's patent are not re-ize carrying charges remains in effect until con- in which you hold an operating or working inter-
search and experimental costs.struction or development is completed. For est. You can deduct only costs for drilling or
personal property, your election is effective until preparing a well for the production of oil, gas, orProduct. The term ªproductº includes any ofthe date you install or first use it, whichever is geothermal steam or hot water.the following items.later. You can elect to deduct only the costs of
• Formula. items with no salvage value. These includeHow to make the election. To make the elec- wages, fuel, repairs, hauling, and supplies re-• Invention.tion to capitalize a carrying charge, write a state- lated to drilling wells and preparing them forment saying which charges you elect to • Patent. production. Your cost for any drilling or develop-capitalize. Attach it to your original tax return for ment work done by contractors under any form• Pilot model.the year the election is to be effective. However, of contract is also an IDC. However, seeif you timely filed your return for the year without • Process. Amounts paid to contractor that must be capital-making the election, you can still make the elec- ized, later.• Technique.tion by filing an amended return within 6 months You can also elect to deduct the cost ofof the due date of the return (excluding exten- • Property similar to the items listed above. drilling exploratory bore holes to determine thesions). Attach the statement to the amended location and delineation of offshore hydrocarbonIt also includes products used by you in yourreturn and write ªFiled pursuant to section deposits if the shaft is capable of conductingtrade or business or held for sale, lease, or301.9100-2º on the statement. File the amended hydrocarbons to the surface on completion. Itlicense.return at the same address you filed the original does not matter whether there is any intent toreturn. Costs not included. Research and experi- produce hydrocarbons.
mental costs do not include expenses for any of If you do not elect to deduct your IDCs as a
the following activities. current business expense, you can elect to de-
duct them over the 60-month period beginning• Advertising or promotions.
with the month they were paid or incurred.
• Consumer surveys.
Amounts paid to contractor that must be• Efficiency surveys. capitalized. Amounts paid to a contractor
• Management studies. must be capitalized if they are either:
Chapter 7 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize Page 21

Page 22 of 49 of Publication 535 15:54 - 26-MAR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Amounts properly allocable to the cost of describe and identify each property or mine, and Under these circumstances, you generally
depreciable property, or clearly state how much is being deducted for treat as ordinary income all of your gain if it is
each one. The election applies to the tax year less than your adjusted exploration costs with• Amounts paid only out of production or you make this election and all later tax years. respect to the mine. If your gain is more thanproceeds from production if these your adjusted exploration costs, treat as ordi-amounts are depletable income to the re- Partnerships. Each partner, not the part- nary income only a part of your gain, up to thecipient. nership, elects whether to capitalize or to deduct amount of your adjusted exploration costs.that partner's share of exploration costs.
Foreign exploration costs. If you pay or incurHow to make the election. You elect to de- Reduced corporate deductions for explora- exploration costs for a mine or other naturalduct IDCs as a current business expense by tion costs. A corporation (other than an S deposit located outside the United States, youtaking the deduction on your income tax return corporation) can deduct only 70% of its domes- cannot deduct all the costs in the current year.for the first tax year you have eligible costs. No tic exploration costs. It must capitalize the re- You can elect to include the costs (other than forformal statement is required. If you file Schedule maining 30% of costs and amortize them over an oil, gas, or geothermal well) in the adjustedC (Form 1040), enter these costs under ªOther the 60-month period starting with the month the basis of the mineral property to figure cost de-expenses.º exploration costs are paid or incurred. A corpo- pletion. (Cost depletion is discussed in chapterFor oil and gas wells, your election is binding ration may also elect to capitalize and amortize 9.) If you do not make this election, you mustfor the year it is made and for all later years. For mining exploration costs over a 10-year period. deduct the costs over the 10-year period begin-geothermal wells, your election can be revoked For more information on this method of amorti- ning with the tax year in which you pay or incurby the filing of an amended return on which you zation, see Internal Revenue Code section them. These rules also apply to foreign develop-do not take the deduction. You can file the 59(e). ment costs.amended return for the year up to the normal The 30% the corporation capitalizes cannot
time of expiration for filing a claim for credit or be added to its basis in the property to figure
refund, generally, within 3 years after the date cost depletion. However, the amount amortized
you filed the original return or within 2 years after is treated as additional depreciation and is sub-
Development Coststhe date you paid the tax, whichever is later. ject to recapture as ordinary income on a dispo-
sition of the property. See Section 1250Energy credit for costs of geothermal wells. You can deduct costs paid or incurred during theProperty under Depreciation Recapture in chap-If you capitalize the drilling and development tax year for developing a mine or any otherter 3 of Publication 544.costs of geothermal wells that you place in serv- natural deposit (other than an oil or gas well)These rules also apply to the deduction ofice during the tax year, you may be able to claim located in the United States. These costs mustdevelopment costs by corporations. See Devel-a business energy credit. See the instructions be paid or incurred after the discovery of ores oropment Costs, later.for Form 3468 for more information. minerals in commercially marketable quantities.
Development costs include those incurred forRecapture of exploration expenses. WhenNonproductive well. If you capitalize your
you by a contractor. Also, development costsyour mine reaches the producing stage, youIDCs, you have another option if the well is
include depreciation on improvements used inmust recapture any exploration costs younonproductive. You can deduct the IDCs of the
the development of ores or minerals. They doelected to deduct. Use either of the followingnonproductive well as an ordinary loss. You
not include costs for the acquisition or improve-methods.must indicate and clearly state your election on
ment of depreciable property.your tax return for the year the well is completed. Method 1ÐInclude the deducted costs in Instead of deducting development costs inOnce made, the election for oil and gas wells is gross income for the tax year the mine the year paid or incurred, you can elect to treatbinding for all later years. You can revoke your reaches the producing stage. Your election them as deferred expenses and deduct themelection for a geothermal well by filing an must be clearly indicated on the return. In- ratably as the units of produced ores or mineralsamended return that does not claim the loss. crease your adjusted basis in the mine by benefited by the expenses are sold. This elec-Costs incurred outside the United States. the amount included in income. Generally, tion applies each tax year to expenses paid orYou cannot deduct as a current business ex- you must elect this recapture method by the incurred in that year. Once made, the election ispense all the IDCs paid or incurred for an oil, due date (including extensions) of your re- binding for the year and cannot be revoked forgas, or geothermal well located outside the turn. However, if you timely filed your return any reason.United States. However, you can elect to include for the year without making the election,
the costs in the adjusted basis of the well to How to make the election. The election toyou can still make the election by filing an
figure depletion or depreciation. If you do not deduct development costs ratably as the ores oramended return within 6 months of the due
make this election, you can deduct the costs minerals are sold must be made for each minedate of the return (excluding extensions).
over the 10-year period beginning with the tax or other natural deposit by a clear indication onMake the election on your amended return
year in which you paid or incurred them. These your return or by a statement filed with the IRSand write ªFiled pursuant to section
rules do not apply to a nonproductive well. office where you file your return. Generally, you301.9100-2º on the form where you are in-
must make the election by the due date of thecluding the income. File the amended re-
return (including extensions). However, if youturn at the same address you filed the
timely filed your return for the year without mak-original return.
ing the election, you can still make the electionExploration Costs Method 2ÐDo not claim any depletion de- by filing an amended return within 6 months ofduction for the tax year the mine reaches the due date of the return (excluding exten-The costs of determining the existence, location, the producing stage and any later tax years sions). Clearly indicate the election on yourextent, or quality of any mineral deposit are until the depletion you would have deducted amended return and write ªFiled pursuant toordinarily capital expenditures if the costs lead equals the exploration costs you deducted. section 301.9100-2.º File the amended return atto the development of a mine. You recover these
the same address you filed the original return.costs through depletion as the mineral is re- You also must recapture deducted explora-moved from the ground. However, you can elect tion costs if you receive a bonus or royalty from Foreign development costs. The rules dis-to deduct domestic exploration costs paid or mine property before it reaches the producing cussed earlier for foreign exploration costs applyincurred before the beginning of the develop- stage. Do not claim any depletion deduction for to foreign development costs.ment stage of the mine (except those for oil, gas, the tax year you receive the bonus or royalty andand geothermal wells). Reduced corporate deductions for develop-any later tax years, until the depletion you would
ment costs. The rules discussed earlier forHow to make the election. You elect to de- have deducted equals the exploration costs you
reduced corporate deductions for explorationduct exploration costs by taking the deduction deducted.
costs also apply to corporate deductions for de-on your income tax return, or on an amended Generally, if you dispose of the mine before
velopment costs.income tax return, for the first tax year for which you have fully recaptured the exploration costs
you wish to deduct the costs paid or incurred you deducted, recapture the balance by treating
during the tax year. Your return must adequately all or part of your gain as ordinary income.
Page 22 Chapter 7 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize

Page 23 of 49 of Publication 535 15:54 - 26-MAR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Hazardous substance. Hazardous sub- qualified contaminated site). An election to de-Circulation Costs stances are defined in section 101(14) of the duct an expenditure for one year has no effect
Comprehensive Environmental Response, on other years. You must make a separate elec-A publisher can deduct as a current business Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 and tion for each year in which you intend to deductexpense the costs of establishing, maintaining, certain substances are designated as hazard- environmental cleanup costs.or increasing the circulation of a newspaper, ous in section 102 of the Act. Also, petroleummagazine, or other periodical. For example, a Recapture. This deduction may have to beproducts are treated as hazardous substances.publisher can deduct the cost of hiring extra recaptured as ordinary income under sectionHowever, substances are not hazardous if aemployees for a limited time to get new sub- 1245 when you sell or otherwise dispose of theremoval or remedial action is prohibited underscriptions through telephone calls. Circulation property that would have received an addition tosections 104 and 104(a)(3) of the Act.costs are deductible even if they normally would basis if you had not elected to deduct the expen-
Qualified contaminated site. A qualifiedbe capitalized. diture. For more information on recapturing the
contaminated site is any area that meets both of deduction, see Depreciation Recapture in Publi-This rule does not apply to the following the following requirements. cation 544.costs that must be capitalized.
1. You hold it for use in a trade or business,• The purchase of land or depreciable prop- More information. For more information
for the production of income, or as inven-erty. about the environmental cleanup cost deduc-
tory. tion, see Internal Revenue Code section 198.• The acquisition of circulation through the
2. There has been a release, threat of re-purchase of any part of the business of
lease, or disposal of any hazardous sub-another publisher of a newspaper, maga-
stance at or on the site.zine, or other periodical, including the
Qualified Disasterpurchase of another publisher's list of sub- You must get a statement from the designated
scribers. state environmental agency that the site meets Expensesrequirement (2).
Other treatment of circulation costs. If you You can elect to deduct rather than capitalizeA site is not eligible if it is on, or proposed for,
do not want to deduct circulation costs as a any qualified disaster expenses that you paid orthe national priorities list under section
current business expense, you can elect one of incurred after 2007.105(a)(8)(B) of the Comprehensive Environ-
the following ways to recover these costs. mental Response, Compensation, and Liability Qualified disaster expense. A qualified dis-Act of 1980. To find out if a site is on the national• Capitalize all circulation costs that are aster expense is an expenditure that:priorities list, contact the U.S. Environmentalproperly chargeable to a capital account
Protection Agency.(see chapter 1). 1. Is paid or incurred in connection with a
trade or business or with business-relatedExpenditures for depreciable property.• Amortize circulation costs over the 3-year
property,You cannot deduct the cost of acquiring depre-period beginning with the tax year they
ciable property used in connection with thewere paid or incurred. 2. Is otherwise capitalized, andabatement or control of hazardous substances
3. Is for one of the following purposes.at a qualified contaminated site. However, the
How to make the election. You elect to capi- part of the depreciation for such property that is
talize circulation costs by attaching a statement a. The abatement or control of hazardousotherwise allocated to the qualified contami-
to your return for the first tax year the election substances that were released becausenated site shall be treated as an environmental
applies. Your election is binding for the year it is of a federally declared disaster occur-cleanup cost.
made and for all later years, unless you get IRS ring before January 1, 2010,
approval to revoke it. b. The removal of debris from, or the dem-When and how to elect. You elect to deduct olition of structures on, real propertyenvironmental cleanup costs by taking the de- that is business-related property dam-duction on the income tax return (filed by the due aged or destroyed as a result of a fed-date including extensions) for the tax year in erally declared disaster occurringEnvironmental Cleanup which the costs are paid or incurred. The costs before such date, orare deducted differently depending on the typeCosts of business entity involved. c. The repair of business-related property
damaged as a result of a federally de-Individuals. Deduct the environmentalEnvironmental cleanup costs are generally capi- clared disaster occurring before suchcleanup costs on the ªOther Expensesº line oftal expenditures. However, you can elect to de- date.Schedule C, E, or F (Form 1040). If the scheduleduct these costs as a current business expense
requires you to separately identify each expenseif certain requirements (discussed later) are met.
included in ªOther Expensesº write ªSection 198This special tax treatment is generally available Federally declared disaster. A federally de-Electionº on the line next to the environmentalfor environmental cleanup costs you pay or incur clared disaster is a disaster that occurred in ancleanup costs.before January 1, 2010 (2011 for certain Mid- area declared by the President to be eligible forwestern disaster areas). federal assistance under the Robert T. StaffordAll other entities. All other taxpayers (in-
Relief and Emergency Assistance Act.cluding S corporations, partnerships, and trusts)
deduct the environmental cleanup costs on theEnvironmental cleanup costs. Environmen- Business-related property. Busi-ªOther Deductionsº line of the appropriate fed-tal cleanup costs are generally costs you pay or ness-related property is property you held (a) foreral income tax return. On a schedule attachedincur to abate or control hazardous substances use in a trade or business or for the productionto the return that separately identifies each ex-at a qualified contaminated site. of income or (b) that is stock in trade or otherpense included in ªOther Deductionsº writeFor costs paid or incurred in a Midwestern property included in inventory or held mainly forªSection 198 Electionº on the line next to thedisaster area on or after the applicable disaster sale to customers.amount for environmental cleanup costs.date, treat a site as a qualified contaminated site
only if the release (or threat of release) or dispo- More than one environmental cleanup Recapture. If you made the election to deduct
sal of a hazardous substance at the site was cost. If, for any tax year, you pay or incur more qualified disaster expenses, the deduction may
caused by a disaster in a Midwestern disaster than one environmental cleanup cost, you can have to be recaptured as ordinary income under
area described in Table 1 (located in Publication elect to deduct one or more of such expendi- section 1245 when you sell or otherwise dispose
4492-B). See Publication 4492-B, Information tures for that year. You can elect to deduct one of the property that would have received an
for Affected Taxpayers in the Midwestern Disas- expenditure and elect to capitalize another ex- addition to basis had you not made the election.
ter Area, for Table 1 and the definition of applica- penditure (whether or not they are of the same For more information on recapturing the deduc-
ble date and Midwestern disaster area. type or paid or incurred with respect to the same tion, see  Depreciation and amortization  under
Chapter 7 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize Page 23

Page 24 of 49 of Publication 535 15:54 - 26-MAR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Gain Treated as Ordinary Income in Publication How to make the election. You elect to de-
544. duct qualifying reforestation costs by claiming Barrier Removal Costs
the deduction on your timely filed income tax
More information. For more information return (including extensions) for the tax year the The cost of an improvement to a business assetabout expensing of qualified disaster expenses, expenses were paid or incurred. If Form T (Tim- is normally a capital expense. However, you cansee Internal Revenue Code section 198A. elect to deduct the costs of making a facility orber), Forest Activities Schedule, is required,
public transportation vehicle more accessible tocomplete Part IV of Form T. If Form T is not
and usable by those who are disabled or elderly.required, attach a statement containing the fol-
You must own or lease the facility or vehicle forlowing information for each qualified timberBusiness Start-Up and use in connection with your trade or business.property for which an election is being made.
A facility is all or any part of buildings, struc-
• The unique stand identification numbers.Organizational Costs tures, equipment, roads, walks, parking lots, or
similar real or personal property. A public trans-• The total number of acres reforested dur-Business start-up and organizational costs are portation vehicle is a vehicle, such as a bus oring the tax year.generally capital expenditures. However, you railroad car, that provides transportation service
can elect to deduct up to $5,000 of business • The nature of the reforestation treatments. to the public (including service for your custom-
start-up and $5,000 of organizational costs paid ers, even if you are not in the business of provid-• The total amounts of qualified reforesta-or incurred after October 22, 2004. The $5,000 ing transportation services).tion expenditures eligible to be amortizeddeduction is reduced by the amount your total You cannot deduct any costs that you paid oror deducted.start-up or organizational costs exceed $50,000. incurred to completely renovate or build a facility
Any remaining costs must be amortized. For or public transportation vehicle or to replaceHowever, if you timely filed your return for theinformation about amortizing start-up and orga- depreciable property in the normal course ofyear without making the election, you can stillnizational costs, see chapter 8. business.make the election by filing an amended returnStart-up costs include any amounts paid or
within 6 months of the due date of the returnincurred in connection with creating an active Deduction limit. The most you can deduct as
(excluding extensions). Clearly indicate thetrade or business or investigating the creation or a cost of removing barriers to the disabled and
election on your amended return and write ªFiledacquisition of an active trade or business. Orga- the elderly for any tax year is $15,000. However,
pursuant to section 301.9100-2.º File thenizational costs include the costs of creating a you can add any costs over this limit to the basis
corporation. For more information on start-up amended return at the same address you filed of the property and depreciate these excess
and organizational costs, see chapter 8. the original return. The election applies when costs.
computing taxable income for the current tax
Partners and partnerships. The $15,000How to make the election. You elect to de- year and all subsequent years.
limit applies to a partnership and also to eachduct the start-up or organizational costs by If you elected to deduct qualified timber costs partner in the partnership. A partner can allocateclaiming the deduction on the income tax return on a federal income tax return filed before June the $15,000 limit in any manner among the part-(filed by the due date including extensions) for
15, 2006, but did not include the above informa- ner's individually incurred costs and the part-the tax year in which the active trade or business
tion, complete Part IV of Form T or the required ner's distributive share of partnership costs. Ifbegins. However, if you timely filed your return
statement and attach it to the first federal income the partner cannot deduct the entire share offor the year without making the election, you can
tax return you file after June 14, 2006. If you partnership costs, the partnership can add anystill make the election by filing an amended
have not elected to deduct qualified timber costs costs not deducted to the basis of the improvedreturn within 6 months of the due date of the
in a prior year you may be able to do so by filing property.return (excluding extensions). Clearly indicate
A partnership must be able to show that anythe election on your amended return and write Form 3115, Application for Change in Account-
amount added to basis was not deducted by theªFiled pursuant to section 301.9100-2.º File the ing Method. For more information, see Notice
partner and that it was over a partner's $15,000amended return at the same address you filed 2006-47 on page 892 of Internal Revenue Bulle-
limit (as determined by the partner). If the part-the original return. The election applies when tin 2006-20. Internal Revenue Bulletin 2006-20
nership cannot show this, it is presumed that thecomputing taxable income for the current tax is available at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb06-20.
partner was able to deduct the distributive shareyear and all subsequent years. pdf.
of the partnership's costs in full.For additional information on reforestation
costs, see chapter 8. Example. John Duke's distributive share of
ABC partnership's deductible expenses for theReforestation Costs
removal of architectural barriers was $14,000.Recapture. This deduction may have to be
John had $12,000 of similar expenses in his soleReforestation costs are generally capital expen- recaptured as ordinary income under section
proprietorship. He elected to deduct $7,000 ofditures. However, you can elect to deduct up to 1245 when you sell or otherwise dispose of the them. John allocated the remaining $8,000 of$10,000 ($5,000 if married filing separately; $0 property that would have received an addition to the $15,000 limit to his share of ABC's ex-for a trust) of qualifying reforestation costs paid basis if you had not elected to deduct the expen- penses. John can add the excess $5,000 of hisor incurred after October 22, 2004, for each diture. For more information on recapturing the own expenses to the basis of the property usedqualified timber property. The remaining costs deduction, see Depreciation Recapture in Publi- in his business. Also, if ABC can show that Johncan be amortized over an 84-month period. For cation 544. could not deduct $6,000 ($14,000 ± $8,000) ofinformation about amortizing reforestation
his share of the partnership's expenses becausecosts, see chapter 8.
of how John applied the limit, ABC can addQualifying reforestation costs are the direct
$6,000 to the basis of its property.costs of planting or seeding for forestation or
Retired Asset Removalreforestation. Qualified timber property is prop- Qualification standards. You can deducterty that contains trees in significant commercial your costs as a current expense only if the bar-Costsquantities. See chapter 8 for more information rier removal meets the guidelines and require-on qualifying reforestation costs and qualified ments issued by the Architectural andIf you retire and remove a depreciable asset intimber property. Transportation Barriers Compliance Boardconnection with the installation or production ofIf you elect to deduct qualified reforestation under the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)a replacement asset, you can deduct the costscosts, create and maintain separate timber ac- of 1990. You can view the Americans with Disa-of removing the retired asset. However, if youcounts for each qualified timber property and bilities Act at www.ada.gov/pubs/ada.htm.replace a component (part) of a depreciableinclude all reforestation costs and the dates The following is a list of some architecturalasset, capitalize the removal costs if the re-each was applied. Do not include this qualified barrier removal costs that can be deducted.placement is an improvement and deduct thetimber property in any account (for example,
costs if the replacement is a repair.depletion block) for which depletion is allowed. • Ground and floor surfaces.
Page 24 Chapter 7 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize

Page 25 of 49 of Publication 535 15:54 - 26-MAR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Walks. extensions. However, if you timely filed your • Amortizing costs of pollution control facili-
return for the year without making the election, ties• Parking lots. you can still make the election by filing an • Amortizing costs of research and experi-• Ramps. amended return within 6 months of the due date mentationof the return (excluding extensions). Clearly indi-• Entrances. • Amortizing costs of certain tax preferencescate the election on your amended return and
• Doors and doorways. write ªFiled pursuant to section 301.9100-2.º File
the amended return at the same address you• Stairs. Useful Itemsfiled the original return. Your election is irrevoca-
You may want to see:• Floors. ble after the due date, including extensions, of
your return.• Toilet rooms. Publication
• Water fountains. Disabled access credit. If you make your ❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of
business accessible to persons with disabilities• Telephones. Assets
and your business is an eligible small business,
• Elevators. ❏ 550 Investment Income and Expensesyou may be able to claim the disabled access
credit. If you choose to claim the credit, you must• Controls. ❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property
reduce the amount you deduct or capitalize by
• Signage. the amount of the credit. Form (and Instructions)
For more information about the disabled ac-• Alarms.
❏ 4562 Depreciation and Amortizationcess credit, see Form 8826.• Protruding objects.
❏ 4626 Alternative Minimum TaxÐ
• Symbols of accessibility. Corporations
You can find the ADA guidelines and require- ❏ 6251 Alternative Minimum TaxÐFilm and Televisionments for architectural barrier removal at www. Individuals
usdoj.gov/crt/ada/reg3a.html.
Production Costs See chapter 12 for information about gettingThe following is a list of some deductible
publications and forms.transportation barrier removal costs. Film and television production costs are gener-
ally capital expenses. However, you can elect to• Rail facilities.
deduct costs paid or incurred for certain produc-
• Buses. tions that begin after October 22, 2004. For
How To Deductmore information, see section 181 of the Internal• Rapid and light rail vehicles.
Revenue Code and Temporary Regulations
AmortizationYou can find the guidelines and requirements for sections 1.181-1T through 1.181-6T.
transportation barrier removal at www.fta.dot.
To deduct amortization that begins during thegov.
current tax year, complete Part VI of Form 4562Also, you can access the ADA website at and attach it to your income tax return.www.ada.gov for additional information. To report amortization from previous years,
Other barrier removals. To be deductible, in addition to amortization that begins in the
expenses of removing any barrier not covered current year, list on Form 4562 each item sepa-8.by the above standards must meet all three of rately. For example, in 2008, you began to amor-
the following tests. tize a lease. In 2009, you began to amortize a
second lease. Report amortization from the new1. The removed barrier must be a substantial lease on line 42 of your 2009 Form 4562. ReportAmortizationbarrier to access or use of a facility or amortization from the 2008 lease on line 43 ofpublic transportation vehicle by persons your 2009 Form 4562.who have a disability or are elderly. If you do not have any new amortizable ex-
2. The removed barrier must have been a Introduction penses for the current year, you are not required
barrier for at least one major group of per- to complete Form 4562 (unless you are claimingAmortization is a method of recovering (deduct-sons who have a disability or are elderly depreciation). Report the current year's deduc-ing) certain capital costs over a fixed period of(such as people who are blind, deaf, or tion for amortization that began in a prior yeartime. It is similar to the straight line method ofwheelchair users). directly on the ªOther deductionº or ªOther ex-depreciation. pense lineº of your return.3. The barrier must be removed without cre- The various amortizable costs covered in
ating any new barrier that significantly im- this chapter are included in the list below. How-
pairs access to or use of the facility or ever, this chapter does not discuss amortization
vehicle by a major group of persons who of bond premium. For information on that topic, Starting a Businesshave a disability or are elderly. see chapter 3 of Publication 550, Investment
Income and Expenses. When you start a business, treat all eligible costs
How to make the election. If you elect to you incur before you begin operating the busi-Topicsdeduct your costs for removing barriers to the ness as capital expenditures which are part ofThis chapter discusses:disabled or the elderly, claim the deduction on your basis in the business. Generally, you re-
your income tax return (partnership return for cover costs for particular assets through depre-• Deducting amortizationpartnerships) for the tax year the expenses were ciation deductions. However, you generally
paid or incurred. Identify the deduction as a cannot recover other costs until you sell the• Amortizing costs of starting a business
separate item. The election applies to all the business or otherwise go out of business. See• Amortizing costs of getting a leasequalifying costs you have during the year, up to Capital Expenses in chapter 1 for a discussion
the $15,000 limit. If you make this election, you on how to treat these costs if you do not go into• Amortizing costs of section 197 intangibles
must maintain adequate records to support your business.• Amortizing reforestation costsdeduction. For costs paid or incurred after September 8,
• Amortizing costs of geological and geo-For your election to be valid, you generally 2008, you can deduct a limited amount of
physical costsmust file your return by its due date, including start-up and organizational costs. The costs that
Chapter 8 Amortization Page 25

Page 26 of 49 of Publication 535 15:54 - 26-MAR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
are not deducted currently can be amortized • Salaries and fees for executives and con- Nonqualifying costs. The following items are
ratably over a 180-month period. The amortiza- sultants, or for similar professional serv- capital expenses that cannot be amortized:
tion period starts with the month you begin oper- ices. • Costs for issuing and selling stock or se-ating your active trade or business. You are not curities, such as commissions, profes-required to attach a statement to make this elec- Nonqualifying costs. Start-up costs do not sional fees, and printing costs.tion. Once made, the election is irrevocable. See include deductible interest, taxes, or researchTemporary Regulations sections 1.195-1T, • Costs associated with the transfer of as-and experimental costs. See Research and Ex-1.248-1T, and 1.709-1T. sets to the corporation.perimental Costs, later.
For costs paid after October 22, 2004, and
before September 9, 2008, you can elect to Purchasing an active trade or business. Costs of Organizingdeduct a limited amount of business start-up Amortizable start-up costs for purchasing an ac-
and organizational costs in the year your active a Partnershiptive trade or business include only investigative
trade or business begins. Any costs not de- costs incurred in the course of a general search The costs to organize a partnership are theducted can be amortized ratably over a for or preliminary investigation of the business. direct costs of creating the partnership.180-month period, beginning with the month you These are costs that help you decide whether to
begin business. If the election is made, you must purchase a business. Costs you incur in an
Qualifying costs. A partnership can amortizeattach any statement required by Regulations attempt to purchase a specific business are cap-
sections 1.195-1(b), 1.248-1(c), and 1.709-1(c). an organizational cost only if it meets all theital expenses that you cannot amortize.
However, you can apply the provisions of Tem- following tests.
porary Regulations sections 1.195-1T, Example. On June 1st, you hired an ac- • It is for the creation of the partnership and1.248-1T, and 1.709-1T to all business start-up counting firm and a law firm to assist you in the not for starting or operating the partner-and organizational costs paid or incurred after potential purchase of XYZ, Inc. They researched ship trade or business.October 22, 2004, provided the period of limita- XYZ's industry and analyzed the financial pro-
tions on assessment has not expired for the year • It is chargeable to a capital account (seejections of XYZ, Inc. In September, the law firm
of the election. Otherwise the provisions under chapter 1).prepared and submitted a letter of intent to XYZ,
Regulations section 1.195-1(b), 1.248-1(c), and Inc. The letter stated that a binding commitment • It could be amortized over the life of the1.709-1(c) will apply. would result only after a purchase agreement partnership if the partnership had a fixedwas signed. The law firm and accounting firmFor costs paid or incurred before October 23, life.continued to provide services including a review2004, you can elect to amortize business
of XYZ's books and records and the preparation • It is incurred by the due date of the part-start-up and organization costs over an amorti-
of a purchase agreement. On October 22nd, youzation period of 60 months or more. See How To nership return (excluding extensions) for
signed a purchase agreement with XYZ, Inc.Make the Election, later. the first tax year in which the partnership
All amounts paid or incurred to investigate is in business. However, if the partnershipThe cost must qualify as one of the following. the business before October 22nd are amortiz- uses the cash method of accounting and• A business start-up cost. able investigative costs. Amounts paid on or pays the cost after the end of its first tax
after that date relate to the attempt to purchase year, see Cash method partnership under• An organizational cost for a corporation. the business and therefore must be capitalized. How To Amortize, later.• An organizational cost for a partnership.
• It is for a type of item normally expected toDisposition of business. If you completely
benefit the partnership throughout its en-dispose of your business before the end of theBusiness Start-Up Costs tire life.amortization period, you can deduct any remain-
ing deferred start-up costs. However, you canStart-up costs are amounts paid or incurred for: Organizational costs include the followingdeduct these deferred start-up costs only to the(a) creating an active trade or business; or (b) fees.extent they qualify as a loss from a business.investigating the creation or acquisition of an
active trade or business. Start-up costs include • Legal fees for services incident to the or-
amounts paid or incurred in connection with an Costs of Organizing a ganization of the partnership, such as ne-
existing activity engaged in for profit; and for the gotiation and preparation of theCorporation
production of income in anticipation of the activ- partnership agreement.
ity becoming an active trade or business. Amounts paid to organize a corporation are the • Accounting fees for services incident todirect costs of creating the corporation. the organization of the partnership.Qualifying costs. A start-up cost is amortiz-
• Filing fees.able if it meets both of the following tests. Qualifying costs. To qualify as an organiza-
tional cost, it must be:• It is a cost you could deduct if you paid or
Nonqualifying costs. The following costsincurred it to operate an existing active • For the creation of the corporation,
cannot be amortized.trade or business (in the same field as the • Chargeable to a capital account (seeone you entered into). • The cost of acquiring assets for the part-chapter 1),
• It is a cost you pay or incur before the day nership or transferring assets to the part-• Amortized over the life of the corporation ifyour active trade or business begins. nership.the corporation had a fixed life, and
• The cost of admitting or removing part-Start-up costs include amounts paid for the • Incurred before the end of the first tax year ners, other than at the time the partnershipfollowing: in which the corporation is in business. is first organized.
• An analysis or survey of potential markets, A corporation using the cash method of ac- • The cost of making a contract concerningproducts, labor supply, transportation facil- counting can amortize organizational costs in- the operation of the partnership trade orities, etc. curred within the first tax year, even if it does not business including a contract between a
• Advertisements for the opening of the pay them in that year. partner and the partnership.
business. Examples of organizational costs include:
• The costs for issuing and marketing inter-
• Salaries and wages for employees who • The cost of temporary directors. ests in the partnership such as brokerage,
are being trained and their instructors. registration, and legal fees and printing• The cost of organizational meetings.
costs. These ªsyndication feesº are capital• Travel and other necessary costs for se- • State incorporation fees. expenses that cannot be depreciated orcuring prospective distributors, suppliers,
amortized.or customers. • The cost of legal services.
Page 26 Chapter 8 Amortization

Page 27 of 49 of Publication 535 15:54 - 26-MAR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Liquidation of partnership. If a partnership is • A description of each start-up cost in- which you may choose to renew, extend, or
liquidated before the end of the amortization curred. continue the lease).
period, the unamortized amount of qualifying • The month your active business began (ororganizational costs can be deducted in the How to amortize. Enter your deduction in Partwas acquired).partnership's final tax year. However, these VI of Form 4562 if you are deducting amortiza-
costs can be deducted only to the extent they • The number of months in your amortiza- tion that begins during the current year, or on the
qualify as a loss from a business. tion period (which is generally 180 appropriate line of your tax return if you are not
months). otherwise required to file Form 4562.
How To Amortize For more information on the costs of gettingFiling the statement early. You can elect a lease, see Cost of Getting a Lease in chapterDeduct start-up and organizational costs in to amortize your start-up costs by filing the state- 3.equal amounts over the applicable amortization ment with a return for any tax year before the
period (discussed earlier). You can choose an year your active business begins. If you file the
amortization period for start-up costs that is dif- statement early, the election becomes effective
ferent from the period you choose for organiza- in the month of the tax year your active business Section 197 Intangiblestional costs, as long as both are not less than the begins.
applicable amortization period. Once you
Generally, you may amortize the capitalizedRevised statement. You can file a revisedchoose an amortization period, you cannot
costs of ªsection 197 intangiblesº (defined later)statement to include any start-up costs not in-change it.
ratably over a 15-year period. You must amor-cluded in your original statement. However, youTo figure your deduction, divide your total
tize these costs if you hold the section 197cannot include on the revised statement anystart-up or organizational costs by the months in
intangibles in connection with your trade or busi-cost you previously treated on your return as athe amortization period. The result is the amount
ness or in an activity engaged in for the produc-cost other than a start-up cost. You can file theyou can deduct for each month.
tion of income.revised statement with a return filed after the
Cash method partnership. A partnership us- return on which you elected to amortize your You may not be able to amortize sec-ing the cash method of accounting can deduct start-up costs. tion 197 intangibles acquired in a trans-an organizational cost only if it has been paid by action that did not result in a significant
CAUTION
!the end of the tax year. However, any cost the Organizational costs election statement. If change in ownership or use. See Anti-Churningpartnership could have deducted as an organi- you elect to amortize your corporation's or part- Rules, later.zational cost in an earlier tax year (if it had been nership's organizational costs, attach a sepa- Your amortization deduction each year is thepaid that year) can be deducted in the tax year of rate statement that contains the following applicable part of the intangible's adjusted basispayment. information. (for purposes of determining gain), figured by
• A description of each cost. amortizing it ratably over 15 years (180 months).
The 15-year period begins with the later of:How To Make the Election • The amount of each cost.
• The month the intangible is acquired, orTo elect to amortize start-up or organizational • The date each cost was incurred.
costs, you must complete and attach Form 4562 • The month the trade or business or activity• The month your corporation or partnershipand an accompanying statement (explained engaged in for the production of incomebegan active business (or acquired thelater) to your return for the first tax year you are begins.business).in business. If you have both start-up and orga-
You cannot deduct amortization for the monthnizational costs, attach a separate statement to • The number of months in your amortiza- you dispose of the intangible.your return for each type of cost. tion period (which is generally 180
Generally, you must file the return by the due months). If you pay or incur an amount that increases
date (including any extensions). However, if you the basis of an amortizable section 197 intangi-
timely filed your return for the year without mak- Partnerships. The statement prepared for ble after the 15-year period begins, amortize iting the election, you can still make the election a cash basis partnership must also indicate the over the remainder of the 15-year period begin-by filing an amended return within 6 months of amount paid before the end of the year for each ning with the month the basis increase occurs.the due date of the return (excluding exten- cost. You are not allowed any other depreciationsions). For more information, see the instruc- You do not need to separately list any part- or amortization deduction for an amortizabletions for Part VI of Form 4562. nership organizational cost that is less than $10. section 197 intangible.Once you make the election to amortize Instead, you can list the total amount of thesestart-up or organizational costs, you cannot re- costs with the dates the first and last costs were Tax-exempt use property subject to a lease.voke it. incurred. The amortization period for any section 197 in-If your business is organized as a corpora-
After a partnership makes the election to tangible leased under a lease agreement en-tion or partnership, only the corporation or part-
amortize organizational costs, it can later file an tered into after March 12, 2004, to a tax-exemptnership can elect to amortize its start-up or
amended return to include additional organiza- organization, governmental unit, or foreign per-organizational costs. A shareholder or partner
tional costs not included in the partnership's son or entity (other than a partnership), shall notcannot make this election. You, as a share-
original return and statement. be less than 125 percent of the lease term.holder or partner, cannot amortize any costs you
incur in setting up your corporation or partner-
Cost attributable to other property. Theship. Only the corporation or partnership can
amortize these costs. rules for section 197 intangibles do not apply to
However, you, as an individual, can elect to any amount that is included in determining theGetting a Lease
amortize costs you incur to investigate an inter- cost of property that is not a section 197 intangi-
est in an existing partnership. These costs qual- ble. For example, if the cost of computerIf you get a lease for business property, you
ify as business start-up costs if you acquire the software is not separately stated from the cost ofrecover the cost by amortizing it over the term of
partnership interest. hardware or other tangible property and youthe lease. The term of the lease for amortization
consistently treat it as part of the cost of thepurposes generally includes all renewal optionsStart-up costs election statement. If you hardware or other tangible property, these rules(and any other period for which you and theelect to amortize your start-up costs, attach a lessor reasonably expect the lease to be re- do not apply. Similarly, none of the cost of ac-separate statement that contains the following newed). However, renewal periods are not in- quiring real property held for the production ofinformation. cluded if 75% or more of the cost of acquiring the rental income is considered the cost of goodwill,
lease is for the term of the lease remaining on going concern value, or any other section 197• A description of the business to which the
the acquisition date (not including any period forstart-up costs relate. intangible.
Chapter 8 Amortization Page 27

Page 28 of 49 of Publication 535 15:54 - 26-MAR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Business books and records, etc. This in- An arrangement that requires the formerSection 197
cludes the intangible value of technical manuals, owner to perform services (or to provide prop-Intangibles Defined training manuals or programs, data files, and erty or the use of property) is not similar to a
accounting or inventory control systems. It also covenant not to compete to the extent theThe following assets are section 197 intangibles includes the cost of customer lists, subscription amount paid under the arrangement representsand must be amortized over 180 months: lists, insurance expirations, patient or client files, reasonable compensation for those services or
and lists of newspaper, magazine, radio, and for that property or its use.1. Goodwill;
television advertisers.2. Going concern value; Franchise, trademark, or trade name. A
3. Workforce in place; franchise, trademark, or trade name is a sectionPatents, copyrights, etc. This includes pack-
197 intangible. You must amortize its purchaseage design, computer software, and any interest4. Business books and records, operating or renewal costs, other than certain contingentin a film, sound recording, videotape, book, orsystems, or any other information base, payments that you can deduct currently. Forother similar property, except as discussed laterincluding lists or other information concern- information on currently deductible contingentunder Assets That Are Not Section 197 In-ing current or prospective customers; payments, see chapter 11.tangibles.
5. A patent, copyright, formula, process, de- Professional sports franchise. Asign, pattern, know-how, format, or similar Customer-based intangible. This is the com- franchise engaged in professional sports anditem; position of market, market share, and any other any intangible assets acquired in connection
value resulting from the future provision of6. A customer-based intangible; with acquiring the franchise (including player
goods or services because of relationships with contracts) is a section 197 intangible amortiz-7. A supplier-based intangible; customers in the ordinary course of business. able over a 15-year period.
For example, you must amortize the part of the8. Any item similar to items (3) through (7);
purchase price of a business that is for the Contract for the use of, or a term interest in, a9. A license, permit, or other right granted by existence of the following intangibles. section 197 intangible. Section 197 in-a governmental unit or agency (including tangibles include any right under a license, con-• A customer base.issuances and renewals); tract, or other arrangement providing for the use
• A circulation base.10. A covenant not to compete entered into in of any section 197 intangible. It also includes
connection with the acquisition of an inter- any term interest in any section 197 intangible,• An undeveloped market or market growth.est in a trade or business; whether the interest is outright or in trust.
• Insurance in force.11. Any franchise, trademark, or trade name;
Assets That Are Not• A mortgage servicing contract.and
Section 197 Intangibles• An investment management contract.12. A contract for the use of, or a term interest
in, any item in this list. • Any other relationship with customers in- The following assets are not section 197 in-
volving the future provision of goods or tangibles.You cannot amortize any of the in- services.tangibles listed in items (1) through (8) 1. Any interest in a corporation, partnership,
that you created rather than acquired trust, or estate.
CAUTION
!Accounts receivable or other similar rights to
unless you created them in acquiring assets that income for goods or services provided to cus- 2. Any interest under an existing futures con-make up a trade or business or a substantial part tomers before the acquisition of a trade or busi- tract, foreign currency contract, notionalof a trade or business. ness are not section 197 intangibles. principal contract, interest rate swap, or
similar financial contract.
Goodwill. This is the value of a trade or busi- Supplier-based intangible. This is the value 3. Any interest in land.ness based on expected continued customer resulting from the future acquisition of goods or
patronage due to its name, reputation, or any services used or sold by the business because 4. Most computer software. (See Computer
other factor. of business relationships with suppliers. software, later.)
For example, you must amortize the part of 5. Any of the following assets not acquired inGoing concern value. This is the additional the purchase price of a business that is for the connection with the acquisition of a tradevalue of a trade or business that attaches to existence of the following intangibles. or business or a substantial part of a tradeproperty because the property is an integral part • A favorable relationship with distributors or business.of an ongoing business activity. It includes value (such as favorable shelf or display spacebased on the ability of a business to continue to a. An interest in a film, sound recording,at a retail outlet).function and generate income even though video tape, book, or similar property.there is a change in ownership (but does not • A favorable credit rating.
b. A right to receive tangible property orinclude any other section 197 intangible). It also • A favorable supply contract. services under a contract or from a gov-includes value based on the immediate use or
ernmental agency.availability of an acquired trade or business,
Government-granted license, permit, etc.such as the use of earnings during any period in c. An interest in a patent or copyright.This is any right granted by a governmental unitwhich the business would not otherwise be
d. Certain rights that have a fixed durationor an agency or instrumentality of a governmen-available or operational.
or amount. (See Rights of fixed durationtal unit. For example, you must amortize the
or amount, later.)capitalized costs of acquiring (including issuingWorkforce in place, etc. This includes the
or renewing) a liquor license, a taxicab medal-composition of a workforce (for example, its ex-
6. An interest under either of the following.lion or license, or a television or radio broadcast-perience, education, or training). It also includes
ing license.the terms and conditions of employment, a. An existing lease or sublease of tangi-whether contractual or otherwise, and any other ble property.value placed on employees or any of their attrib- Covenant not to compete. Section 197 in-
utes. tangibles include a covenant not to compete (or b. A debt that was in existence when the
For example, you must amortize the part of similar arrangement) entered into in connection interest was acquired.
the purchase price of a business that is for the with the acquisition of an interest in a trade or
existence of a highly skilled workforce. Also, you business, or a substantial portion of a trade or 7. A right to service residential mortgages un-
must amortize the cost of acquiring an existing business. An interest in a trade or business less the right is acquired in connection with
employment contract or relationship with em- includes an interest in a partnership or a corpo- the acquisition of a trade or business or a
ployees or consultants. ration engaged in a trade or business. substantial part of a trade or business.
Page 28 Chapter 8 Amortization

Page 29 of 49 of Publication 535 15:54 - 26-MAR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
8. Certain transaction costs incurred by par- you acquired the intangible and the trans-Safe Harbor for Creative
action in which the seller or transferor ac-ties to a corporate organization or reorgan- Property Costs quired it are part of a series of relatedization in which any part of a gain or loss is
transactions.not recognized. If you are engaged in the trade or business of
film production, you may be able to amortize the • The gain-recognition exception, discussedIntangible property that is not amortizable
creative property costs for properties not set for later, applies.under the rules for section 197 intangibles can
production within 3 years of the first capitalizedbe depreciated if it meets certain requirements.
transaction. You may amortize these costs rata-You generally must use the straight line method Related person. For purposes of thebly over a 15-year period beginning on the firstover its useful life. For certain intangibles, the anti-churning rules, the following are related per-day of the second half of the tax year in whichdepreciation period is specified in the law and sons.you properly write off the costs for financial ac-regulations. For example, the depreciation pe-
counting purposes. If, during the 15-year period, • An individual and his or her brothers, sis-riod for computer software that is not a section
you dispose of the creative property rights, you ters, half-brothers, half-sisters, spouse,197 intangible is generally 36 months.
must continue to amortize the costs over the ancestors (parents, grandparents, etc.),For more information on depreciating intan- remainder of the 15-year period. and lineal descendants (children, grand-gible property, see Intangible Property  under Creative property costs include costs paid or children, etc.).What Method Can You Use To Depreciate Your incurred to acquire and develop screenplays,Property? in chapter 1 of Publication 946. • A corporation and an individual who owns,scripts, story outlines, motion picture production directly or indirectly, more than 20% of therights to books and plays, and other similarComputer software. Section 197 intangibles value of the corporation's outstandingproperties for purposes of potential future filmdo not include the following types of computer stock.development, production, and exploitation.software. Amortize these costs using the rules of Rev- • Two corporations that are members of the
enue Procedure 2004-36. For more information, same controlled group as defined in sec-1. Software that meets all the following re-
see Revenue Procedure 2004-36, 2004-24 tion 1563(a) of the Internal Revenuequirements.
I.R.B. 1063, available at Code, except that ªmore than 20%º is sub-
a. It is, or has been, readily available for www.irs.gov/irb/2004-24_IRB/ar16.html. stituted for ªat least 80%º in that definition
purchase by the general public. and the determination is made without re-A change in the treatment of creative gard to subsections (a)(4) and (e)(3)(C) ofb. It is subject to a nonexclusive license. property costs is a change in method of section 1563. (For an exception, see sec-accounting.
CAUTION
!c. It has not been substantially modified. tion 1.197-2(h)(6)(iv) of the regulations.)
This requirement is considered met if • A trust fiduciary and a corporation if morethe cost of all modifications is not more Anti-Churning Rules than 20% of the value of the corporation'sthan the greater of 25% of the price of outstanding stock is owned, directly or in-the publicly available unmodified Anti-churning rules prevent you from amortizing directly, by or for the trust or grantor of thesoftware or $2,000. most section 197 intangibles if the transaction in trust.which you acquired them did not result in a
2. Software that is not acquired in connection significant change in ownership or use. These • The grantor and fiduciary, and the fiduci-
with the acquisition of a trade or business rules apply to goodwill and going concern value, ary and beneficiary, of any trust.
or a substantial part of a trade or business. and to any other section 197 intangible that is • The fiduciaries of two different trusts, andnot otherwise depreciable or amortizable. the fiduciaries and beneficiaries of two dif-Computer software defined. Computer Under the anti-churning rules, you cannot ferent trusts, if the same person is thesoftware includes all programs designed to use 15-year amortization for the intangible if any grantor of both trusts.cause a computer to perform a desired function. of the following conditions apply.
It also includes any database or similar item that • The executor and beneficiary of an estate.
1. You or a related person (defined later) heldis in the public domain and is incidental to the • A tax-exempt educational or charitable or-or used the intangible at any time from Julyoperation of qualifying software. ganization and a person who directly or25, 1991, through August 10, 1993.
indirectly controls the organization (orRights of fixed duration or amount. Section 2. You acquired the intangible from a person whose family members control it).197 intangibles do not include any right under a who held it at any time during the period in
contract or from a governmental agency if the • A corporation and a partnership if the(1) and, as part of the transaction, the user
right is acquired in the ordinary course of a trade same persons own more than 20% of thedid not change.
or business (or in an activity engaged in for the value of the outstanding stock of the cor-
3. You granted the right to use the intangibleproduction of income) but not as part of a poration and more than 20% of the capital
to a person (or a person related to thatpurchase of a trade or business and either: or profits interest in the partnership.
person) who held or used it at any time
• Has a fixed life of less than 15 years, or • Two S corporations, and an S corporationduring the period in (1). This applies only if
and a regular corporation, if the same per-the transaction in which you granted the• Is of a fixed amount that, except for the sons own more than 20% of the value ofright and the transaction in which you ac-rules for section 197 intangibles, would be the outstanding stock of each corporation.quired the intangible are part of a series ofrecovered under a method similar to the
related transactions. See Related person,unit-of-production method of cost recov- • Two partnerships if the same persons
later, for more information.ery. own, directly or indirectly, more than 20%
of the capital or profits interests in bothHowever, this does not apply to the following Exceptions. The anti-churning rules do not partnerships.intangibles. apply in the following situations. • A partnership and a person who owns,• Goodwill. • You acquired the intangible from a dece- directly or indirectly, more than 20% of the
• Going concern value. dent and its basis was stepped up to its capital or profits interests in the partner-
fair market value. ship.• A covenant not to compete.
• The intangible was amortizable as a sec- • Two persons who are engaged in trades• A franchise, trademark, or trade name. tion 197 intangible by the seller or trans- or businesses under common control (as
• A customer-related information base, cus- feror you acquired it from. This exception described in section 41(f)(1) of the Internal
tomer-based intangible, or similar item. does not apply if the transaction in which Revenue Code).
Chapter 8 Amortization Page 29

Page 30 of 49 of Publication 535 15:54 - 26-MAR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
When to determine relationship. Persons • To avoid the requirement that the intangi- • A change in computing amortization in the
tax year in which your use of the assetare treated as related if the relationship existed ble be acquired after August 10, 1993.
changes.at the following time. • To avoid any of the anti-churning rules.
• An adjustment in the useful life of an am-• In the case of a single transaction, imme-
ortizable asset.diately before or immediately after the More information. For more informationtransaction in which the intangible was ac- • Generally, the making of a late amortiza-about the anti-churning rules, including addi-quired. tion election or the revocation of a timelytional rules for partnerships, see Regulations
valid amortization election.• In the case of a series of related transac- section 1.197-2(h).
tions (or a series of transactions that com- • Any change in the placed-in-service dateprise a qualified stock purchase under Incorrect Amount of of an amortizable asset.section 338(d)(3) of the Internal Revenue
Amortization DeductedCode), immediately before the earliest See Regulations section 1.446-1(e)(2)(ii)(a)transaction or immediately after the last for more information and examples.If you later discover that you deducted an incor-transaction. rect amount for amortization for a section 197 Automatic approval. In some instances, youintangible in any year, you may be able to makeOwnership of stock. In determining may be able to get automatic approval from thea correction for that year by filing an amendedwhether an individual directly or indirectly owns IRS to change your method of accounting for
return. See Amended Return, next. If you are not amortization. For a list of automatic accountingany of the outstanding stock of a corporation, the
allowed to make the correction on an amended method changes, see the Instructions for Formfollowing rules apply.
return, you can change your accounting method 3115. Also see the Instructions for Form 3115Rule 1. Stock directly or indirectly owned by to claim the correct amortization. See Changing for more information on getting approval, auto-or for a corporation, partnership, estate, or trust Your Accounting Method, later. matic approval procedures, and a list of excep-is considered owned proportionately by or for its tions to the automatic approval process.shareholders, partners, or beneficiaries. For more information, see Revenue Proce-
Amended Return dure 2006-12 and Revenue Procedure 2008-52Rule 2. An individual is considered to own
as modified by Announcement 2008-84. Seethe stock directly or indirectly owned by or for his If you deducted an incorrect amount for amorti- Revenue Procedure 2006-12, 2006-3 I.R.B.or her family. Family includes only brothers and zation, you can file an amended return to correct 310, available at sisters, half-brothers and half-sisters, spouse, the following. www.irs.gov/irb/2006-03_IRB/ar14.html.ancestors, and lineal descendants.
See Revenue Procedure 2008-52, 2008-36• A mathematical error made in any year.Rule 3. An individual owning (other than by I.R.B. 587, available atapplying Rule 2) any stock in a corporation is • A posting error made in any year. www.irs.gov/irb/2008-36_IRB/ar09.html.considered to own the stock directly or indirectly See Announcement 2008-84, 2008-38 I.R.B.• An amortization deduction for a sectionowned by or for his or her partner. 748, available at 197 intangible for which you have not
www.irs.gov/irb/2008-38_IRB/ar14.html.Rule 4. For purposes of applying Rule 1, 2, adopted a method of accounting.
or 3, treat stock constructively owned by a per-
son under Rule 1 as actually owned by that Disposition ofWhen to file. If an amended return is allowed,person. Do not treat stock constructively owned Section 197 Intangiblesyou must file it by the later of the following dates.by an individual under Rule 2 or 3 as owned by
the individual for reapplying Rule 2 or 3 to make • 3 years from the date you filed your origi- A section 197 intangible is treated as deprecia-
another person the constructive owner of the ble property used in your trade or business. Ifnal return for the year in which you did not
stock. you held the intangible for more than 1 year, anydeduct the correct amount. (A return filed
gain on its disposition, up to the amount of allow-early is considered filed on the due date.)
Gain-recognition exception. This exception able amortization, is ordinary income (section• 2 years from the time you paid your tax forto the anti-churning rules applies if the person 1245 gain). If multiple section 197 intangiblesthat year.you acquired the intangible from (the transferor) are disposed of in a single transaction or a
meets both of the following requirements. series of related transactions, treat all of the
section 197 intangibles as if they were a singleChanging Your• That person would not be related to you asset for purposes of determining the amount ofAccounting Method(as described under Related person, ear- gain that is ordinary income. Any remaininglier) if the 20% test for ownership of stock gain, or any loss, is a section 1231 gain or loss. IfGenerally, you must get IRS approval to changeand partnership interests were replaced by you held the intangible 1 year or less, any gainyour method of accounting. File Form 3115,a 50% test. or loss on its disposition is an ordinary gain orApplication for Change in Accounting Method, to
• That person chose to recognize gain on loss. For more information on ordinary or capitalrequest a change to a permissible method of
the disposition of the intangible and pay gain or loss on business property, see chapter 3accounting for amortization.
income tax on the gain at the highest tax in Publication 544.The following are examples of a change inrate. See chapter 2 in Publication 544 for Nondeductible loss. You cannot deduct anymethod of accounting for amortization.information on making this choice. loss on the disposition or worthlessness of a• A change in the amortization method, pe- section 197 intangible that you acquired in theIf this exception applies, the anti-churning riod of recovery, or convention of an amor- same transaction (or series of related transac-rules apply only to the amount of your adjusted tizable asset. tions) as other section 197 intangibles you stillbasis in the intangible that is more than the gain have. Instead, increase the adjusted basis of• A change in the accounting for amortiz-recognized by the transferor. each remaining amortizable section 197 intangi-able assets from a single asset account toNotification. If the person you acquired the ble by a proportionate part of the nondeductiblea multiple asset account (pooling), or viceintangible from chooses to recognize gain under loss. Figure the increase by multiplying the non-versa.the rules for this exception, that person must deductible loss on the disposition of the intangi-
• A change in the accounting for amortiz-notify you in writing by the due date of the return ble by the following fraction.
able assets from one type of multiple as-on which the choice is made. • The numerator is the adjusted basis ofset account to a different type of multiple each remaining intangible on the date ofasset account.Anti-abuse rule. You cannot amortize any the disposition.section 197 intangible acquired in a transaction
Changes in amortization that are not a changefor which the principal purpose was either of the • The denominator is the total adjusted ba-
following. in method of accounting include the following: ses of all remaining amortizable section
Page 30 Chapter 8 Amortization

Page 31 of 49 of Publication 535 15:54 - 26-MAR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
197 intangibles on the date of the disposi- those costs you must capitalize and include in tax year in which you incurred the costs. How-
tion. the adjusted basis of the property. They include ever, if you timely filed your return for the year
costs for the following items. without making the election, you can still make
the election by filing an amended return within 6Covenant not to compete. A covenant not to • Site preparation. months of the due date of the return (excludingcompete, or similar arrangement, is not consid- • Seeds or seedlings. extensions). Attach Form 4562 and the state-ered disposed of or worthless before you dis- ment to the amended return and write ªFiledpose of your entire interest in the trade or • Labor. pursuant to section 301.9100-2º on Form 4562.business for which you entered into the cove- • Tools. File the amended return at the same addressnant. you filed the original return.• Depreciation on equipment used in plant-
Nonrecognition transfers. If you acquire a ing and seeding. Revoking the election. You must get IRS ap-section 197 intangible in a nonrecognition trans-
proval to revoke your election to amortize quali-fer, you are treated as the transferor with respect Qualifying costs do not include costs for which fying reforestation costs. Your application toto the part of your adjusted basis in the intangi- the government reimburses you under a revoke the election must include your name,ble that is not more than the transferor's ad- cost-sharing program, unless you include the address, the years for which your election was injusted basis. You amortize this part of the reimbursement in your income. effect, and your reason for revoking it. Pleaseadjusted basis over the intangible's remaining
provide your daytime telephone number (op-Qualified timber property. Qualified timberamortization period in the hands of the trans-
tional), in case we need to contact you. You, orproperty is property that contains trees in signifi-feror. Nonrecognition transfers include transfers
your duly authorized representative, must signcant commercial quantities. It can be a woodlotto a corporation, partnership contributions and
the application and file it at least 90 days beforeor other site that you own or lease. The propertydistributions, like-kind exchanges, and involun-
the due date (without extensions) for filing yourqualifies only if it meets all of the following re-tary conversions.
income tax return for the first tax year for whichquirements.In a like-kind exchange or involuntary con-
your election is to end.version of a section 197 intangible, you must • It is located in the United States.continue to amortize the part of your adjusted  
• It is held for the growing and cutting ofbasis in the acquired intangible that is not more
timber you will either use in, or sell for usethan your adjusted basis in the exchanged or Send the application to:
in, the commercial production of timberconverted intangible over the remaining amorti- Internal Revenue Service
products.zation period of the exchanged or converted Associate Chief Counsel
intangible. Amortize over a new 15-year period Passthroughs and Special Industries• It consists of at least one acre planted withthe part of your adjusted basis in the acquired CC:PSI:6tree seedlings in the manner normallyintangible that is more than your adjusted basis 1111 Constitution Ave., N.W., IR-5300used in forestation or reforestation.in the exchanged or converted intangible. Washington, DC 20224
Qualified timber property does not includeExample. You own a section 197 intangible property on which you have planted shelter beltsyou have amortized for 4 full years. It has a or ornamental trees, such as Christmas trees.remaining unamortized basis of $30,000. You
Geological andexchange the asset plus $10,000 for a like-kind Amortization period. The 84-month amorti-
section 197 intangible. The nonrecognition pro- zation period starts on the first day of the first Geophysical Costsvisions of like-kind exchanges apply. You amor- month of the second half of the tax year you
tize $30,000 of the $40,000 adjusted basis of the incur the costs (July 1 for a calendar year tax- You can amortize the cost of geological andacquired intangible over the 11 years remaining payer), regardless of the month you actually geophysical expenses paid or incurred in con-in the original 15-year amortization period for the incur the costs. You can claim amortization de- nection with oil and gas exploration or develop-transferred asset. You amortize the other ductions for no more than 6 months of the first ment within the U.S. These costs can be$10,000 of adjusted basis over a new 15-year and last (eighth) tax years of the period. amortized ratably over a 24-month period begin-period. ning on the mid-point of the tax year in which theLife tenant and remainderman. If one per-
expenses were paid or incurred. For major inte-son holds the property for life with the remainder
grated oil companies (as defined in sectiongoing to another person, the life tenant is entitled
167(h)(5)), these costs must be amortized rata-to the full amortization for qualifying reforesta-Reforestation Costs bly over a 5-year period for costs paid or in-tion costs incurred by the life tenant. Any re-
curred after May 17, 2006 (a 7-year period formainder interest in the property is ignored forYou can elect to deduct a limited amount of costs paid or incurred after December 19, 2007).amortization purposes.reforestation costs paid or incurred during the If you retire or abandon the property duringtax year. See Reforestation Costs in chapter 7. Recapture. If you dispose of qualified timber the amortization period, no amortization deduc-You can elect to amortize the qualifying costs property within 10 years after the tax year you tion is allowed in the year of retirement or aban-that are not deducted currently over an incur qualifying reforestation expenses, report donment.84-month period. There is no limit on the amount any gain as ordinary income up to the amortiza-
of your amortization deduction for reforestation tion you took. See chapter 3 of Publication 544
costs paid or incurred during the tax year. for more information.
The election to amortize reforestation costs
How to make the election. To elect to amor- Pollutionincurred by a partnership, S corporation, or es-
tize qualifying reforestation costs, complete Parttate must be made by the partnership, corpora-
VI of Form 4562 and attach a statement that Control Facilitiestion, or estate. A partner, shareholder, or
contains the following information.beneficiary cannot make that election.
You can elect to amortize the cost of a certifiedA partner's or shareholder's share of amor- • A description of the costs and the dates pollution control facility over 60 months. How-tizable costs is figured under the general rules you incurred them. ever, see Atmospheric pollution control facilitiesfor allocating items of income, loss, deduction,
for an exception. The cost of a pollution control• A description of the type of timber beingetc., of a partnership or S corporation. The am-
facility that is not eligible for amortization can begrown and the purpose for which it isortizable costs of an estate are divided between
depreciated under the regular rules for deprecia-grown.the estate and the income beneficiary based on
tion. Also, you can claim a special depreciationthe income of the estate allocable to each. Attach a separate statement for each property allowance on a certified pollution control facilityfor which you amortize reforestation costs.Qualifying costs. Reforestation costs are the that is qualified property even if you elect to
direct costs of planting or seeding for forestation Generally, you must make the election on a amortize its cost. You must reduce its cost (am-
or reforestation. Qualifying costs include only timely filed return (including extensions) for the ortizable basis) by the amount of any special
Chapter 8 Amortization Page 31

Page 32 of 49 of Publication 535 15:54 - 26-MAR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
allowance you claim. See chapter 3 of Publica- If you elect to amortize these costs, deduct period, complete Part VI of Form 4562 and at-
tach a statement containing the following infor-tion 946. them in equal amounts over 60 months or more.
mation to your return for the tax year in which theThe amortization period begins the month youA certified pollution control facility is a new
election begins:identifiable treatment facility used in connection first receive an economic benefit from the costs.
with a plant or other property in operation before For a definition of ªresearch and experimen- • Your name, address, and taxpayer identifi-1976, to reduce or control water or atmospheric tal costsº and information on deducting them as cation number; andpollution or contamination. The facility must do current business expenses, see chapter 7. • The type of cost and the specific amountso by removing, changing, disposing, storing, or
of the cost for which you are making thepreventing the creation or emission of pollu- Optional write-off method. Rather than election.tants, contaminants, wastes, or heat. The facility amortize these costs or deduct them as a cur-
must be certified by state and federal certifying rent expense, you have the option of deducting Generally, the election must be made on aauthorities. (writing off) research and experimental costs timely filed return (including extensions) for theThe facility must not significantly increase ratably over a 10-year period beginning with the tax year in which you incurred the costs. How-the output or capacity, extend the useful life, or tax year in which you incurred the costs. For ever, if you timely filed your return for the yearreduce the total operating costs of the plant or more information, see Optional Write-off of Cer- without making the election, you can still makeother property. Also, it must not significantly tain Tax Preferences, later, and section 59(e) of the election by filing an amended return within 6change the nature of the manufacturing or pro- the Internal Revenue Code. months of the due date of the return (excludingduction process or facility. extensions). Attach Form 4562 to the amendedThe federal certifying authority will not certify Costs you can amortize. You can amortize return and write ªFiled pursuant to sectionyour property to the extent it appears you will costs chargeable to a capital account (see chap- 301.9100-2º on Form 4562. File the amendedrecover (over the property's useful life) all or part return at the same address you filed the originalter 1) if you meet both of the following require-of its cost from the profit based on its operation return.ments.(such as through sales of recovered wastes).
The federal certifying authority will describe the • You paid or incurred the costs in your Revoking the election. You must obtain con-
nature of the potential cost recovery. You must trade or business. sent from the IRS to revoke your election. Your
then reduce the amortizable basis of the facility request to revoke the election must be submit-• You are not deducting the costs currently.by this potential recovery. ted to the IRS in the form of a letter ruling before
the end of the tax year in which the optionalNew identifiable treatment facility. A new How to make the election. To elect to amor- recovery period ends. The request must containidentifiable treatment facility is tangible depre- tize research and experimental costs, complete all of the information necessary to demonstrateciable property that is identifiable as a treatment Part VI of Form 4562 and attach it to your in- the rare and unusual circumstances that wouldfacility. It does not include a building and its come tax return. Generally, you must file the justify granting revocation. If the request for rev-structural components unless the building is ex- return by the due date (including extensions). ocation is approved, any unamortized costs areclusively a treatment facility. However, if you timely filed your return for the deductible in the year the revocation is effective.
year without making the election, you can stillAtmospheric pollution control facilities.
make the election by filing an amended returnCertain atmospheric pollution control facilities
within 6 months of the due date of the returncan be amortized over 84 months. To qualify,
(excluding extensions). Attach Form 4562 to thethe following must apply.
amended return and write ªFiled pursuant to• The facility must be acquired and placed section 301.9100-2º on Form 4562. File thein service after April 11, 2005. If acquired, amended return at the same address you filed 9.the original use must begin with you after the original return.April 11, 2005. Your election is binding for the year it is
• The facility must be used in connection made and for all later years unless you obtain Depletionwith an electric generation plant or other approval from the IRS to change to a different
property placed in operation after Decem- method.
ber 31, 1975, that is primarily coal fired.
What's New• If you construct, reconstruct, or erect the
facility, only the basis attributable to the
Marginal production of oil and gas. For taxOptional Write-off construction, reconstruction, or erection
years beginning in 2009, the 100% taxable in-completed after April 11, 2005, qualifies.
come limit does not apply to percentage deple-of Certain Tax
tion on the marginal production of oil and naturalBasis reduction for corporations. A corpo- gas.Preferencesration must reduce the amortizable basis of a
pollution control facility by 20% before figuring You can elect to amortize certain tax preferencethe amortization deduction. items over an optional period beginning in the
tax year in which you incurred the costs. If you IntroductionMore information. For more information on make this election, there is no AMT adjustment.the amortization of pollution control facilities, Depletion is the using up of natural resources byThe applicable costs and the optional recoverysee Code sections 169 and 291(c) and the re- mining, quarrying, drilling, or felling. The deple-periods are as follows:lated regulations. tion deduction allows an owner or operator to
account for the reduction of a product's• Circulation costs Ð 3 years,
reserves.• Intangible drilling and development costs There are two ways of figuring depletion:Ð 60 months, cost depletion and percentage depletion. ForResearch and
mineral property, you generally must use the• Mining exploration and development costs
method that gives you the larger deduction. ForÐ 10 years, andExperimental Costs
standing timber, you must use cost depletion.• Research and experimental costs Ð 10You can elect to amortize your research and years.experimental costs, deduct them as current Topics
business expenses, or write them off over a This chapter discusses:
How to make the election. To elect to amor-10-year period (see Optional write-off method
below). tize qualifying costs over the optional recovery • Who can claim depletion
Page 32 Chapter 9 Depletion

Page 33 of 49 of Publication 535 15:54 - 26-MAR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Step Action Result• Mineral property • The number of units of mineral sold during
the tax year.• Timber  1 Divide your property's Rate per
basis for depletion by unit.
total recoverable units.Basis for depletion. To figure the property's
basis for depletion, subtract all the following  2 Multiply the rate per Costfrom the property's adjusted basis. unit by units sold depletion
Who Can during the tax year. deduction.1. Amounts recoverable through:
Claim Depletion? a. Depreciation deductions,
Note. You must keep accounts for the de-b. Deferred expenses (including deferredIf you have an economic interest in mineral prop- pletion of each property and adjust these ac-exploration and development costs),erty or standing timber, you can take a deduction counts each year for units sold and depletionandfor depletion. More than one person can have an claimed.
economic interest in the same mineral deposit or c. Deductions other than depletion.
timber. Elective safe harbor for owners of oil and gas
2. The residual value of land and improve- property. Owners of oil and gas property mayYou have an economic interest if both the
ments at the end of operations. use an elective safe harbor in determining thefollowing apply.
property's recoverable reserves for purposes of3. The cost or value of land acquired for pur-• You have acquired by investment any in- computing cost depletion. If this election isposes other than mineral production.terest in mineral deposits or standing tim- made, special rules apply. See Revenue Proce-
ber. dure 2004-19 on page 563 of Internal RevenueAdjusted basis. The adjusted basis of your Bulletin 2004-10, available at www.irs.gov/pub/• You have a legal right to income from the property is your original cost or other basis, plus irs-irbs/irb04-10.pdf.extraction of the mineral or cutting of the certain additions and improvements, and minus
To make the election, attach a statement totimber to which you must look for a return certain deductions such as depletion allowed or
your timely filed (including extensions) originalof your capital investment. allowable and casualty losses. Your adjusted
return for the first tax year for which the safebasis can never be less than zero. See Publica-A contractual relationship that allows you an harbor is elected. The statement must indicatetion 551, Basis of Assets, for more informationeconomic or monetary advantage from products that you are electing the safe harbor provided byon adjusted basis.of the mineral deposit or standing timber is not, Revenue Procedure 2004-19. The election, if
in itself, an economic interest. A production pay- Total recoverable units. The total recover- made, is effective for the tax year in which it is
ment carved out of, or retained on the sale of, able units is the sum of the following. made and all subsequent years. It cannot be
mineral property is not an economic interest. revoked for the tax year in which it is elected, but• The number of units of mineral remaining may be revoked in a later year. Once revoked, itat the end of the year (including units re-Individuals, corporations, estates, and cannot be re-elected for the next 5 years.covered but not sold).trusts who claim depletion deductions
• The number of units of mineral sold duringmay be liable for alternative minimum
CAUTION
! Percentage Depletionthe tax year (determined under yourtax.
method of accounting, as explained next). To figure percentage depletion, you multiply a
certain percentage, specified for each mineral,
You must estimate or determine recoverable by your gross income from the property during
units (tons, pounds, ounces, barrels, thousands the tax year.Mineral Property of cubic feet, or other measure) of mineral prod- The rates to be used and other conditionsucts using the current industry method and the and qualifications for oil and gas wells are dis-Mineral property includes oil and gas wells, most accurate and reliable information you can cussed later under Independent Producers andmines, and other natural deposits (including ge- obtain. Royalty Owners and under Natural Gas Wells.othermal deposits). For this purpose, the term
Rates and other rules for percentage depletionªpropertyº means each separate interest you Number of units sold. You determine the
of other specific minerals are found later innumber of units sold during the tax year basedown in each mineral deposit in each separate
Mines and Geothermal Deposits.on your method of accounting. Use the followingtract or parcel of land. You can treat two or more
table to make this determination.separate interests as one property or as sepa- Gross income. When figuring your percent-rate properties. See section 614 of the Internal age depletion, subtract from your gross incomeIF you THEN the units soldRevenue Code and the related regulations for from the property the following amounts.use ... during the year are ...rules on how to treat separate mineral interests.
• Any rents or royalties you paid or incurredThere are two ways of figuring depletion on The cash The units sold for which
for the property.method of you receive paymentmineral property.
accounting during the tax year • The part of any bonus you paid for a lease• Cost depletion. (regardless of the year of on the property allocable to the productsale).• Percentage depletion. sold (or that otherwise gives rise to gross
income) for the tax year.An accrual The units sold based onGenerally, you must use the method that gives
method of your inventories andyou the larger deduction. However, unless you A bonus payment includes amounts you paid asaccounting method of accounting forare an independent producer or royalty owner, a lessee to satisfy a production payment re-inventory.you generally cannot use percentage depletion tained by the lessor.
for oil and gas wells. See Oil and Gas Wells , Use the following fraction to figure the part ofThe number of units sold during the tax yearlater. the bonus you must subtract.does not include any for which depletion deduc-
tions were allowed or allowable in earlier years.Cost Depletion No. of units sold in the tax year BonusFiguring the cost depletion deduction. Recoverable units from the × PaymentsTo figure cost depletion you must first determine Once you have figured your property's basis for property
the following. depletion, the total recoverable units, and the
For oil and gas wells and geothermal depos-number of units sold during the tax year, you can• The property's basis for depletion. its, gross income from the property is definedfigure your cost depletion deduction by taking
• The total recoverable units of mineral in later under Oil and Gas Wells. For property otherthe following steps.
the property's natural deposit. than a geothermal deposit or an oil and gas well,
Chapter 9 Depletion Page 33

Page 34 of 49 of Publication 535 15:54 - 26-MAR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
gross income from the property is defined later leased, or controlled by you or a relatedIndependent Producers and
person.under Mines and Geothermal Deposits. Royalty Owners
If you are an independent producer or royalty 2. The combined gross receipts from salesTaxable income limit. The percentage deple- owner, you figure percentage depletion using a (not counting resales) of oil, natural gas, or
tion deduction generally cannot be more than rate of 15% of the gross income from the prop- their by-products by all retail outlets taken
50% (100% for oil and gas property) of your erty based on your average daily production of into account in (1) are more than $5 million
domestic crude oil or domestic natural gas up totaxable income from the property figured without for the tax year.
your depletable oil or natural gas quantity. How-the depletion deduction and the domestic pro- For the purpose of determining if this ruleever, certain refiners, as explained next, andduction activities deduction. applies, do not count the following.certain retailers and transferees of proven oilTaxable income from the property means and gas properties, as explained later, cannot • Bulk sales (sales in very large quantities)gross income from the property minus all allowa- claim percentage depletion. For information on of oil or natural gas to commercial or in-
ble deductions (excluding any deduction for de- figuring the deduction, see Figuring percentage dustrial users.
pletion or qualified domestic production depletion, later. • Bulk sales of aviation fuels to the Depart-activities) attributable to mining processes, in- ment of Defense.Refiners who cannot claim percentage de-cluding mining transportation. These deductible
pletion. You cannot claim percentage deple- • Sales of oil or natural gas or theiritems include, but are not limited to, the follow- tion if you or a related person refine crude oil and by-products outside the United States ifing. you and the related person refined more than none of your domestic production or that
• Operating expenses. 75,000 barrels on any day during the tax year of a related person is exported during the
based on average (rather than actual) daily re- tax year or the prior tax year.• Certain selling expenses. finery runs for the tax year. The average daily
• Administrative and financial overhead. refinery run is computed by dividing total refinery Related person. To determine if you and
runs for the tax year by the total number of days another person are related persons, see Re-• Depreciation. in the tax year. lated person under Refiners who cannot claim• Intangible drilling and development costs. percentage depletion, earlier.Related person. You and another person
• Exploration and development expendi- are related persons if either of you holds a signif- Sales through a related person. You are
icant ownership interest in the other person or iftures. considered to be selling through a related per-
a third person holds a significant ownership in- son if any sale by the related person produces
The following rules apply when figuring your terest in both of you. gross income from which you may benefit be-
For example, a corporation, partnership, es-taxable income from the property for purposes cause of your direct or indirect ownership inter-
tate, or trust and anyone who holds a significantof the taxable income limit. est in the person.
ownership interest in it are related persons. A You are not considered to be selling through• Do not deduct any net operating loss de- partnership and a trust are related persons if one a related person who is a retailer if all the follow-duction from the gross income from the person holds a significant ownership interest in ing apply.property. each of them.
• You do not have a significant ownershipFor purposes of the related person rules,• Corporations do not deduct charitable con- interest in the retailer.significant ownership interest means direct ortributions from the gross income from the indirect ownership of 5% or more in any one of • You sell your production to persons whoproperty. the following. are not related to either you or the retailer.
• If, during the year, you dispose of an item • The value of the outstanding stock of a • The retailer does not buy oil or natural gasof section 1245 property that was used in corporation. from your customers or persons related toconnection with mineral property, reduce your customers.• The interest in the profits or capital of aany allowable deduction for mining ex-
partnership. • There are no arrangements for the retailerpenses by the part of any gain you must
to acquire oil or natural gas you producedreport as ordinary income that is allocable • The beneficial interests in an estate or for resale or made available for purchasetrust.to the mineral property. See section by the retailer.1.613-5(b)(1) of the regulations for infor-
Any interest owned by or for a corporation, • Neither you nor the retailer knows of ormation on how to figure the ordinary gain
partnership, trust, or estate is considered to be controls the final disposition of the oil orallocable to the property. owned directly both by itself and proportionately natural gas you sold or the original source
by its shareholders, partners, or beneficiaries. of the petroleum products the retailer ac-
Oil and Gas Wells quired for resale.Retailers who cannot claim percentage de-
pletion. You cannot claim percentage deple-You cannot claim percentage depletion for an oil Transferees who cannot claim percentagetion if both the following apply.or gas well unless at least one of the following depletion. You cannot claim percentage de-applies. pletion if you received your interest in a proven1. You sell oil or natural gas or their
oil or gas property by transfer after 1974 andby-products directly or through a related• You are either an independent producer or
before October 12, 1990. For a definition of theperson in any of the following situations.a royalty owner.
term ªtransfer,º see section 1.613A-7(n) of the• The well produces natural gas that is ei- a. Through a retail outlet operated by you regulations. For a definition of the term ªinterest
ther sold under a fixed contract or pro- or a related person. in proven oil or gas property,º see section
duced from geopressured brine. 1.613A-7(p) of the regulations.b. To any person who is required under an
agreement with you or a related person Figuring percentage depletion. Generally,If you are an independent producer or royalty to use a trademark, trade name, or as an independent producer or royalty owner,owner, see Independent Producers and Royalty service mark or name owned by you or you figure your percentage depletion by comput-Owners, next. a related person in marketing or distrib- ing your average daily production of domestic oiluting oil, natural gas, or theirFor information on the depletion deduction or gas and comparing it to your depletable oil orby-products.for wells that produce natural gas that is either gas quantity. If your average daily production
sold under a fixed contract or produced from c. To any person given authority under an does not exceed your depletable oil or gas quan-
geopressured brine, see Natural Gas Wells , agreement with you or a related person tity, you figure your percentage depletion by
later. to occupy any retail outlet owned, multiplying the gross income from the oil or gas
Page 34 Chapter 9 Depletion

Page 35 of 49 of Publication 535 15:54 - 26-MAR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
property (defined later) by 15%. If your average proportion to each entity's or family member's • 100% of your taxable income from the
daily production of domestic oil or gas exceeds production of domestic oil or gas for the year. property figured without the deduction for
your depletable oil or gas quantity, you must depletion and the deduction for domestic• Corporations, trusts, and estates if 50% ormake an allocation as explained later under Av- production activities under section 199 ofmore of the beneficial interest is owned byerage daily production exceeds depletable the Internal Revenue Code. For a defini-the same or related persons (consideringquantities. tion of taxable income from the property,only persons that own at least 5% of the see Taxable income limit, earlier, underIn addition, there is a limit on the percentage beneficial interest). Mineral Property.depletion deduction. See Taxable income limit,
• You and your spouse and minor children.later. • 65% of your taxable income from all
A related person is anyone mentioned in the sources, figured without the depletion al-Average daily production. Figure your aver- related persons discussion under Nondeduct- lowance, the deduction for domestic pro-age daily production by dividing your total do- ible loss in chapter 2 of Publication 544, except duction activities, any net operating lossmestic production of oil or gas for the tax year by that for purposes of this allocation, item (1) in carryback, and any capital loss carryback.the number of days in your tax year. that discussion includes only an individual, his or You can carry over to the following year anyher spouse, and minor children.Partial interest. If you have a partial inter- amount you cannot deduct because of theest in the production from a property, figure your Controlled group of corporations. Mem- 65%-of-taxable-income limit. Add it to your de-share of the production by multiplying total pro- bers of the same controlled group of corpora- pletion allowance (before applying any limits) forduction from the property by your percentage of tions are treated as one taxpayer when figuring the following year.interest in the revenues from the property. the depletable oil or natural gas quantity. TheyYou have a partial interest in the production share the depletable quantity. Under this rule, a Note. For tax years beginning in 2009, thefrom a property if you have a net profits interest controlled group of corporations is defined in 100% taxable income limit does not apply toin the property. To figure the share of production section 1563(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, percentage depletion on marginal production offor your net profits interest, you must first deter- except that the stock ownership requirement in oil and natural gas. For information on marginalmine your percentage participation (as mea- that definition is ªmore than 50%º rather than ªat production, see section 613A(c)(6) of the Inter-sured by the net profits) in the gross revenue least 80%.º nal Revenue Code.from the property. To figure this percentage, you
divide the income you receive for your net profits Gross income from the property. For pur-interest by the gross revenue from the property. poses of percentage depletion, gross income Partnerships and S CorporationsThen multiply the total production from the prop- from the property (in the case of oil and gaserty by your percentage participation to figure wells) is the amount you receive from the sale of Generally, each partner or shareholder, and notyour share of the production. the oil or gas in the immediate vicinity of the well. the partnership or S corporation, figures the de-
If you do not sell the oil or gas on the property, pletion allowance separately. (However, seeExample. John Oak owns oil property in but manufacture or convert it into a refined prod- Electing large partnerships must figure deple-which Paul Elm owns a 20% net profits interest. uct before sale or transport it before sale, the tion allowance,  later.) Each partner or share-During the year, the property produced 10,000 gross income from the property is the represen- holder must decide whether to use cost orbarrels of oil, which John sold for $200,000. tative market or field price (RMFP) of the oil or percentage depletion. If a partner or shareholderJohn had expenses of $90,000 attributable to gas, before conversion or transportation. uses percentage depletion, he or she must ap-the property. The property generated a net profit ply the 65%-of-taxable-income limit using his orIf you sold gas after you removed it from theof $110,000 ($200,000 − $90,000). Paul re- her taxable income from all sources.premises for a price that is lower than the RMFP,ceived income of $22,000 ($110,000 ×  .20) for determine gross income from the property forhis net profits interest. Partner's or shareholder's adjusted basis.percentage depletion purposes without regardPaul determined his percentage participation The partnership or S corporation must allocateto the RMFP.to be 11% by dividing $22,000 (the income he to each partner or shareholder his or her shareGross income from the property does notreceived) by $200,000 (the gross revenue from of the adjusted basis of each oil or gas propertyinclude lease bonuses, advance royalties, orthe property). Paul determined his share of the held by the partnership or S corporation. Theother amounts payable without regard to pro-oil production to be 1,100 barrels (10,000 bar- partnership or S corporation makes the alloca-duction from the property.rels ×  11%). tion as of the date it acquires the oil or gas
property.Average daily production exceeds deplet-Depletable oil or natural gas quantity. Gen- Each partner's share of the adjusted basis ofable quantities. If your average daily produc-erally, your depletable oil quantity is 1,000 bar- the oil or gas property generally is figured ac-tion for the year is more than your depletable oilrels. Your depletable natural gas quantity is cording to that partner's interest in partnershipor natural gas quantity, figure your allowance for6,000 cubic feet multiplied by the number of capital. However, in some cases, it is figureddepletion for each domestic oil or natural gasbarrels of your depletable oil quantity that you according to the partner's interest in partnershipproperty as follows.choose to apply. If you claim depletion on both income.oil and natural gas, you must reduce your de- 1. Figure your average daily production of oil The partnership or S corporation adjusts thepletable oil quantity (1,000 barrels) by the num- or natural gas for the year. partner's or shareholder's share of the adjustedber of barrels you use to figure your depletable
basis of the oil and gas property for any capital2. Figure your depletable oil or natural gasnatural gas quantity.
expenditures made for the property and for anyquantity for the year.
change in partnership or S corporation interests.Example. You have both oil and natural gas 3. Figure depletion for all oil or natural gasproduction. To figure your depletable natural Each partner or shareholder must sep-produced from the property using a per-gas quantity, you choose to apply 360 barrels of arately keep records of his or her sharecentage depletion rate of 15%.your 1000-barrel depletable oil quantity. Your of the adjusted basis in each oil and
RECORDS
depletable natural gas quantity is 2.16 million 4. Multiply the result figured in (3) by a frac- gas property of the partnership or S corporation.
cubic feet of gas (360 ×  6000). You must reduce tion, the numerator of which is the result The partner or shareholder must reduce his or
your depletable oil quantity to 640 barrels (1000 figured in (2) and the denominator of which her adjusted basis by the depletion allowed or
− 360). is the result figured in (1). This is your allowable on the property each year. The part-
depletion allowance for that property for If you have production from marginal wells, ner or shareholder must use that reduced ad-
the year.see section 613A(c)(6) of the Internal Revenue justed basis to figure cost depletion or his or her
Code to figure your depletable oil or natural gas gain or loss if the partnership or S corporation
quantity. disposes of the property.Taxable income limit. If you are an indepen-
Business entities and family members. dent producer or royalty owner of oil and gas,
You must allocate the depletable oil or gas your deduction for percentage depletion is lim- Reporting the deduction. Information that
quantity among the following related persons in ited to the smaller of the following. you, as a partner or shareholder, use to figure
Chapter 9 Depletion Page 35

Page 36 of 49 of Publication 535 15:54 - 26-MAR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
your depletion deduction on oil and gas proper- Natural gas from geopressured brine. Qual- • Extracting ores or minerals from the
ties is reported by the partnership or S corpora- ground.ified natural gas from geopressured brine is eli-
tion on Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) or on gible for a percentage depletion rate of 10%. • Applying certain treatment processes.Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S). Deduct oil and gas This is natural gas that is both the following.
depletion for your partnership or S corporation • Transporting ores or minerals (generally,• Produced from a well you began to drillinterest on Schedule E (Form 1040). The deple- not more than 50 miles) from the point of
after September 1978 and before 1984.tion deducted on Schedule E is included in figur- extraction to the plants or mills in which
ing income or loss from rental real estate or the treatment processes are applied.• Determined in accordance with section
royalty properties. The instructions for Schedule 503 of the Natural Gas Policy Act of 1978
E explain where to report this income or loss and Excise tax. Gross income from mining in-to be produced from geopressured brine.
whether you need to file either of the following cludes the separately stated excise tax received
forms. by a mine operator from the sale of coal to
compensate the operator for the excise tax theMines and• Form 6198, At-Risk Limitations. mine operator must pay to finance black lungGeothermal Deposits• Form 8582, Passive Activity Loss Limita- benefits.
tions. Certain mines, wells, and other natural deposits, Extraction. Extracting ores or mineralsincluding geothermal deposits, qualify for per- from the ground includes extraction by mine
centage depletion.Electing large partnerships must figure de- owners or operators of ores or minerals from the
pletion allowance. An electing large partner- waste or residue of prior mining. This does not
ship, rather than each partner, generally must Mines and other natural deposits. For a nat- apply to extraction from waste or residue of prior
figure the depletion allowance. The partnership ural deposit, the percentage of your gross in- mining by the purchaser of the waste or residue
figures the depletion allowance without taking come from the property that you can deduct as or the purchaser of the rights to extract ores or
into account the 65-percent-of-taxable-income depletion depends on the type of deposit. minerals from the waste or residue.
limit and the depletable oil or natural gas quan- The following is a list of the percentage de- Treatment processes. The processes in-tity. Also, the adjusted basis of a partner's inter- pletion rates for the more common minerals. cluded as mining depend on the ore or mineralest in the partnership is not affected by the
mined. To qualify as mining, the treatmentdepletion allowance. DEPOSITS RATE processes must be applied by the mine owner orAn electing large partnership is one that
operator. For a listing of treatment processesmeets both the following requirements. Sulphur, uranium, and, if from considered as mining, see section 613(c)(4) ofdeposits in the United States,• The partnership had 100 or more partners the Internal Revenue Code and the related regu-asbestos, lead ore, zinc ore, nickelin the preceding year. lations.ore, and mica ............ . 22%
• The partnership chooses to be an electing Transportation of more than 50 miles. IfGold, silver, copper, iron ore, andlarge partnership. the IRS finds that the ore or mineral must becertain oil shale, if from deposits in
the United States .......... . 15% transported more than 50 miles to plants or millsDisqualified persons. An electing large to be treated because of physical and otherBorax, granite, limestone, marble,partnership does not figure the depletion allow- requirements, the additional authorized trans-mollusk shells, potash, slate,ance of its partners that are disqualified per- portation is considered mining and included insoapstone, and carbon dioxidesons. Disqualified persons must figure it the computation of gross income from mining.produced from a well ....... . 14%themselves, as explained earlier.
If you wish to include transportation ofCoal, lignite, and sodium chloride 10%All the following are disqualified persons.
more than 50 miles in the computationClay and shale used or sold for• Refiners who cannot claim percentage de- of gross income from mining, file an
use in making sewer pipe or brickspletion (discussed under Independent Pro- application in duplicate with the IRS. Include onor used or sold for use as sinteredducers and Royalty Owners, earlier). the application the facts concerning the physicalor burned lightweight aggregates 71/2% and other requirements which prevented the• Retailers who cannot claim percentage
Clay used or sold for use in construction and operation of the plant within 50depletion (discussed under Independent making drainage and roofing tile, miles of the point of extraction. Send this appli-Producers and Royalty Owners, earlier). flower pots, and kindred products, cation to:• Any partner whose average daily produc- and gravel, sand, and stone (other Internal Revenue Servicetion of domestic crude oil and natural gas than stone used or sold for use by Associate Chief Counsela mine owner or operator asis more than 500 barrels during the tax Passthroughs and Special Industriesdimension or ornamental stone) 5%year in which the partnership tax year CC:PSI:FOends. Average daily production is dis- 1111 Constitution Ave., N.W., IR-5300You can find a complete list of minerals andcussed earlier. Washington, DC 20224their percentage depletion rates in section
613(b) of the Internal Revenue Code.
Natural Gas Wells Disposal of coal or iron ore. You cannot takeCorporate deduction for iron ore and coal. a depletion deduction for coal (including lignite)The percentage depletion deduction of a corpo-You can use percentage depletion for a well that or iron ore mined in the United States if both theproduces natural gas either sold under a fixed ration for iron ore and coal (including lignite) is following apply.contract or produced from geopressured brine. reduced by 20% of:
• You disposed of it after holding it for more
• The percentage depletion deduction forNatural gas sold under a fixed contract. than 1 year.
the tax year (figured without regard to thisNatural gas sold under a fixed contract qualifies • You disposed of it under a contract underreduction), minusfor a percentage depletion rate of 22%. This is which you retain an economic interest indomestic natural gas sold by the producer under • The adjusted basis of the property at the the coal or iron ore.a contract that does not provide for a price in- close of the tax year (figured without thecrease to reflect any increase in the seller's tax Treat any gain on the disposition as a capitaldepletion deduction for the tax year).liability because of the repeal of percentage de- gain.
pletion for gas. The contract must have been in Disposal to related person. This rule doesGross income from the property. For prop-effect from February 1, 1975, until the date of not apply if you dispose of the coal or iron ore toerty other than a geothermal deposit or an oil orsale of the gas. Price increases after February 1, one of the following persons.gas well, gross income from the property means1975, are presumed to take the increase in tax
the gross income from mining. Mining includes • A related person (as listed in chapter 2 ofliability into account unless demonstrated other-
all the following. Publication 544).wise by clear and convincing evidence.
Page 36 Chapter 9 Depletion

Page 37 of 49 of Publication 535 15:54 - 26-MAR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• A person owned or controlled by the same royalties were paid if the minerals were not pro- When to claim depletion. Claim your deple-
duced before termination. Increase your ad- tion allowance as a deduction in the year of saleinterests that own or control you.
justed basis in the property by the amount you or other disposition of the products cut from the
include in income. timber, unless you choose to treat the cutting ofGeothermal deposits. Geothermal deposits timber as a sale or exchange (explained below).located in the United States or its possessions Delay rentals. These are payments for defer- Include allowable depletion for timber productsqualify for a percentage depletion rate of 15%. A ring development of the property. Since delay not sold during the tax year the timber is cut as ageothermal deposit is a geothermal reservoir of rentals are ordinary rent, they are ordinary in- cost item in the closing inventory of timber prod-
natural heat stored in rocks or in a watery liquid come that is not subject to depletion. These ucts for the year. The inventory is your basis for
or vapor. For percentage depletion purposes, a rentals can be avoided by either abandoning the determining gain or loss in the tax year you sell
geothermal deposit is not considered a gas well. lease, beginning development operations, or the timber products.
obtaining production.Figure gross income from the property for a
Example. Assume the same facts as in thegeothermal steam well in the same way as for oil
previous example except that you sold only halfand gas wells. See Gross income from the prop-
of the timber products in the cutting year. Youerty earlier, under Oil and Gas Wells.  Percent-
would deduct $20,000 of the $40,000 depletionage depletion on a geothermal deposit cannot Timber
that year. You would add the remaining $20,000be more than 50% of your taxable income from
depletion to your closing inventory of timberYou can figure timber depletion only by the costthe property. products.method. Percentage depletion does not apply to
timber. Base your depletion on your cost or otherLessor's Gross Income Electing to treat the cutting of timber as abasis in the timber. Your cost does not include sale or exchange. You can elect, under cer-the cost of land or any amounts recoverableA lessor's gross income from the property that tain circumstances, to treat the cutting of timberthrough depreciation.qualifies for percentage depletion usually is the held for more than 1 year as a sale or exchange.Depletion takes place when you cut standingtotal of the royalties received from the lease. You must make the election on your income taxtimber. You can figure your depletion deductionHowever, for oil, gas, or geothermal property, return for the tax year to which it applies. If youwhen the quantity of cut timber is first accuratelygross income does not include lease bonuses, make this election, subtract the adjusted basismeasured in the process of exploitation.advanced royalties, or other amounts payable for depletion from the fair market value of the
without regard to production from the property. timber on the first day of the tax year in whichFiguring cost depletion. To figure your cost you cut it to figure the gain or loss on the cutting.depletion allowance, you multiply the number of You generally report the gain as long-term capi-Bonuses and advanced royalties. Bonuses timber units cut by your depletion unit. tal gain. The fair market value then becomesand advanced royalties are payments a lessee
Timber units. When you acquire timber your basis for figuring your ordinary gain or lossmakes before production to a lessor for the grant
property, you must make an estimate of the on the sale or other disposition of the productsof rights in a lease or for minerals, gas, or oil to
quantity of marketable timber that exists on the cut from the timber. For more information, seebe extracted from leased property. If you are the
property. You measure the timber using board Timber in chapter 2 of Publication 544, Saleslessor, your income from bonuses and ad-
feet, log scale, cords, or other units. If you later and Other Dispositions of Assets.vanced royalties received is subject to an allow- determine that you have more or less units of You may revoke an election to treat the cut-ance for depletion. timber, you must adjust the original estimate. ting of timber as a sale or exchange without
Figuring cost depletion. To figure cost de- IRS's consent. The prior election (and revoca-The term ªtimber propertyº means your eco-
pletion on a bonus, multiply your adjusted basis tion) is disregarded for purposes of making anomic interest in standing timber in each tract or
in the property by a fraction, the numerator of subsequent election. See Form T (Timber), For-block representing a separate timber account.
which is the bonus and the denominator of which est Activities Schedule, for more information.Depletion unit. You figure your depletionis the total bonus and royalties expected to be unit each year by taking the following steps. Form T. Complete and attach Form T (Timber)received. To figure cost depletion on advanced
to your income tax return if you claim a deduc-royalties, use the computation explained earlier 1. Determine your cost or adjusted basis of tion for timber depletion, choose to treat theunder Cost Depletion, treating the number of the timber on hand at the beginning of the cutting of timber as a sale or exchange, or makeunits for which the advanced royalty is received year. Adjusted basis is defined under Cost an outright sale of timber.as the number of units sold. Depletion in the discussion on Mineral
Property.Figuring percentage depletion. In the
case of mines, wells, and other natural deposits 2. Add to the amount determined in (1) the
other than gas, oil, or geothermal property, you cost of any timber units acquired during
may use the percentage rates discussed earlier the year and any additions to capital.
under Mines and Geothermal Deposits. Any bo- 3. Figure the number of timber units to takenus or advanced royalty payments are generally 10.into account by adding the number of tim-part of the gross income from the property to ber units acquired during the year to thewhich the rates are applied in making the calcu- number of timber units on hand in the ac-
lation. However, in the case of independent pro- count at the beginning of the year and then Businessducers and royalty owners of oil and gas adding (or subtracting) any correction to
property, bonuses and advance royalty pay- the estimate of the number of timber units
ments are not a part of gross income. Bad Debtsremaining in the account.
Terminating the lease. If you receive a bo- 4. Divide the result of (2) by the result of (3).
nus on a lease that expires, terminates, or is This is your depletion unit.
abandoned before you derive any income from Introduction
the extraction of mineral, include in income for Example. You bought a timber tract for If someone owes you money that you are notthe year of expiration, termination, or abandon- $160,000 and the land was worth as much as going to be able to collect, you have a bad debt.ment, the depletion deduction you took. Also the timber. Your basis for the timber is $80,000. There are two kinds of bad debts Ðbusinessincrease your adjusted basis in the property to Based on an estimated one million board feet and nonbusiness. This chapter discusses only
restore the depletion deduction you previously (1,000 MBF) of standing timber, you figure your business bad debts.
subtracted. depletion unit to be $80 per MBF ($80,000 ÷ Generally, a business bad debt is one that
For advanced royalties, include in income for 1,000). If you cut 500 MBF of timber, your deple- comes from operating your trade or business.
the year of lease termination, the depletion tion allowance would be $40,000 (500 MBF × You can deduct business bad debts on your
claimed on minerals for which the advanced $80). business income tax return.
Chapter 10 Business Bad Debts Page 37

Page 38 of 49 of Publication 535 15:54 - 26-MAR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
All other bad debts are nonbusiness bad You can claim a bad debt deduction 2. More than 30% of your receivables ac-
only if the amount owed to you was crued in the year of the sale were fromdebts and are deductible only as short-term cap-
previously included in gross income. sales to political parties.ital losses on Schedule D (Form 1040). For more
CAUTION
!
This applies to amounts owed to you from allinformation on nonbusiness bad debts, see Pub- 3. You made substantial and continuing ef-sources of taxable income, including sales,lication 550. forts to collect on the debt.services, rents, and interest.
Topics Loan or capital contribution. You cannotAccrual method. If you use the accrualThis chapter discusses: claim a bad debt deduction for a loan you mademethod of accounting, generally, you report in-
to a corporation if, based on the facts and cir-come as you earn it. You can only claim a bad• Definition of business bad debt cumstances, the loan is actually a contribution todebt deduction for an uncollectible receivable if capital.you have previously included the uncollectible• When a debt becomes worthless
amount in income. Debts of an insolvent partner. If your busi-• How to claim a business bad debt ness partnership breaks up and one of yourIf you qualify, you can use the nonac-
• Recovery of a bad debt former partners becomes insolvent, you maycrual-experience method of accounting dis-
have to pay more than your pro rata share. If youcussed later. Under this method, you do not
pay any part of the insolvent partner's share ofhave to accrue income that, based on your ex-Useful Items the debts, you can claim a bad debt deductionperience, you do not expect to collect.You may want to see: for the amount you paid that is attributable to theCash method. If you use the cash method insolvent partner's share.Publication of accounting, generally, you report income
Business loan guarantee. If you guarantee awhen you receive payment. You cannot claim a❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income debt that subsequently becomes worthless, thebad debt deduction for amounts owed to you
debt can qualify as a business bad debt if all thebecause you never included those amounts in❏ 536 Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for following requirements are met.income. For example, a cash basis architectIndividuals, Estates, and Trusts
cannot claim a bad debt deduction if a client fails • You made the guarantee in the course of❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of to pay the bill because the architect's fee was your trade or business.Assets never included in income. • You have a legal duty to pay the debt.❏ 550 Investment Income and Expenses
• You made the guarantee before the debtDebts from a former business. If you sell❏ 556 Examination of Returns, Appeal became worthless. You meet this require-your business but retain its receivables, theseRights, and Claims for Refund ment if you reasonably expected youdebts are business debts because they arose
would not have to pay the debt without fullout of your trade or business. If any of theseSee chapter 12 for information about getting reimbursement from the issuer.receivables subsequently become worthless,publications and forms. the loss is still a business bad debt. • You receive reasonable consideration for
making the guarantee. You meet this re-Debt acquired from a decedent. The char-
quirement if you made the guarantee inacter of a loss from debts of a business acquired
accord with normal business practice orfrom a decedent is determined in the same wayDefinition of Business for a good faith business purpose.as debts sold by a business. The executor of the
decedent's estate treats any loss from the debtsBad Debt
as a business bad debt if the debts were closely Example. Jane Zayne owns the Zayne
related to the decedent's trade or businessA business bad debt is a loss from the worth- Dress Company. She guaranteed payment of a
when they became worthless. Otherwise, a losslessness of a debt that was either: $20,000 note for Elegant Fashions, a dress out-
from these debts becomes a nonbusiness bad let that is not a ªrelated person.º Elegant Fash-• Created or acquired in your trade or busi- debt for the decedent's estate. ions is one of Zayne's largest clients. Elegantness, or Fashions later defaulted on the loan. As a result,Liquidation. If you liquidate your business• Closely related to your trade or business Ms. Zayne paid the remaining balance of theand some of your accounts receivable becomewhen it became partly or totally worthless. loan in full to the bank.worthless, they become business bad debts. She can claim a business bad debt deduc-
A debt is closely related to your trade or busi- tion only for the amount she paid, since herTypes of Business Badness if your primary motive for incurring the debt guarantee was made in the course of her trade
Debtsis business related. Bad debts of a corporation or business for a good faith business purpose.
She was motivated by the desire to retain one of(other than an S corporation) are always busi-
The following are situations that may result in a her better clients and keep a sales outlet.ness bad debts.
business bad debt.
Deductible in the year paid. If you make a
Credit sales. Business bad debts are mainly payment on a loan you guaranteed, you canLoans to clients and suppliers. If you loanthe result of credit sales to customers. Goods deduct it in the year paid, unless you have rightsmoney to a client, supplier, employee, or distrib-that have been sold, but not yet paid for, and against the borrower.utor for a business reason and subsequently,services that have been performed, but not yet after making attempts to collect, the loan receiv- Rights against a borrower. When youpaid for, are recorded in your books as either able becomes worthless, you have a business make payment on a loan you guaranteed, youaccounts receivable or notes receivable. After a bad debt. may have the right to take the place of thereasonable period of time, if you have tried to lender. The debt is then owed to you. If you havecollect the amount due, but are unable to do so, this right, or some other right to demand pay-Debts of political parties. If a political partythe uncollectible part becomes a business bad ment from the borrower, you cannot claim a bad(or other organization that accepts contributionsdebt. debt deduction until these rights become partlyor spends money to influence elections) owes Accounts or notes receivable valued at fair or totally worthless.you money and the debt becomes worthless,market value (FMV) when received are deducti- you can claim a bad debt deduction only if you Joint debtor.  If two or more debtors jointlyble only at that value, even though the FMV may use an accrual method of accounting and meet owe you money, your inability to collect from onebe less than the face value. If you purchased an all the following tests. does not enable you to deduct a proportionateaccount receivable for less than its face value, amount as a bad debt.and the receivable subsequently becomes 1. The debt arose from the sale of goods or
services in the ordinary course of yourworthless, the most you are allowed to deduct is Sale of mortgaged property. If mortgaged or
trade or business.the amount you paid to acquire it. pledged property is sold for less than the debt,
Page 38 Chapter 10 Business Bad Debts

Page 39 of 49 of Publication 535 15:54 - 26-MAR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the unpaid, uncollectible balance of the debt is a later tax year, you can deduct the amount you Generally, you can use the nonac-
bad debt. crual-experience method for accounts receiva-charged off in that year plus the disallowed
ble for services you performed only if:amount charged-off in the earlier year. The
charge off in the earlier year, unless reversed on • The services are provided in the fields ofyour books, fulfills the charge-off requirement for accounting, actuarial science, architecture,the later year.When a Debt Becomes consulting, engineering, health, law, or the
performing arts, orWorthless Totally worthless debts. If a debt becomes
• You meet the $5 million gross receipts testtotally worthless in the current tax year, you can
for all prior years.You do not have to wait until a debt is due to deduct the entire amount, less any amount de-
determine whether it is worthless. A debt be- ducted in an earlier tax year when the debt was
comes worthless when there is no longer any only partly worthless. Service related income. You can use thechance the amount owed will be paid. You do not have to make an actual nonaccrual-experience method only forIt is not necessary to go to court if you can charge-off on your books to claim a bad debt amounts earned by performing services. Youshow that a judgment from the court would be deduction for a totally worthless debt. However, cannot use this method for amounts owed to youuncollectible. You must only show that you have you may want to do so. If you do not and the IRS from activities such as lending money, sellingtaken reasonable steps to collect the debt. later rules the debt is only partly worthless, you goods, or acquiring receivables or other rights toBankruptcy of your debtor is generally good evi- will not be allowed a deduction for the debt in receive payment.dence of the worthlessness of at least a part of that tax year. A deduction of a partly worthless
an unsecured and unpreferred debt. Gross receipts test.  You meet the gross re-bad debt is limited to the amount actually
ceipts test if your average annual gross receiptscharged off.Property received for debt. If you receive for any 3 prior tax year period does not exceedproperty in partial settlement of a debt, reduce $5,000,000.Filing a claim for refund. If you did not deductthe debt by the FMV of the property received. a bad debt on your original return for the year itYou can deduct the remaining debt as a bad Interest or penalty charged. Generally, youbecame worthless, you can file a claim for adebt if and when it becomes worthless. cannot use the nonaccrual-experience methodcredit or refund. If the bad debt was totally worth-If you later sell the property, any gain on the for amounts due on which you charge interest orless, you must file the claim by the later of thesale is due to the appreciation of the property. It a late payment penalty. However, do not treat afollowing dates.is not a recovery of a bad debt. For information discount offered for early payment as the charg-on the sale of an asset, see Publication 544. • 7 years from the date your original return ing of interest or a penalty if both the following
was due (not including extensions). apply.
• 2 years from the date you paid the tax. • You otherwise accrue the full amount due
as gross income at the time you provideHow To Claim a If the claim is for a partly worthless bad debt, the services.
you must file the claim by the later of the follow-Business Bad Debt • You treat the discount allowed for earlying dates.
payment as an adjustment to gross in-
There are two methods to claim a business bad • 3 years from the date you filed your origi- come in the year of payment.
debt. nal return.
• The specific charge-off method. • 2 years from the date you paid the tax. Change in accounting method. Generally,
you cannot change from one method to another• The nonaccrual-experience method. You may have longer to file the claim if you were without IRS approval. You may be able to obtainunable to manage your financial affairs due to aGenerally, you must use the specific charge-off automatic consent to change your method ofphysical or mental impairment. Such an impair-method. However, you may use the nonac- accounting. See Form 3115, Application forment requires proof of existence.crual-experience method if you meet the re- Change in Accounting Method, and the Instruc-
quirements discussed later under For details and more information about filing a tions for Form 3115 for more information on
Nonaccrual-Experience Method. claim, see Publication 556. Use one of the fol- obtaining consent to change to a nonac-
lowing forms to file a claim. crual-experience method (other than one of the
Specific Charge-Off Method safe harbor methods) or to change from one
Table 10-1. Forms Used To File a method to another.
If you use the specific charge-off method, you Claim
can deduct specific business bad debts that
IF you filed as THEN file...become either partly or totally worthless during
a...the tax year. Recovery of a Bad
Sole proprietor orPartly worthless debts. You can deduct spe-  Form 1040X Debtfarmercific bad debts that become partly uncollectible
during the tax year. Your tax deduction is limited Corporation  Form 1120X If you claim a deduction for a bad debt on yourto the amount you charge off on your books income tax return and later recover (collect) allS corporation  Form 1120Sduring the year. You do not have to charge off or part of it, you may have to include all or part of(check box H(4))and deduct your partly worthless debts annually. the recovery in gross income. The amount youYou can delay the charge off until a later year. Partnership  Form 1065 include is limited to the amount you actuallyHowever, you cannot deduct any part of a debt (check box G(5)) deducted. However, you can exclude theafter the year it becomes totally worthless. amount deducted that did not reduce your tax.
Significantly modified debt.  An exception Report the recovery as ªOther incomeº on the
to the charge-off rule exists for debt which has appropriate business form or schedule.Nonaccrual-Experiencebeen significantly modified and on which the See  Recoveries in Publication 525 for moreMethodholder recognized gain. For more information, information.
see Regulations section 1.166-3(a)(3). If you use an accrual method of accounting and Net operating loss (NOL) carryover. If a
qualify under the rules explained in this section,Deduction disallowed. Generally, you can bad debt deduction increases an NOL carryover
you can use the nonaccrual-experience methodclaim a partial bad debt deduction only in the that has not expired before the beginning of the
for bad debts. Under this method, you do notyear you make the charge-off on your books. If, tax year in which the recovery takes place, you
accrue service related income you expect to beunder audit, the IRS does not allow your deduc- treat the deduction as having reduced your tax.
uncollectible.tion and the debt becomes partly worthless in a A bad debt deduction that contributes to a net
Chapter 10 Business Bad Debts Page 39

Page 40 of 49 of Publication 535 15:54 - 26-MAR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
operating loss helps lower taxes in the year to Table 11±1. Reporting Reimbursements
which you carry the net operating loss. See
IF the type of reimbursement (or otherPublication 536 for more information about net
expense allowance) arrangement is under THEN the employer reports on Form W-2operating losses.
An accountable plan with:
Actual expense reimbursement: No amount.
Adequate accounting made and excess
returned
Actual expense reimbursement: The excess amount as wages in box 1.
Adequate accounting and return of excess11.
both required but excess not returned
Per diem or mileage allowance up to the No amount.
federal rate:
Other Expenses Adequate accounting made and excess
returned
Per diem or mileage allowance up to the The excess amount as wages in box 1. The
federal rate: amount up to the federal rate is reported onlyWhat's New Adequate accounting and return of excess in box 12Ðit is not reported in box 1.
both required but excess not returned
Standard mileage rate. The standard mile-
Per diem or mileage allowance exceeds the The excess amount as wages in box 1. Theage rate for the cost of operating your car, van,
federal rate: amount up to the federal rate is reported onlypickup, or panel truck in 2009 is 55 cents a mile Adequate accounting made up to the federal in box 12Ðit is not reported in box 1.for all business miles. For more information, see rate only and excess not returnedCar and truck expenses , under Miscellaneous
Expenses. A nonaccountable plan with:
Either adequate accounting or return of The entire amount as wages in box 1.
excess, or both, not required by plan
No reimbursement plan The entire amount as wages in box 1.Introduction
This chapter covers business expenses that
may not have been explained to you, as a busi- A reimbursement or allowance arrangement
ness owner, in previous chapters of this publica- (including per diem allowances, discussed later)Reimbursement oftion. depends on whether you have: (1) an accounta-
ble plan or (2) a nonaccountable plan. If youTravel, Meals, andTopics reimburse these expenses under an accounta-
ble plan, then you can deduct the amount allow-This chapter discusses: Entertainment
able to the extent of the tax law as travel, meal,
The following discussion explains how to handle• Travel, meals, and entertainment and entertainment expenses on your tax return.
any reimbursements or allowances you may  If you reimburse these expenses under a• Bribes and kickbacks provide for travel, meals, and entertainment ex- nonaccountable plan, then you must report thepenses when incurred by your employees. If you• Charitable contributions reimbursements as wages on Form W-2, Wageare self-employed and report your income and• Education expenses and Tax Statement, and deduct them as wagesexpenses on Schedule C or C-EZ (Form 1040), on the appropriate line of your tax return. If you• Lobbying expenses see Publication 463.
make a single payment to your employees and itTo be deductible for tax purposes, expenses• Penalties and fines includes both wages and an expense reim-incurred for travel, meals, and entertainment bursement, you must specify the amount attribu-• Repayments (claim of right) must be ordinary and necessary expenses in- table to reimbursement and report it accordingly.curred while carrying on your trade or business.• Other miscellaneous expenses See Table 11±1, Reporting Reimbursements.Generally, you also must show that entertain-
ment expenses (including meals) are directly
Useful Items related to, or associated with, the conduct of Accountable Plansyour trade or business. For more information onYou may want to see:
travel, meals, and entertainment, including de- An accountable plan requires your employees toductibility, see Publication 463.Publication meet all of the following requirements. They
must:❏ 15-B Employer's Tax Guide to Fringe Reimbursements
Benefits 1. Have paid or incurred deductible expenses
A ªreimbursement or allowance arrangementº while performing services as your employ-❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car provides for payment of advances, reimburse- ees,Expenses ments, and charges for travel, meals, and enter-
2. Adequately account to you for these ex-❏ 526 Charitable Contributions tainment expenses incurred by your employees
penses within a reasonable period of time,during the ordinary course of business. Upon❏ 529 Miscellaneous Deductions andsatisfying your established substantiation re-
❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of quirements, you can deduct the allowable 3. Return any excess reimbursement or al-
Assets amount on your tax return. Because of differ- lowance within a reasonable period ofences between accounting methods and tax time.❏ 970 Tax Benefits for Education law, these amounts may not be the same. For
An arrangement under which you advance❏ 1542 Per Diem Rates example, you may deduct 100% of the cost of
money to employees is treated as meeting (3)meals on your business books and records.
See chapter 12 for information about getting above only if the following requirements are alsoHowever, for tax purposes, only 50% of these
met.publications and forms. costs are allowed by law as a tax deduction.
Page 40 Chapter 11 Other Expenses

Page 41 of 49 of Publication 535 15:54 - 26-MAR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• The advance is reasonably calculated not deductions line of Form 1120, U.S. Corporation Standard meal allowance. The federal rate
to exceed the amount of anticipated ex- Income Tax Return. If you are filing any other for meal and incidental expenses (M & IE) is the
penses. business income tax return, such as a partner- standard meal allowance. You may pay only an
ship or S corporation return, deduct the reim- M & IE allowance to employees who travel away• You make the advance within a reasona- bursement on the appropriate line of the return from home if:ble period of time. as provided in the instructions for that return. • You pay the employee for actual expenses
If any expenses reimbursed under this ar- for lodging based on receipts submitted to
rangement are not substantiated, or an excess you,Per Diem and Car Allowancesreimbursement is not returned within a reasona- • You provide for the lodging,ble period of time by an employee, you are not You may reimburse your employees under an
allowed to deduct these expenses as reim- • You pay for the actual expense of theaccountable plan based on travel days, miles, or
bursed under an accountable plan. Instead, lodging directly to the provider,some other fixed allowance. In these cases,
treat the reimbursed expenses as paid under a your employee is considered to have accounted • You do not have reasonable belief thatnonaccountable plan, discussed later. to you for the amount of the expense that does lodging expenses were incurred by thenot exceed the rates established by the federal employee, orAdequate accounting. Your employees must government. Your employee must actually sub-adequately account to you for their travel, • The allowance is computed on a basisstantiate to you the other elements of the ex-meals, and entertainment expenses. They must similar to that used in computing the em-pense, such as time, place, and businessgive you documentary evidence of their travel, ployee's wages (that is, number of hourspurpose.mileage, and other employee business ex- worked or miles traveled).Federal rate. The federal rate can be figuredpenses. This evidence should include items
using any one of the following methods.such as receipts, along with either a statement Internet access.  Per diem rates are avail-of expenses, an account book, a day-planner, or able on the Internet. You can access per diem1. For per diem amounts:similar record in which the employee entered rates at www.gsa.gov.each expense at or near the time the expense a. The regular federal per diem rate. High-low method. This is a simplifiedwas incurred.
method of computing the federal per diem rateb. The standard meal allowance.
Excess reimbursement or allowance. An for lodging and meal expenses for travelingc. The high-low rate.excess reimbursement or allowance is any within the continental United States. It elimi-
amount you pay to an employee that is more nates the need to keep a current list of the per2. For car expenses:than the business-related expenses for which diem rate in effect for each city in the continental
the employee adequately accounted. The em- United States.a. The standard mileage rate.ployee must return any excess reimbursement Under the high-low method, the per diemb. A fixed and variable rate (FAVR).or other expense allowance to you within a rea- amount for travel during 2009 is $256 ($58 for Msonable period of time. & IE) for certain high-cost locations. All other
Car allowance. Your employee is considered areas have a per diem amount of $158 ($45 forReasonable period of time. A reasonable
to have accounted to you for car expenses that M & IE). The high-cost locations eligible for theperiod of time depends on the facts and circum-
do not exceed the standard mileage rate. For $256 per diem amount under the high-lowstances. Generally, actions that take place
2009, the standard mileage rate for each busi- method are listed in Publication 1542.within the times specified in the following list will
ness mile is 55 cents per mile for all businessbe treated as taking place within a reasonable
miles. Reporting per diem and car allowances.period of time.
You can choose to reimburse your employ- The following discussion explains how to report
ees using a fixed and variable rate (FAVR) al-1. You give an advance within 30 days of the per diem and car allowances. The manner in
lowance. This is an allowance that includes atime the employee has incurred the ex- which you report them depends on how the
combination of payments covering fixed and va-pense. allowance compares to the federal rate. See
riable costs, such as a cents-per-mile rate to Table 11±1.2. Your employees adequately account for cover your employees' variable operating coststheir expenses within 60 days after the ex- Allowance less than or equal to the federal(such as gas, oil, etc.) plus a flat amount to coverpenses were paid or incurred. rate. If your allowance for the employee is lessyour employees' fixed costs (such as deprecia- than or equal to the appropriate federal rate, thattion, insurance, etc.). For information on using a3. Your employees return any excess reim- allowance is not included as part of the em-FAVR allowance, see Revenue Procedurebursement within 120 days after the ex- ployee's pay in box 1 of the employee's Form2009-47 in Internal Revenue Bulletin 2009-42.penses were paid or incurred. W-2. Deduct the allowance as travel expensesYou can read Revenue Procedure 2009-47 at4. You give a periodic statement (at least (including meals that may be subject to the 50%www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb09-42.pdf.quarterly) to your employees that asks limit, discussed later). See How to deduct under
Per diem allowance. If your employee actu-them to either return or adequately ac- Accountable Plans, earlier.
ally substantiates to you the other elements (dis-count for outstanding advances and they
Allowance more than the federal rate. Ifcussed earlier) of the expenses reimbursedcomply within 120 days of the date of the
your employee's allowance is more than theusing the per diem allowance, how you reportstatement.
appropriate federal rate, you must report theand deduct the allowance depends on whether
allowance as two separate items.the allowance is for lodging and meal expensesHow to deduct. You can claim a deduction for
Include the allowance amount up to the fed-or for meal expenses only and whether the al-travel, meals, and entertainment expenses if
eral rate in box 12 (code L) of the employee'slowance is more than the federal rate.you reimburse your employees for these ex-
Form W-2. Deduct it as travel expenses (aspenses under an accountable plan. Generally, Regular federal per diem rate. The regular explained above). This part of the allowance isthe amount you can deduct for meals and enter- federal per diem rate is the highest amount the treated as reimbursed under an accountabletainment, is subject to a 50% limit, discussed federal government will pay to its employees plan.later. If you are a sole proprietor, or are filing as a while away from home on travel. It has two Include the amount that is more than thesingle member limited liability company, deduct components: federal rate in box 1 (and in boxes 3 and 5 if theythe travel reimbursement on line 24a and the
apply) of the employee's Form W-2. Deduct it asdeductible part of the meals and entertainment 1. Lodging expense, and
wages subject to income tax withholding, socialreimbursement on line 24b, Schedule C (Form 2. Meal and incidental expense (M & IE). security, Medicare, and federal unemployment1040) or line 2, Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040).
taxes. This part of the allowance is treated asIf you are filing an income tax return for a The rates are different for different locations.
reimbursed under a nonaccountable plan as ex-corporation, the reimbursement should be in- Publication 1542 lists the rates in the continental
plained later under Nonaccountable Plans.cluded with the amount claimed on the Other United States.
Chapter 11 Other Expenses Page 41

Page 42 of 49 of Publication 535 15:54 - 26-MAR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the food and beverages. These expenses are the entertainment you furnish to your cus-Meals and Entertainment
tomers, such as a floor show, is a busi-subject to the 50% limit unless they qualify as a
Under an accountable plan, you can generally ness expense that is fully deductible.de minimis fringe benefit, discussed in Publica-
deduct only 50% of any otherwise deductible tion 15-B, or unless they are compensation to • The cost of providing meals, entertain-business-related meal and entertainment ex- your employees and you treat them as provided ment, or recreational facilities to the gen-penses you reimburse your employees. The de- under a nonaccountable plan. eral public as a means of advertising orduction limit applies even if you reimburse them
promoting goodwill in the community isfor 100% of the expenses. Employee activities. The expense of provid- fully deductible.
ing recreational, social, or similar activities (in-Application of the 50% limit. The 50% de-
cluding the use of a facility) for your employeesduction limit applies to reimbursements you
is deductible. The benefit must be primarily formake to your employees for expenses they incur
for meals while traveling away from home on your employees who are not highly compen-
Miscellaneousbusiness and for entertaining business custom- sated.
ers at your place of business, a restaurant, or For this purpose, a highly compensated em- Expensesanother location. It applies to expenses incurred ployee is an employee who meets either of the
at a business convention or reception, business following requirements. In addition to travel, meal, and entertainmentmeeting, or business luncheon at a club. The expenses, other miscellaneous expenses thatdeduction limit may also apply to meals you 1. Owned a 10% or more interest in the busi- are deductible, subject to limitations, include:furnish on your premises to your employees. ness during the year or the preceding year.
An employee is treated as owning any in- • Amounts paid for the reasonable cost ofRelated expenses. Taxes and tips relating terest owned by his or her brother, sister, advertising that are directly related to yourto a meal or entertainment activity you reim- business activities. Generally, amountsspouse, ancestors, and lineal descend-burse to your employee under an accountable paid to influence legislation (i.e., lobbying)ants.plan are included in the amount subject to the are not deductible for tax purposes. See50% limit. Reimbursements you make for ex- 2. Received more than $105,000 in pay for Lobbying expenses, later.penses, such as cover charges for admission to the preceding year. You may choose to
a nightclub, rent paid for a room to hold a dinner • Amounts paid that are directly related toinclude only employees who were also in
or cocktail party, or the amount you pay for the conduct of business meetings of yourthe top 20% of employees when ranked by
parking at a sports arena, are all subject to the employees, partners, stockholders,pay for the preceding year.
50% limit. However, the cost of transportation to agents, or directors. Some minor social For example, the expenses for food, bever-and from an otherwise allowable business meal activities may be allowed, however, these
ages, and entertainment for a company-wideor a business-related entertainment activity is expenses are subject to the 50% limit.
picnic are not subject to the 50% limit.not subject to the 50% limit. • Amounts paid that are directly related to
Amount subject to 50% limit. If you provide and necessary for attending business
your employees with a per diem allowance only meetings or conventions of certainNonaccountable Plans
for meal and incidental expenses, the amount tax-exempt organizations. These organi-
A nonaccountable plan is an arrangement thattreated as an expense for food and beverages is zations include business leagues, cham-
the lesser of the following. does not meet the requirements for an account- bers of commerce, real estates boards,
able plan. All amounts paid, or treated as paid, and trade and professional associations.• The per diem allowance. under a nonaccountable plan are reported as
• The federal rate for M & IE. wages on Form W-2. The payments are subject Advertising expenses. You can usually de-to income tax withholding, social security, Medi- duct as a business expense the cost of institu-If you provide your employees with a per diem care, and federal unemployment taxes. You can tional or goodwill advertising to keep your nameallowance that covers lodging, meals, and inci- deduct the reimbursement as compensation or before the public if it relates to business youdental expenses, you must treat an amount wages only to the extent it meets the deductibil- reasonably expect to gain in the future. For ex-equal to the federal M & IE rate for the area of ity tests for employees' pay in chapter 2. Deduct ample, the cost of advertising that encouragestravel as an expense for food and beverages. If the allowable amount as compensation or people to contribute to the Red Cross, to buythe per diem allowance you provide is less than wages on the appropriate line of your income tax U.S. Savings Bonds, or to participate in similarthe federal per diem rate for the area of travel, return, as provided in its instructions. causes is usually deductible.you can treat 40% of the per diem allowance as Generally, amounts paid for meals, enter-the amount for food and beverages. Anticipated liabilities. Anticipated liabilitiestainment, and amusement provided to individu- or reserves for anticipated liabilities are not de-Meal expenses when subject to ªhours of als who are not your employees are not subject ductible. For example, assume you sold 1-yearserviceº limits. You can deduct 80% of the to the 50% limit. Such activities must be directly TV service contracts this year totaling $50,000.reimbursed meals your employees consume related to the active conduct of your trade or From experience, you know you will have ex-while away from their tax home on business business. Examples include: penses of about $15,000 in the coming year forduring, or incident to, any period subject to the these contracts. You cannot deduct any of the• Amounts paid for meals, goods, services,Department of Transportation's ªhours of serv- $15,000 this year by charging expenses to aor the use of a facility. You are allowed aiceº limits. reserve or liability account. You can deduct yourdeduction only to the extent it is includedSee Publication 463 for a detailed discussion expenses only when you actually pay or accruein the gross income of the recipient asof individuals subject to the Department of them, depending on your accounting method.compensation for services or as a prize orTransportation's ªhours of serviceº limits.
award. Bribes and kickbacks. Engaging in the pay-De minimis (minimal) fringe benefit. The ment of bribes or kickbacks is a serious criminal•  Expenses that exceed $600 and are re-50% limit does not apply to an expense for food matter. Such activity could result in criminalquired to be reported on an informationor beverage that is excluded from the gross prosecution. Any payments that appear to havereturn, for example, Form 1099-MISC.income of an employee because it is a de been made, either directly or indirectly, to anSee the General Instructions for Formsminimis fringe benefit. See Publication 15-B for official or employee of any government or an1099, 1098, 3921, 3922, 5498, and W-2Gadditional information on de minimis fringe ben- agency or instrumentality of any government arefor more information about reporting re-efits. not deductible for tax purposes and are in viola-quirements.Company cafeteria or executive dining tion of the law.
• The cost of providing meals, entertain-room. The cost of food and beverages you Payments paid directly or indirectly to a per-
ment, goods and services, or use of facili-provide primarily to your employees on your son in violation of any federal or state law (but
ties you sell to the public. For example, ifbusiness premises is deductible. This includes only if that state law is generally enforced, de-
the cost of maintaining the facilities for providing you operate a nightclub, your expense for fined below) that provides for a criminal penalty
Page 42 Chapter 11 Other Expenses

Page 43 of 49 of Publication 535 15:54 - 26-MAR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
or for the loss of a license or privilege to engage See Publication 526 for a discussion of able to show the education maintains or im-
donated inventory, including capital gain prop- proves skills required in your trade or business,in a trade or business are also not allowed as a
erty. or that it is required by law or regulations, fordeduction for tax purposes.
keeping your license to practice, status, or job.Meaning of ªgenerally enforced.º A state Club dues and membership fees. Generally, For example, an attorney can deduct the cost oflaw is considered generally enforced unless it is amounts paid or incurred for membership in any attending Continuing Legal Education (CLE)never enforced or enforced only for infamous club organized for business, pleasure, recrea- classes that are required by the state bar associ-persons or persons whose violations are ex- tion, or any other social purpose are not deducti- ation to maintain his or her license to practicetraordinarily flagrant. For example, a state law is ble. Clubs organized for business, pleasure, law.generally enforced unless proper reporting of a recreation, or other social purpose include, but Education expenses you incur to meet theviolation of the law results in enforcement only are not limited to country clubs, golf and athletic minimum requirements of your present trade orunder unusual circumstances. clubs, hotel clubs, sporting clubs, airline clubs, business, or those that qualify you for a new
and clubs operated to provide meals under cir- trade or business, are not deductible. This is trueKickbacks. A kickback is a payment for re- cumstances generally considered to be condu- even if the education maintains or improvesferring a client, patient, or customer. The com- cive to business discussions. skills presently required in your business. Formon kickback situation occurs when money or
more information on education expenses, seeproperty is given to someone as payment for Exception. The following organizations are
Publication 970.influencing a third party to purchase from, use not treated as clubs organized for business,
the services of, or otherwise deal with the per- pleasure, recreation, or other social purpose un- Franchise, trademark, trade name. If youson who pays the kickback. In many cases, the less one of the main purposes is to conduct buy a franchise, trademark, or trade name, youperson whose business is being sought or en- entertainment activities for members or their can deduct the amount you pay or incur as ajoyed by the person who pays the kickback is not guests or to provide members or their guests business expense only if your payments are partaware of the payment. with access to entertainment facilities. of a series of payments that are:
For example, the Yard Corporation is in the • Boards of trade.business of repairing ships. It engages in the 1. Contingent on productivity, use, or disposi-
• Business leagues.practice of returning 10% of the repair bills as tion of the item,
kickbacks to the captains and chief officers of • Chambers of commerce. 2. Payable at least annually for the entirethe vessels it repairs. Although this practice is term of the transfer agreement, and• Civic or public service organizations.considered an ordinary and necessary expense
3. Substantially equal in amount (or payableof getting business, it is clearly a violation of a • Professional organizations such as bar as- under a fixed formula).state law that is generally enforced. These ex- sociations and medical associations.
penditures are not deductible for tax purposes, When determining the term of the transfer• Real estate boards.whether or not the owners of the shipyard are agreement, include all renewal options and anysubsequently prosecuted. • Trade associations. other period for which you and the transferrer
reasonably expect the agreement to be re-Form 1099-MISC. It does not matter
newed.whether any kickbacks paid during the tax year Credit card convenience fees. Credit card
A franchise includes an agreement that givesare deductible on your income tax return in re- companies charge a fee to businesses who ac-
one of the parties to the agreement the right togards to information reporting. See Form cept their cards. This fee when paid or incurred
distribute, sell, or provide goods, services, or1099-MISC for more information. by the business can be deducted as a business
facilities within a specified area.expense.
Car and truck expenses. The costs of operat- Impairment-related expenses. If you are dis-Damages recovered. Special rules apply toing a car, truck, or other vehicle in your business abled, you can deduct expenses necessary forcompensation you receive for damages sus-are deductible. For more information on how to you to be able to work (impairment-related ex-tained as a result of patent infringement, breachfigure your deduction, see Publication 463. penses) as a business expense, rather than as aof contract or fiduciary duty, or antitrust viola- medical expense.tions. You must include this compensation inCharitable contributions. Cash payments to You are disabled if you have either of theyour income. However, you may be able to takean organization, charitable or otherwise, may be following.a special deduction. The deduction applies onlydeductible as business expenses if the pay-
to amounts recovered for actual injury, not any • A physical or mental disability (for exam-ments are not charitable contributions or gifts. If
additional amount. The deduction is the smaller ple, blindness or deafness) that function-the payments are charitable contributions or
of the following. ally limits your being employed.gifts, you cannot deduct them as business ex-
penses. However, corporations (other than S • The amount you received or accrued for • A physical or mental impairment that sub-corporations) can deduct charitable contribu- damages in the tax year reduced by the stantially limits one or more of your majortions on their income tax returns, subject to amount you paid or incurred in the year to life activities.limitations. See the Instructions for Form 1120 recover that amount.
for more information. Sole proprietors, partners The expense qualifies as a business expense• Your losses from the injury you have notin a partnership, or shareholders in an S corpo- if all the following apply.deducted.ration may be able to deduct charitable contribu-
• Your work clearly requires the expense fortions made by their business on Schedule A
you to satisfactorily perform that work.(Form 1040). Demolition expenses or losses. Amounts
paid or incurred to demolish a structure are not • The goods or services purchased areExample. You paid $15 to a local church for deductible. These amounts are added to the clearly not needed or used, other than in-a half-page ad in a program for a concert it is basis of the land where the demolished structure cidentally, in your personal activities.sponsoring. The purpose of the ad was to en- was located. Any loss for the remaining un- • Their treatment is not specifically providedcourage readers to buy your products. Your pay- depreciated basis of a demolished structure for under other tax law provisions.ment is not a charitable contribution. However, would not be recognized until the property is
you may deduct it as an advertising expense. disposed.
Example. You are blind. You must use aExample. You made a $100,000 donation Education expenses. Ordinary and neces- reader to do your work, both at and away fromto a committee organized by the local Chamber sary expenses paid for the cost of the education your place of work. The reader's services areof Commerce to bring a convention to your city, and training of your employees are deductible. only for your work. You can deduct your ex-intended to increase business activity, including See Education Expenses in chapter 2. penses for the reader as a business expense.yours. Your payment is not a charitable contribu- You may also deduct the cost of your own
tion. However, you may deduct it as a business education (including certain related travel) re- Internet-related expenses. Generally, you
expense. lated to your trade or business. You must be can deduct internet-related expenses including
Chapter 11 Other Expenses Page 43

Page 44 of 49 of Publication 535 15:54 - 26-MAR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
domain registrations fees and webmaster con- • Attempting to influence the general public, expenses for the tax year do not exceed
sulting costs. If you are starting a business you $2,000 (excluding overhead expenses).or segments of the public, about elections,
may have to amortize these expenses as legislative matters, or referendums. • Expenses incurred by taxpayers engagedstart-up costs. For more information about am- in the trade or business of lobbying (pro-• Communicating directly with covered ex-ortizing start-up and organizational costs, see fessional lobbyists) on behalf of anotherecutive branch officials (defined later) inchapter 8. person (but does apply to payments by theany attempt to influence the official actions
other person to the lobbyist for lobbyingor positions of those officials.Interview expense allowances. Reimburse- activities).ments you make to job candidates for transpor- • Researching, preparing, planning, or coor-
tation or other expenses related to interviews for dinating any of the preceding activities.
Moving machinery. Generally, the cost ofpossible employment are not wages. You can
moving machinery from one city to another is adeduct the reimbursements as a business ex- Your expenses for influencing legislation and
deductible expense. So is the cost of movingpense. However, expenses for food, beverages, communicating directly with a covered execu-
machinery from one plant to another, or fromand entertainment are subject to the 50% limit tive branch official include a portion of your labor
one part of your plant to another. You can de-discussed earlier under Meals and Entertain- costs and general and administrative costs of
duct the cost of installing the machinery in thement. your business. For information on making this new location. However, you must capitalize theallocation, see section 1.162-28 of the regula- costs of installing or moving newly purchasedLegal and professional fees. Fees charged tions. machinery.by accountants and attorneys that are ordinary You cannot claim a charitable or business
and necessary expenses directly related to op- expense deduction for amounts paid to an or- Outplacement services. The costs of out-
erating your business are deductible as busi- placement services you provide to your employ-ganization if both of the following apply.
ness expenses. However, usually legal fees you ees to help them find new employment, such as• The organization conducts lobbying activi-pay to acquire business assets are not deducti- career counseling, rÂesumÂe assistance, skills as-ties on matters of direct financial interestble. These costs are added to the basis of the sessment, etc. are deductible.to your business.property. The costs of outplacement services may
Fees that include payments for work of a cover more than one deduction category. For• A principal purpose of your contribution is
personal nature (such as drafting a will, or dam- example, deduct as a utilities expense the costto avoid the rules discussed earlier that
ages arising from a personal injury), are not of telephone calls made under this service andprohibit a business deduction for lobbyingallowed as a business deduction on Schedule C deduct as rental expense the cost of rentingexpenses.or C-EZ. If the invoice includes both business machinery and equipment for this service.
and personal charges, compute the business For information on whether the value of out-If a tax-exempt organization, other than a sec-portion as follows: multiply the total amount of placement services is includable in your employ-tion 501(c)(3) organization, provides you with athe bill by a fraction, the numerator of which is ees' income, see Publication 15-B.notice on the part of dues that is allocable tothe amount attributable to business matters, the nondeductible lobbying and political expenses, Penalties and fines. Penalties paid for latedenominator of which is the total amount paid. you cannot deduct that part of the dues. performance or nonperformance of a contractThe result is the portion of the invoice attributa-
are generally deductible. For instance, you ownCovered executive branch official. Forble to business expenses. The portion attributa-
and operate a construction company. You havepurposes of this discussion, a covered executiveble to personal matters is the difference
been contracted to construct a building by abranch official is any of the following.between the total amount and the business por-
certain date. Due to construction delays, thetion (computed above).
1. The President. building is not completed and ready for occu-Legal fees relating to personal tax advice
pancy on the date stipulated in the contract. Youmay be deductible on Line 22, Schedule A 2. The Vice President. are now required to pay an additional amount for(Form 1040), if you itemize deductions. How- 3. Any officer or employee of the White each day that completion is delayed beyond theever, the deduction is subject to the 2% limita- House Office of the Executive Office of the completion date stipulated in the contract.tion on miscellaneous itemized deductions. See
President and the two most senior level These additional costs are deductible businessPublication 529, Miscellaneous Deductions.
officers of each of the other agencies in expenses.
Tax preparation fees. The cost of hiring a the Executive Office. On the other hand, penalties or fines paid to
tax professional, such as a C.P.A., to prepare any government agency or instrumentality be-4. Any individual who:that part of your tax return relating to your busi- cause of a violation of any law are not deducti-
ness as a sole proprietor is deductible on Sched- ble. These fines or penalties include thea. Is serving in a position in Level I of theule C or Schedule C-EZ. Any remaining cost following amounts.Executive Schedule under section 5312may be deductible on Schedule A (Form 1040) if of title 5, United States Code, • Paid because of a conviction for a crime oryou itemize deductions.
after a plea of guilty or no contest in ab. Has been designated by the PresidentYou can also claim a business deduction for
criminal proceeding.as having Cabinet-level status, oramounts paid or incurred in resolving asserted
tax deficiencies for your business operated as a • Paid as a penalty imposed by federal,c. Is an immediate deputy of an individualsole proprietor. state, or local law in a civil action, includ-listed in item (a) or (b).
ing certain additions to tax and additional
Licenses and regulatory fees. Licenses and amounts and assessable penalties im-
Exceptions to denial of deduction. Theregulatory fees for your trade or business paid posed by the Internal Revenue Code.
general denial of the deduction does not apply toannually to state or local governments generally • Paid in settlement of actual or possiblethe following.are deductible. Some licenses and fees may liability for a fine or penalty, whether civilhave to be amortized. See chapter 8 for more • Expenses of appearing before, or commu- or criminal.information. nicating with, any local council or similar
• Forfeited as collateral posted for a pro-governing body concerning its legislationLobbying expenses. Generally, lobbying ex- ceeding that could result in a fine or pen-(local legislation) if the legislation is of di-penses are not deductible. Lobbying expenses alty.rect interest to you or to you and an organ-include amounts paid or incurred for any of the ization of which you are a member. Anfollowing activities. Examples of nondeductible penalties andIndian tribal government is treated as a fines include the following.local council or similar governing body.• Influencing legislation.
• Fines for violating city housing codes.• Any in-house expenses for influencing leg-• Participating in or intervening in any politi-
islation and communicating directly with acal campaign for, or against, any candi- • Fines paid by truckers for violating state
date for public office. covered executive branch official if those maximum highway weight laws.
Page 44 Chapter 11 Other Expenses

Page 45 of 49 of Publication 535 15:54 - 26-MAR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2008 2008 • Fines for violating air quality laws. Repayments. If you had to repay an amount
With Income Without Incomeyou included in your income in an earlier year,• Civil penalties for violating federal laws re- Taxableyou may be able to deduct the amount repaid forgarding mining safety standards and dis- Income $15,000 $10,000the year in which you repaid it. Or, if the amountcharges into navigable waters. you repaid is more than $3,000, you may be able Tax $ 1,853 $ 1,103
to take a credit against your tax for the year inA fine or penalty does not include any of the which you repaid it. 2009 2009 following. Without Deduction With DeductionType of deduction. The type of deduction Taxable• Legal fees and related expenses to defend you are allowed in the year of repayment de- Income $49,950 $44,950yourself in a prosecution or civil action for pends on the type of income you included in the
a violation of the law imposing the fine or Tax  $8,681  $7,431earlier year. For instance, if you repay an
civil penalty. amount you previously reported as a capital
gain, deduct the repayment as a capital loss on Your tax under Method 1 is $7,431. Your tax• Court costs or stenographic and printing Schedule D (Form 1040). If you reported it as under Method 2 is $7,931, figured as follows:charges. self-employment income, deduct it as a busi-
Tax previously determined for 2008 $ 1,853• Compensatory damages paid to a govern- ness deduction on Schedule C or Schedule
Less: Tax as refigured ......... . − 1,103C-EZ (Form 1040) or Schedule F (Form 1040).ment.
Decrease in 2008 tax $ 750If you reported the amount as wages, unem- Regular tax liability for 2009 ...... . $8,681ployment compensation, or other nonbusinessPolitical contributions. Contributions or gifts Less: Decrease in 2008 tax ...... . − 750
ordinary income, enter it on Schedule A (Formpaid to political parties or candidates are not Refigured tax for 2009 $ 7,931
1040) as a miscellaneous itemized deductiondeductible. In addition, expenses paid or in-
that is subject to the 2% limitation. However, ifcurred to take part in any political campaign of a Because you pay less tax under Method 1, you
the repayment is over $3,000 and Method 1candidate for public office are not deductible. should take a deduction for the repayment in
(discussed later) applies, deduct it on Schedule 2009.Indirect political contributions. You can- A (Form 1040) as a miscellaneous itemized de-
Repayment does not apply. This discus-not deduct indirect political contributions and duction that is not subject to the 2% limitation.
sion does not apply to the following.costs of taking part in political activities as busi- Repayment Ð $3,000 or less. If theness expenses. Examples of nondeductible ex- • Deductions for bad debts.amount you repaid was $3,000 or less, deduct itpenses include the following. from your income in the year you repaid it. • Deductions from sales to customers, such
• Advertising in a convention program of a as returns and allowances, and similarRepaymentÐover $3,000. If the amountpolitical party, or in any other publication if items.you repaid was more than $3,000, you can de-any of the proceeds from the publication duct the repayment, as described earlier. How- • Deductions for legal and other expensesare for, or intended for, the use of a politi- ever, you can instead choose to take a tax credit of contesting the repayment.cal party or candidate. for the year of repayment if you included the
income under a ªclaim of right.º This means that Year of deduction (or credit). If you use• Admission to a dinner or program (includ-
at the time you included the income, it appeared the cash method of accounting, you can take theing, but not limited to, galas, dances, film that you had an unrestricted right to it. If you deduction (or credit, if applicable) for the taxpresentations, parties, and sporting qualify for this choice, figure your tax under both year in which you actually make the repayment.events) if any of the proceeds from the methods and use the method that results in less If you use any other accounting method, you canfunction are for, or intended for, the use of tax. deduct the repayment or claim a credit for it onlya political party or candidate. for the tax year in which it is a proper deductionMethod 1. Figure your tax for 2009 claiming• Admission to an inaugural ball, gala, under your accounting method. For example, ifa deduction for the repaid amount.parade, concert, or similar event if identi- you use the accrual method, you are entitled to
Method 2. Figure your tax for 2009 claimingfied with a political party or candidate. the deduction or credit in the tax year in which
a credit for the prepaid amount. Follow these the obligation for the repayment accrues.
steps.Repairs. The cost of repairing or improving
property used in your trade or business is either 1. Figure your tax for 2009 without deducting Subscriptions. Subscriptions to professional,
the repaid amount.a deductible or capital expense. Routine mainte- technical, and trade journals that deal with your
business field are deductible.nance that keeps your property in a normal effi- 2. Refigure your tax from the earlier year
cient operating condition, but that does not without including in income the amount
materially increase the value or substantially you repaid in 2009. Supplies and materials. Unless you have de-
prolong the useful life of the property is deducti- ducted the cost in any earlier year, you generally3. Subtract the tax in (2) from the tax shownble in the year that it is incurred. Otherwise, the can deduct the cost of materials and supplieson your return for the earlier year. This iscost must be depreciated over the useful life of actually consumed and used during the tax year.the amount of your credit.the property. See Form 4562 and its instructions If you keep incidental materials and supplies4. Subtract the answer in (3) from the tax forfor how to compute and claim the depreciation on hand, you can deduct the cost of the inciden-2009 figured without the deduction (stepdeduction. tal materials and supplies you bought during the1). tax year if all the following requirements are met.The cost of repairs includes the costs of
If Method 1 results in less tax, deduct thelabor, supplies, and certain other items. The • You do not keep a record of when they areamount repaid as discussed earlier under Typevalue of your own labor is not deductible. Exam- used.of deduction.ples of repairs include:
• You do not take an inventory of theIf Method 2 results in less tax, claim the• Reconditioning floors (but not replace- amount on hand at the beginning and endcredit on line 70 of Form 1040, and write ªI.R.C.ment), of the tax year.1341º next to line 70.
• Repainting the interior and exterior walls • This method does not distort your income.
of a building, Example. For 2008, you filed a return and
reported your income on the cash method. In You can also deduct the cost of books, profes-• Cleaning and repairing roofs and gutters, 2008, you repaid $5,000 included in your 2008 sional instruments, equipment, etc., if you nor-and gross income under a claim of right. Your filing mally use them within a year. However, if the
• Fixing plumbing leaks (but not replace- status in 2009 and 2008 is single. Your income usefulness of these items extends substantially
ment of fixtures). and tax for both years are as follows: beyond the year they are placed in service, you
Chapter 11 Other Expenses Page 45

Page 46 of 49 of Publication 535 15:54 - 26-MAR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
generally must recover their costs through de- information sources, including publications, Phone. Many services are available by
preciation. For more information regarding de- phone. services, and free tax education and assistance
preciation see Publication 946, How to programs. It also has an index of over 100
Depreciate Property. TeleTax topics (recorded tax information) you • Ordering forms, instructions, and publica-
can listen to on your telephone.Utilities. Business expenses for heat, lights, tions. Call 1-800-TAX-FORM
power, telephone service, and water and sewer- (1-800-829-3676) to order current-yearAccessible versions of IRS published prod-
age are deductible. However, any part attributa- forms, instructions, and publications, anducts are available on request in a variety of
ble to personal use is not deductible. prior-year forms and instructions. Youalternative formats for people with disabilities.
should receive your order within 10 days.Telephone. The cost of basic local tele-
phone service (including any taxes) for the first • Asking tax questions. Call the IRS withFree help with your return. Free help in pre-
telephone line you have in your home, even your tax questions at 1-800-829-4933.paring your return is available nationwide from
though you have an office in your home is not IRS-trained volunteers. The Volunteer Income • Solving problems. You can getdeductible. However, charges for business Tax Assistance (VITA) program is designed to face-to-face help solving tax problemslong-distance phone calls on that line, as well as help low-income taxpayers and the Tax Coun- every business day in IRS Taxpayer As-the cost of a second line into your home used seling for the Elderly (TCE) program is designed sistance Centers. An employee can ex-exclusively for business, are deductible busi- plain IRS letters, request adjustments toto assist taxpayers age 60 and older with theirness expenses. your account, or help you set up a pay-tax returns. Many VITA sites offer free electronic
ment plan. Call your local Taxpayer Assis-filing and all volunteers will let you know about
tance Center for an appointment. To findcredits and deductions you may be entitled to
the number, go to claim. To find the nearest VITA or TCE site, call
www.irs.gov/localcontacts or look in the1-800-829-1040.
phone book under United States Govern-As part of the TCE program, AARP offers the ment, Internal Revenue Service.12. Tax-Aide counseling program. To find the near-
• TTY/TDD equipment. If you have accessest AARP Tax-Aide site, call 1-888-227-7669 or
to TTY/TDD equipment, callvisit AARP's website at
1-800-829-4059 to ask tax questions or towww.aarp.org/money/taxaide.How To Get Tax order forms and publications.For more information on these programs, go
• TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 to lis-to www.irs.gov and enter keyword ªVITAº in theHelp ten to pre-recorded messages coveringupper right-hand corner.
various tax topics.
Internet. You can access the IRS web-You can get help with unresolved tax issues, • Refund information. To check the status ofsite at www.irs.gov 24 hours a day, 7order free publications and forms, ask tax ques- your 2009 refund, call 1-800-829-1954days a week to:tions, and get information from the IRS in sev-
 during business hours or 1-800-829-4477eral ways. By selecting the method that is best • E-file your return. Find out about commer- (automated refund information 24 hours afor you, you will have quick and easy access to cial tax preparation and e-file services day, 7 days a week). Wait at least 72tax help. available free to eligible taxpayers. hours after the IRS acknowledges receipt
Contacting your Taxpayer Advocate. The of your e-filed return, or 3 to 4 weeks after• Check the status of your 2009 refund. GoTaxpayer Advocate Service (TAS) is an inde- mailing a paper return. If you filed Formto www.irs.gov and click on Where's Mypendent organization within the IRS whose em- 8379 with your return, wait 14 weeks (11Refund. Wait at least 72 hours after theployees assist taxpayers who are experiencing weeks if you filed electronically). HaveIRS acknowledges receipt of your e-filedeconomic harm, who are seeking help in resolv- your 2009 tax return available so you canreturn, or 3 to 4 weeks after mailing aing tax problems that have not been resolved provide your social security number, yourpaper return. If you filed Form 8379 withthrough normal channels, or who believe that an filing status, and the exact whole dollaryour return, wait 14 weeks (11 weeks ifIRS system or procedure is not working as it amount of your refund. Refunds are sentyou filed electronically). Have your 2009should. out weekly on Fridays. If you check thetax return available so you can provideYou can contact the TAS by calling the TAS status of your refund and are not given theyour social security number, your filingtoll-free case intake line at 1-877-777-4778 or date it will be issued, please wait until the
status, and the exact whole dollar amountTTY/TDD 1-800-829-4059 to see if you are eligi- next week before checking back.
of your refund.ble for assistance. You can also call or write your
• Other refund information. To check thelocal taxpayer advocate, whose phone number • Download forms, instructions, and publica- status of a prior year refund or amendedand address are listed in your local telephone tions. return refund, call 1-800-829-1954.directory and in Publication 1546, Taxpayer Ad-
vocate Service ÐYour Voice at the IRS. You • Order IRS products online.
Evaluating the quality of our telephonecan file Form 911, Request for Taxpayer Advo- • Research your tax questions online. services. To ensure IRS representatives givecate Service Assistance (And Application for
accurate, courteous, and professional answers,• Search publications online by topic orTaxpayer Assistance Order), or ask an IRS em-
we use several methods to evaluate the qualityployee to complete it on your behalf. For more keyword. of our telephone services. One method is for ainformation, go to www.irs.gov/advocate. • View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs) second IRS representative to listen in on or
Low Income Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs). published in the last few years. record random telephone calls. Another is to ask
LITCs are independent organizations that pro- some callers to complete a short survey at the• Figure your withholding allowances usingvide low income taxpayers with representation end of the call.the withholding calculator online at in federal tax controversies with the IRS for free
www.irs.gov/individuals. Walk-in. Many products and servicesor for a nominal charge. The clinics also provide
are available on a walk-in basis.tax education and outreach for taxpayers who • Determine if Form 6251 must be filed by
speak English as a second language. Publica-
 using our Alternative Minimum Tax (AMT)
tion 4134, Low Income Taxpayer Clinic List, Assistant. • Products. You can walk in to many postprovides information on clinics in your area. It is offices, libraries, and IRS offices to pick up• Sign up to receive local and national taxavailable at www.irs.gov or your local IRS office. certain forms, instructions, and publica-news by email.Free tax services.  To find out what services tions. Some IRS offices, libraries, grocery
• Get information on starting and operatingare available, get Publication 910, IRS Guide to stores, copy centers, city and county gov-
a small business.Free Tax Services. It contains lists of free tax ernment offices, credit unions, and office
Page 46 Chapter 12 How To Get Tax Help

Page 47 of 49 of Publication 535 15:54 - 26-MAR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
supply stores have a collection of products ongoing, complex tax account problem or • Tax Map: an electronic research tool and
available to print from a CD or photocopy finding aid.a special need, such as a disability, an
from reproducible proofs. Also, some IRS appointment can be requested. All other • Tax law frequently asked questions.offices and libraries have the Internal Rev- issues will be handled without an appoint-
• Tax Topics from the IRS telephone re-enue Code, regulations, Internal Revenue ment. To find the number of your local
sponse system.Bulletins, and Cumulative Bulletins avail- office, go to www.irs.gov/localcontacts or
able for research purposes. look in the phone book under United • Internal Revenue CodeÐTitle 26 of the
States Government, Internal Revenue U.S. Code.• Services. You can walk in to your local
Service.Taxpayer Assistance Center every busi- • Fill-in, print, and save features for most taxness day for personal, face-to-face tax forms.Mail. You can send your order forhelp. An employee can explain IRS letters,
forms, instructions, and publications to • Internal Revenue Bulletins.request adjustments to your tax account,
the address below. You should receiveor help you set up a payment plan. If you
 • Toll-free and email technical support.a response within 10 days after your request isneed to resolve a tax problem, have ques-
• Two releases during the year.tions about how the tax law applies to your received.
± The first release will ship the beginningindividual tax return, or you are more com-
of January 2010.fortable talking with someone in person, Internal Revenue Service
± The final release will ship the beginningvisit your local Taxpayer Assistance 1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorway
of March 2010.Center where you can spread out your Bloomington, IL 61705-6613
records and talk with an IRS representa-
Purchase the DVD from National TechnicalDVD for tax products. You can ordertive face-to-face. No appointment is nec-
Information Service (NTIS) at Publication 1796, IRS Tax ProductsessaryÐjust walk in. If you prefer, you
www.irs.gov/cdorders for $30 (no handling fee)DVD, and obtain:can call your local Center and leave a
or call 1-877-233-6767 toll-free to buy the DVDmessage requesting an appointment to re- • Current-year forms, instructions, and pub- for $30 (plus a $6 handling fee).solve a tax account issue. A representa- lications.tive will call you back within 2 business
• Prior-year forms, instructions, and publica-days to schedule an in-person appoint-
ment at your convenience. If you have an tions.
Chapter 12 How To Get Tax Help Page 47

Page 48 of 49 of Publication 535 15:54 - 26-MAR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See ªComments and Suggestionsº in the ªIntroductionº for the ways you can reach us.
Cleanup costs, Refunds of ................ . 14A F
environmental ............ . 23 When to deduct ........... . 14Advertising ................. . 42 Fees:
Club dues .................. . 43 Internet-relatedCommitment .............. . 13Amortization:
expenses ................ . 43Legal and professional ..... . 44Comments on publication ... . 1Anti-abuse rule ............ . 30
Regulatory ................ . 44 Interview expenses ......... . 44Anti-churning rules ........ . 29 Commitment fees .......... . 13
Tax return preparation ..... . 44Atmospheric pollution control Computer software ......... . 29
Fines ....................... . 44facilities ................ . 31 Constant-yield method, KCorporate organization Forgone interest ........... . 14OID ...................... . 13 Key person ................. . 13costs ................... . 26 Form:Contested liability ........... . 4 Kickbacks .................. . 42Dispositions of section 197 3115 ................. . 16, 30Contributions:intangibles .............. . 30 4562 ..................... . 25Charitable ................ . 43Experimental costs ........ . 32 5213 ...................... . 5 LPolitical ................... . 45Geological and geophysical 8826 ..................... . 25 Leases:Copyrights ................. . 28costs ................... . 31 8885 ..................... . 19 Canceling .................. . 8Cost depletion ............. . 33How to deduct ............ . 25 T ......................... . 37 Cost of getting .......... . 9, 27Cost of getting lease ..... . 9, 27Incorrect amount Franchise .............. . 28, 43 Improvements by lessee ... . 10Cost of goods sold .......... . 2deducted ............... . 30 Franchise taxes ............ . 17 Leveraged ................. . 9Cost recovery ............... . 3Partnership organization Mineral ................... . 37Fringe benefits .............. . 7costs ................... . 26 Covenant not to Oil and gas ............... . 37Fuel taxes .................. . 17Pollution control facilities ... . 31 compete ................. . 28 Sales distinguished ......... . 8Reforestation costs ........ . 31 Credit card convenience Taxes on .................. . 9Reforestation expenses .... . 24 Gfees ...................... . 43 Legal and professionalRelated person ............ . 29 Gas wells .................. . 36 fees ...................... . 44Research costs ........... . 32 Geological and geophysical Licenses ............... . 28, 44DSection 197 intangibles costs: Life insurance coverage ..... . 7De minimis OID ............ . 12defined ................. . 28 Development, oil and Limit on deductions ......... . 5Starting a business Debt-financed gas ..................... . 31
Line of credit ............... . 12costs ................... . 25 distributions ............. . 12 Exploration, oil and gas .... . 31
Start-up costs ............. . 26 Loans:Definitions: Geothermal wells ....... . 21, 36
Below-market interestAnticipated liabilities ....... . 42 Business bad debt ......... . 38 Gifts, nominal value ......... . 7 rate .................... . 14Necessary expense ........ . 2Assessments, local ........ . 16 Going into business ...... . 3, 25 Discounted ............... . 14Ordinary expense .......... . 2At-risk limits ................ . 4 Goodwill ................... . 28Section 197 intangibles .... . 28 Loans or Advances .......... . 7Attorney fees ............... . 44
Demolition expenses ....... . 43 Lobbying expenses ........ . 44Awards ...................... . 6 HDepletion: Long-term care
Health insurance, deduction forMineral property ........... . 33 insurance ................ . 18
self-employed ............ . 18Oil and gas wells .......... . 34B Losses .................... . 4, 5
Percentage table .......... . 36 Heating equipment .......... . 3 At-risk limits ................ . 4Bad debts:
Timber .................... . 37 Net operating .............. . 4Defined ................... . 38
Who can claim ............ . 33 Passive activities ........... . 4How to treat ............... . 39 IDepreciation  (See CostRecovery ................. . 39 Impairment-relatedrecovery)Types of .................. . 38 expenses ................ . 43 MWhen worthless ........... . 39 Development costs, Improvements ............... . 3 Machinery parts ............. . 3miners ................... . 22Bonuses: By lessee ................. . 10 Meals ...................... . 40Employee .................. . 7 Disabled, improvements For disabled and elderly ... . 24 Meals and entertainment ... . 42Royalties ................. . 37 for ....................... . 24 Income taxes ............... . 16 Meals and lodging ........... . 7Bribes ...................... . 42 Drilling and development Incorrect amount of Methods of accounting ...... . 4costs ..................... . 21Brownfields  (See Environmental amortization deducted ... . 30 Mining:cleanup costs) Dues, membership ......... . 43 Insurance: Depletion ................. . 36Business: Capitalized premiums ...... . 20 Development costs ........ . 22Assets ..................... . 3 Deductible premiums ...... . 17E Exploration costs .......... . 22Books and records ........ . 28 NondeductibleEconomic interest .......... . 33 Mortgage ................... . 12Meal expenses ............ . 42 premiums ............... . 19Economic performance ..... . 4 Moving expenses,Use of car .............. . 4, 43 Self-employedEducation expenses ...... . 7, 43 machinery ............... . 44Use of home ............... . 3 individuals .............. . 18Elderly, improvements Intangible drilling costs .... . 21for ....................... . 24 NIntangibles, amortization ... . 27C Employee benefit Natural gas ................. . 36Interest:Campaign contribution ..... . 45 programs ................. . 7 Allocation of ............... . 11 NonqualifyingCapital expenses ............ . 3 Employment taxes ......... . 17 Below-market ............. . 14 intangibles ............... . 28Capitalization of interest ... . 13 Entertainment .............. . 40 Business expense for ...... . 10 Not-for-profit activities ...... . 5Car allowance .............. . 41 Environmental cleanup Capitalized ................ . 13Car and truck expenses .... . 43 (remediation) costs ...... . 23 Carrying charge ........... . 21
Carrying charges ........... . 21 Excise taxes ............... . 17 ODeductible ................ . 12
Charitable contributions .... . 43 Experimentation costs .... . 21, Office in home .............. . 3Forgone .................. . 14
32Circulation costs, newspapers Life insurance policies ..... . 13 Oil and gas wells:
and periodicals .......... . 23 Exploration costs .......... . 22 Not deductible ............ . 13 Depletion ................. . 34
Page 48 Publication 535 (2009)

Page 49 of 49 of Publication 535 15:54 - 26-MAR-2010
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Oil and gas wells: (Cont.) Prepaid expense ............ . 4 Repairs .................... . 45 Income ................... . 16
Drilling costs .............. . 21 Extends useful life ......... . 20 Leased property ............ . 9Repayments (claim of
Partnerships .............. . 35 Interest ................... . 14 Personal property ......... . 17right) ..................... . 45
S corporations ............ . 35 Rent ....................... . 8 Real estate ............... . 16Research costs ........ . 21, 32
Sales ..................... . 17Optional write-off method: Prepayment penalty ........ . 12
Unemployment fund ....... . 17Circulation costs .......... . 32 Presumption of profit ........ . 5 SExperimental costs ........ . 32 Telephone .................. . 46Sales taxes ................. . 17Intangible drilling and Timber ................. . 31, 37R Section 179 expense deductiondevelopment costs ...... . 32 Tools ........................ . 3Real estate taxes ........... . 16 (See Cost recovery)Mining exploration and Trademark, trade name .... . 28,Recapture: Self-employed health insurancedevelopment costs ...... . 32 43Exploration expenses ...... . 22 deduction ................ . 18Research costs ........... . 32 Travel ...................... . 40Timber property ........... . 31 Self-employment tax ....... . 17Organization costs:
Recovery of amount Self-insurance, reserveCorporate ................. . 26
deducted .................. . 4 Ufor ....................... . 19Partnership ............... . 26
Refiners who cannot claim Unemployment fundSick pay ..................... . 8Organizational costs ....... . 24
percentage depletion ..... . 34 taxes ..................... . 17Standard meal allowance ... . 41Original issue discount ..... . 12
Reforestation costs .... . 24, 31 Unpaid expenses, relatedStandard mileage rate ...... . 41Outplacement services ..... . 44 person ................... . 14Regulatory fees ............ . 44 Standby charges ........... . 13 Utilities ..................... . 46Reimbursements ........... . 40 Start-up costs .......... . 24, 26P Business expenses ......... . 8 Subscriptions .......... . 43, 45Passive activities ............ . 4 Mileage ................... . 41 VSuggestions forPayments in kind ............ . 4 Nonaccountable plan ...... . 42 Vacation pay ................ . 8publication ................ . 1Penalties ................... . 12 Per diem .................. . 41 Supplies and materials ..... . 45Deductible ................ . 44 Related persons:
Nondeductible ............ . 44 WAnti-churning rules ........ . 29
Prepayment ............... . 12 Wages:TCoal or iron ore ........... . 36
Per diem and car Property ................... . 7Payments to ............ . 4, 14 Tax preparation fees ....... . 44
allowances ............... . 41 Tests for deducting pay ..... . 6Refiners .................. . 34 Taxes ....................... . 9
Percentage depletion ....... . 33 Rent expense .............. . 8 Welfare benefit funds ........ . 7Carrying charge ........... . 21
Unreasonable rent .......... . 8Personal property tax ...... . 17 Employment .............. . 17 ■Removal ................... . 24 Excise .................... . 17Political contributions ...... . 45
Franchise ................. . 17Rent expense,Pollution control
Fuel ...................... . 17capitalizing ............... . 10facilities .................. . 31
Publication 535 (2009) Page 49