Userid: ________ DTD TIP04 Leadpct: 0% Pt. size: 7 ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: D:\Users\hjdcb\documents\work products\PUB 334\12-19 3 10.SGM (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 53 of Publication 334 9:31 - 20-DEC-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication
334Tax Guide for Catalog Number 11063P
Department Small Business
of the For use inTreasury
preparing(For Individuals Who UseInternal
Revenue
2007Service Schedule C or C-EZ)
Returns
Get forms and other information faster and easier by:
Internet • www.irs.gov
www.irs.gov/efile

Page 2 of 53 of Publication 334 9:31 - 20-DEC-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
in addition to your regular job or business may be
self-employment.Contents
Introduction .............................. 2 Independent contractor.  People such as doctors, den-
tists, veterinarians, lawyers, accountants, contractors,What’s New for 2007........................ 3
subcontractors, public stenographers, or auctioneers who
What’s New for 2008........................ 3 are in an independent trade, business, or profession in
which they offer their services to the general public areReminders ................................ 4 generally independent contractors. However, whether they
are independent contractors or employees depends on thePhotographs of Missing Children ............. 4
facts in each case. The general rule is that an individual is
1. Filing and Paying Business Taxes ......... 5 an independent contractor if the payer has the right to
control or to direct only the result of the work and not how it2. Accounting Periods and Methods .......... 12 will be done. The earnings of a person who is working as
an independent contractor are subject to self-employment3. Dispositions of Business Property ......... 16
tax. For more information on determining whether you are
4. General Business Credits ................ 18 an independent contractor or an employee, see Publica-
tion 15-A, Employer’s Supplemental Tax Guide.5. Business Income ....................... 20
6. How To Figure Cost of Goods Sold ......... 27 Statutory employee. A statutory employee has a
checkmark in box 13 of his or her Form W-2, Wage and7. Figuring Gross Profit .................... 29 Tax Statement. Statutory employees use Schedule C or
C-EZ to report their wages and expenses.8. Business Expenses ..................... 31
9. Figuring Net Profit or Loss ............... 40 Limited liability company (LLC). A limited liability com-
10. Self-Employment (SE) Tax ................ 41 pany (LLC) is an entity formed under state law by filing
articles of organization. Generally, a single-member LLC is11. Your Rights as a Taxpayer ............... 45 disregarded as an entity separate from its owner and
reports its income and deductions on its owner’s federal12. How To Get More Information ............. 47
income tax return. An owner who is an individual may use
Index .................................... 50 Schedule C or C-EZ.
Husband and wife business. If you and your spouse
jointly own and operate an unincorporated business andIntroduction
share in the profits and losses, you are partners in a
The purpose of this publication is to provide general infor- partnership, whether or not you have a formal partnership
mation about the federal tax laws that apply to small agreement. Do not use Schedule C or C-EZ. Instead, file
business owners who are sole proprietors and to statutory Form 1065, U.S. Return of Partnership Income. For more
employees. information, see Publication 541, Partnerships.
Exception—Community income.  If you and your
spouse wholly own an unincorporated business as com-Are you self-employed? You are self-employed if you
munity property under the community property laws of acarry on a trade or business as a sole proprietor or an
state, foreign country, or U.S. possession, you can treatindependent contractor.
the business either as a sole proprietorship or a partner-
ship. The only states with community property laws areSole proprietor. A sole proprietor is someone who owns Arizona, California, Idaho, Louisiana, Nevada, New Mex-an unincorporated business by himself or herself. How- ico, Texas, Washington, and Wisconsin. A change in yourever, if you are the sole member of a domestic limited reporting position will be treated as a conversion of theliability company (LLC), you are not a sole proprietor if you entity.elect to treat the LLC as a corporation. Exception—Qualified joint venture.  If you and your
spouse materially participate as the only members of a
Trade or business.  A trade or business is generally an jointly owned and operated business, and you file a joint
activity carried on to make a profit. The facts and circum- return for the tax year, you can make a joint election to be
stances of each case determine whether or not an activity taxed as a qualified joint venture instead of a partnership.
is a trade or business. You do not need to actually make a To make this election, you must divide all items of income,
profit to be in a trade or business as long as you have a gain, loss, deduction, and credit between you and your
profit motive. You do need to make ongoing efforts to spouse in accordance with your respective interests in the
further the interests of your business. venture. Each of you must file a separate Schedule C or
C-EZ.You do not have to carry on regular full-time business
activities to be self-employed. Having a part-time business
Page 2 Publication 334 (2007)

Page 3 of 53 of Publication 334 9:31 - 20-DEC-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
This publication does not cover the topics listed in the Husband and wife business. For tax years beginning in
following table. 2007, a husband and wife filing married filing jointly may be
able to make a joint election to be taxed as a qualified joint
venture instead of a partnership if they meet certain re-
IF you need information about: THEN you should quirements. For more information see Publication 541.
see:
Increased section 179 deduction dollar limit. For taxCorporations ................. Publication 542 years beginning in 2007, the maximum section 179 ex-Farming .................... Publication 225 pense deduction is increased from $108,000 to $125,000Fishermen (Capital Construction ($143,000 to $160,000 for qualified enterprise zone, re-Fund) ...................... Publication 595 newal community). For more information, see DepreciationPartnerships ................. Publication 541 in chapter 8.Passive activities .............. Publication 925
Recordkeeping ............... Publication 583 Self-employment tax. The maximum net
Rental ...................... Publication 527 self-employment earnings subject to the social security
S corporations ................ Instructions for part (12.4%) of the self-employment tax is $97,500 for
Form 1120S 2007 For more information, see Self-Employment (SE)
Tax in chapter 1 and chapter 10.
What you need to know. Table A (shown later) provides Standard mileage rate. The standard mileage rate for the
a list of questions you need to answer to help you meet cost of operating your car, van, pickup, or panel truck in
your federal tax obligations. After each question is the 2007 is 48.5 cents a mile for all business miles. For more
location in this publication where you will find the related information, see Car and Truck Expenses in chapter 8.
discussion.
Welfare-to-work credit and the work opportunity
credit. The welfare-to-work credit and the work opportu-IRS mission. Provide America’s taxpayers top quality
nity credit have been combined with respect to employeesservice by helping them understand and meet their tax
who began work for you after December 31, 2006. Seeresponsibilities and by applying the tax law with integrity
Publication 954, Tax Incentives for Distressed Communi-and fairness to all.
ties, for more information.
Comments and suggestions. We welcome your com- Electric vehicle credit. This credit does not apply toments about this publication and your suggestions for vehicles placed in service after December 31, 2006. Seefuture editions. Form 8834 for more information.You can email us at *taxforms@irs.gov. (The asterisk
must be included in the address.) Please put “Publications
Comment” on the subject line. Although we cannot re-
What’s New for 2008spond individually to each email, we do appreciate your
feedback and will consider your comments as we revise
The following are some of the tax changes for 2008. Forour tax products.
more information on other changes, go to  www.irs.gov,You can write us at the following address:
click on More Forms and Publications, and then on What’s
Internal Revenue Service Hot in Tax Forms, Publications, and Other Tax Products,
Business Forms and Publications Branch or see Publication 553.
SE:W:CAR:MP:T:B
1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6526 Self-employment tax. The maximum net
Washington, DC 20224 self-employment earnings subject to the social security
part of the self-employment tax increases to $102,000 for
2008.We respond to many letters by telephone. Therefore, it
would be helpful if you would include your daytime phone Standard mileage rate. The standard mileage rate for thenumber, including the area code, in your correspondence. cost of operating your car, van, pickup, or panel truck in
2008 is 50.5 cents a mile for all business miles. For moreTax questions. If you have a tax question, visit www.irs. information, see Car and Truck Expenses in chapter 8.gov or call 1-800-829-1040. We cannot answer tax ques-
tions at either of the addresses listed above.
What’s New for 2007
The following are some of the tax changes for 2007. For
information on other changes, see Publication 553, High-
lights of 2007 Tax Changes.
Publication 334 (2007) Page 3

Page 4 of 53 of Publication 334 9:31 - 20-DEC-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table A. What You Need To Know About Federal Taxes
(Note. The following is a list of questions you may need to answer so you can fill out your federal income tax
return. Chapters are given to help you find the related discussion in this publication.)
 What must I know  Where to find the answer
What kinds of federal taxes do I have to pay? How do I pay them? See chapter 1 (page 8).
What forms must I file? See chapter 1 (page 10).
What must I do if I have employees? See Employment Taxes in chapter 1
(page 9).
Do I have to start my tax year in January? Or can I start it in any other See Accounting Periods in chapter 2
month? (page 12).
What method can I use to account for my income and expenses? See Accounting Methods in chapter 2
(page 12).
What kinds of business income do I have to report on my tax return? See chapter 5 (page 20).
What kinds of business expenses can I deduct on my tax return? See Business Expenses in chapter 8
(page 31).
What kinds of expenses are not deductible as business expenses? See Expenses You Cannot Deduct in
chapter 8 (page 40).
What happens if I have a business loss? Can I deduct it? See chapter 9 (page 40).
What must I do if I disposed of business property during the year? See chapter 3 (page 16).
What are my rights as a taxpayer? See chapter 11 (page 45).
Where do I go if I need help with federal tax matters? See chapter 12 (page 47).
foreign currency transactions) or $4 million in any
combination of tax years,Reminders
5. Transactions entered into before August 3, 2007,
Accounting Methods. Certain small business taxpayers with asset holding periods of 45 days or less and that
may be eligible to adopt or change to the cash method of result in a tax credit of more than $250,000, and
accounting and may not be required to account for invento- 6. Transactions the same or substantially similar to oneries. For more information, see Inventories in chapter 2. of the types of transactions the IRS has identified as
a transaction of interest.Reportable transactions. You must file Form 8886, Re-
portable Transaction Disclosure Statement, to report cer- For more information, see the Instructions for Form 8886.
tain transactions. You may have to pay a penalty if you are
required to file Form 8886 but do not do so. You may also
have to pay interest and penalties on any reportable trans- Photographs of Missingaction understatements. Reportable transactions include:
Children1. Transactions the same as or substantially similar to
tax avoidance transactions identified by the IRS, The Internal Revenue Service is a proud partner with the
National Center for Missing and Exploited Children. Photo-2. Transactions offered to you under conditions of confi-
graphs of missing children selected by the Center maydentiality for which you paid an advisor a minimum
appear in this publication on pages that would otherwisefee,
be blank. You can help bring these children home by3. Transactions for which you have, or a related party looking at the photographs and calling 1-800-THE-LOSThas, contractual protection against disallowance of (1-800-843-5678) if you recognize a child.the tax benefits,
4. Transactions that result in losses of at least $2 mil-
lion in any single tax year ($50,000 if from certain
Page 4 Publication 334 (2007)

Page 5 of 53 of Publication 334 9:31 - 20-DEC-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1-800-772-1213. It is also available from the SSA website
at www.socialsecurity.gov. 
1.
Individual taxpayer identification number (ITIN). The
IRS will issue an ITIN if you are a nonresident or resident
alien and you do not have and are not eligible to get anFiling and Paying SSN. In general, if you need to obtain an ITIN, you must
attach Form W-7, Application for IRS Individual Taxpayer
Business Taxes Identification Number, with your signed, original, com-
pleted tax return and mail both to the following address.
Introduction Internal Revenue Service
ITIN OperationThis chapter explains the business taxes you may have to
P.O. Box 149342pay and the forms you may have to file. It also discusses
Austin, TX 78714-9342taxpayer identification numbers.
Table 1-1 lists the benefits of filing electronically.
The exceptions are covered in detail in the instructionsTable 1-2 lists the federal taxes you may have to pay, for Form W-7. If you must include another person’s SSNtheir due dates, and the forms you use to report them. on your return and that person does not have and cannot
Table 1-3 provides checklists that highlight the typical get an SSN, enter that person’s ITIN. The application is
forms and schedules you may need to file if you ever go out also available in Spanish. The form is available from the
of business. IRS website at www.irs.gov or you can call
1-800-829-3676 to order the form.You may want to get Publication 509, Tax Calen-
dars for 2008. It has tax calendars that tell you An ITIN is for tax use only. It does not entitle the
when to file returns and make tax payments.
TIP
holder to social security benefits or change the
holder’s employment or immigration status.CAUTION
!
Useful Items
Employer identification number (EIN). You must alsoYou may want to see: have an EIN to use as a taxpayer identification number if
you do either of the following.Publication
• Pay wages to one or more employees.❏ 505 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax
• File pension or excise tax returns.
Form (and Instructions)
If you must have an EIN, include it along with your SSN❏ 1040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Return on your Schedule C or C-EZ.
❏ 1040-ES Estimated Tax for Individuals You can apply for an EIN:
❏ Sch C (Form 1040) Profit or Loss From Business • Online by clicking on the EIN link at www.irs.gov/
businesses/small. The EIN is issued immediately❏ Sch C-EZ (Form 1040) Net Profit From Business once the application information is validated.
❏ Sch SE (Form 1040) Self-Employment Tax • By telephone at 1-800-829-4933 from 7:00 a.m. to
See chapter 12 for information about getting publica- 10:00 p.m. in your local time zone.
tions and forms. • By mailing or faxing Form SS-4, Application for Em-
ployer Identification Number.
New EIN. You may need to get a new EIN if either theIdentification Numbers
form or the ownership of your business changes. For more
information, see Publication 1635, Understanding YourThis section explains three types of taxpayer identification
EIN.numbers, who needs them, when to use them, and how to
get them.
When you need identification numbers of other per-
sons. In operating your business, you will probably makeSocial security number (SSN). Generally, use your SSN certain payments you must report on information returns.as your taxpayer identification number. You must put this These payments are discussed under Information Re-number on each of your individual income tax forms, such turns, later in this chapter. You must give the recipient of
as Form 1040 and its schedules. these payments (the payee) a statement showing the total
To apply for an SSN, use Form SS-5, Application for a amount paid during the year. You must include the payee’s
Social Security Card. This form is available at Social Se- identification number and your identification number on the
curity Administration (SSA) offices or by calling returns and statements.
Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes Page 5

Page 6 of 53 of Publication 334 9:31 - 20-DEC-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Employee. If you have employees, you must get an IRS e-file (Electronic Filing)SSN from each of them. Record the name and SSN of
each employee exactly as they are shown on the em-
ployee’s social security card. If the employee’s name is not
correct as shown on the card, the employee should re-
quest a new card from the SSA. This may occur if the
You may be able to file your tax returns electronically usingemployee’s name was changed due to marriage or di-
an IRS e-file option. Table 1-1 lists the benefits of IRSvorce.
e-file. IRS e-file uses automation to replace most of theForm W-4 is completed by each employee so the cor-
manual steps needed to process paper returns. As a re-rect federal income tax can be withheld from their pay.
sult, the processing of e-file returns is faster and moreIf your employee does not have an SSN, he or she
accurate than the processing of paper returns. As with ashould file Form SS-5 with the SSA.
paper return, you are responsible for making sure yourOther payee. If you make payments to someone who is return contains accurate information and is filed on time.not your employee and you must report the payments on Using e-file does not affect your chances of an IRSan information return, get that person’s SSN. If you must examination of your return.report payments to an organization, such as a corporation You can file most commonly used business forms usingor partnership, you must get its EIN. IRS e-file. For more information, visit the IRS website atTo get the payee’s SSN or EIN, use Form W-9, Request www.irs.gov.for Taxpayer Identification Number and Certification.
A payee who does not provide you with an identification Electronic signatures. Paperless filing is easier than you
number may be subject to backup withholding. For infor- think and it’s available to most taxpayers who file electroni-
mation on backup withholding, see the Form W-9 instruc- cally—including those first-time filers who were 16 or older
tions and the General Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098, at the end of 2007. If you file electronically using tax
5498, and W-2G. preparation software or a tax professional, you may be
able to participate in the Self-Select PIN (personal identifi-
cation number) program. If you are married filing jointly,
you and your spouse will each need to create a PIN and
Income Tax
enter these PINs as your electronic signatures.
 To create a PIN, you must know your adjusted grossThis part explains whether you have to file an income tax
income (AGI) from your originally filed 2006 income taxreturn and when you file it. It also explains how you pay the
return (not from an amended return, Form 1040X, or anytax.
math error notice from the IRS). You will also need to
provide your date of birth (DOB). Make sure your DOB isDo I Have To File accurate and matches the information on record with the
an Income Tax Return? Social Security Administration before you e-file. To do this,
check your annual Social Security Statement.You have to file an income tax return for 2007 if your net If you use a Self-Select PIN, there is nothing to sign andearnings from self-employment were $400 or more. If your nothing to mail—not even your Forms W-2. For morenet earnings from self-employment were less than $400, details on the Self-Select PIN program, visit the IRS web-you still have to file an income tax return if you meet any site at www.irs.gov.other filing requirement listed in the Form 1040 instruc-
tions. Forms 8453 and 8453-OL. Your return is not complete
without your signature. If you are not eligible or choose not
to sign your return electronically, you must complete, sign,
How Do I File? and file Form 8453, U.S. Individual Income Tax Declara-
tion for an IRS e-file Return, or Form 8453-OL, U.S. Indi-File your income tax return on Form 1040  and attach
vidual Income Tax Declaration for an IRS e-file OnlineSchedule C  or Schedule C-EZ.  Enter the net profit or
Return, whichever applies.loss from Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ on page 1 of Form
1040. Use Schedule C to figure your net profit or loss from State returns. In most states, you can file an electronicyour business. If you operated more than one business as state return simultaneously with your federal return. Fora sole proprietorship, you must attach a separate Schedule more information, check with your local IRS office, stateC for each business. You can use the simpler Schedule tax agency, tax professional, or the IRS website at www.C-EZ if you operated only one business as a sole proprie- irs.gov.torship, you did not have a net loss, and you meet the other
requirements listed in Part I of the schedule. Refunds. You can have your refund check mailed to you,
or you can have your refund deposited directly to your
checking or savings account.
With e-file, your refund will be issued in half the time as
when filing on paper. Most refunds are issued within 3
weeks. If you choose Direct Deposit, you can receive your
refund in as few as 10 days.
Page 6 Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes

Page 7 of 53 of Publication 334 9:31 - 20-DEC-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Offset against debts. As with a paper return, you may Depending on the provider and the specific services
not get all of your refund if you owe certain past-due requested, a fee may be charged. To find an authorized
amounts, such as federal tax, state tax, a student loan, or IRS e-file provider near you, go to www.irs.gov or look for
child support. You will be notified if the refund you claimed an “Authorized IRS e-file Provider” sign.
has been offset against your debts.
Refund inquiries. You can check the status of your re- Using Your Personal Computer
fund if it has been at least 3 weeks from the date you filed
your return. Be sure to have a copy of your tax return A computer with Internet access is all you need to file your
available because you will need to know the filing status, tax return using IRS e-file. Best of all, when you use your
the first social security number shown on the return, and personal computer, you can e-file your return from the
the exact whole-dollar amount of the refund. To check on comfort of your home any time of the day or night. Sign
your refund, do one of the following. your return electronically using a self-selected PIN to com-
plete the process. There is no signature form to submit or• Go to www.irs.gov, and click on Where’s My Refund. Forms W-2 to send in.
• Call 1-800-829-4477 for automated refund informa-
tion, and follow the recorded instructions. Free Internet filing options. More taxpayers can now
prepare and e-file their individual income tax returns free• Call 1-800-829-1954 during the hours shown in your using commercial tax preparation software accessibleform instructions.
through www.irs.gov or www.firstgov.gov. The IRS is
partnering with the tax software industry to offer free prep-
Balance due. If you owe tax, you must pay it by April 15, aration and filing services to a significant number of tax-
2008, to avoid late-payment penalties and interest. You payers. Security and privacy certificate programs will
can make your payment electronically by scheduling an assure tax data is safe and secure. To see if you qualify for
electronic funds withdrawal from your checking or savings these services, visit the Free Internet Filing Homepage at
account or by credit card. www.irs.gov.
If you cannot use the free services, you can buy tax
preparation software at various electronics stores or com-Using an Authorized IRS e-file Provider
puter and office supply stores. You can also download
Many tax professionals can electronically file paperless software from the Internet or prepare and file your return
returns for their clients. You have two options. completely online by using a tax preparation software
package available on the Internet.1. You can prepare your return, take it to an authorized
IRS e-file provider, and have the provider transmit it
electronically to the IRS. Through Employers and Financial
Institutions2. You can have an authorized IRS e-file provider pre-
pare your return and transmit it for you electronically. Some businesses offer free e-file to their employees,
members, or customers. Others offer it for a fee. Ask yourYou will be asked to complete Form 8879, IRS e-file
employer or financial institution if they offer IRS e-file as anSignature Authorization, to authorize the provider to enter
your self-selected PIN on your return. employee, member, or customer benefit.
Table 1-1. Benefits of IRS e-file
Accuracy • Your chance of getting an error notice from the IRS is significantly reduced.
Security • Your privacy and security are assured.
Electronic signatures • Create your own personal identification number (PIN) and file a completely
paperless return through your tax preparation software or tax professional. There is
nothing to mail!
Proof of acceptance
• You receive an electronic acknowledgment within 48 hours that the IRS has
accepted your return for processing.
Fast refunds • You get your refund in half the time, even faster with Direct Deposit—in as few as
10 days.
Free Internet filing options • Use the IRS website www.irs.gov to access commercial tax preparation and e-file
services available at no cost to eligible taxpayers.
Electronic payment • Convenient, safe, and secure electronic payment options are available. E-file and
options pay your taxes in a single step. Schedule an electronic funds withdrawal from your
checking or savings account (up to and including April 15, 2008) or pay by credit
card.
Federal/State filing
• Prepare and file your federal and state tax returns together and double the benefits
you get from e-file.
Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes Page 7

Page 8 of 53 of Publication 334 9:31 - 20-DEC-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
a. The chance of an error in making your paymentsFree Help With Your Return
is reduced.
Free help in preparing your return is available nationwide b. You receive immediate confirmation of everyfrom IRS-trained volunteers. The Volunteer Income Tax transaction.Assistance (VITA) program is designed to help low-income
taxpayers, and the Tax Counseling for the Elderly (TCE)
program is designed to assist taxpayers age 60 or older Penalty for underpayment of tax. If you did not pay
with their tax returns. Some locations offer free electronic enough income tax and self-employment tax for 2007 by
filing. withholding or by making estimated tax payments, you
may have to pay a penalty on the amount not paid. The IRS
will figure the penalty for you and send you a bill. Or you
When Is My Tax Return Due?
can use Form 2210, Underpayment of Estimated Tax by
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts, to see if you have to pay aForm 1040 for calendar year 2007 is due by April 15, 2008.
penalty and to figure the penalty amount. For more infor-If you use a fiscal year (explained in chapter 2), your return
mation, see Publication 505.is due by the 15th day of the 4th month after the end of your
fiscal year. If you file late, you may have to pay penalties
and interest. If you cannot file your return on time, use
Form 4868, Application for Automatic Extension of Time Self-Employment (SE) Tax
To File U.S. Individual Income Tax Return, to request an
automatic 6-month extension. Self-employment tax (SE tax) is a social security and
Medicare tax primarily for individuals who work for them-
selves. It is similar to the social security and Medicare
How Do I Pay Income Tax?
taxes withheld from the pay of most wage earners.
Federal income tax is a pay-as-you-go tax. You must pay it If you earned income as a statutory employee,as you earn or receive income during the year. An em- you do not pay SE tax on that income.ployee usually has income tax withheld from his or her pay. CAUTION
!
If you do not pay your tax through withholding, or do not
pay enough tax that way, you might have to pay estimated
tax. You generally have to make estimated tax payments if
Social security coverage. Social security benefits areyou expect to owe taxes, including self-employment tax available to self-employed persons just as they are to(discussed later), of $1,000 or more when you file your wage earners. Your payments of SE tax contribute to yourreturn. Use Form 1040-ES to figure and pay the tax. If you coverage under the social security system. Social securitydo not have to make estimated tax payments, you can pay coverage provides you with retirement benefits, disabilityany tax due when you file your return. For more information benefits, survivor benefits, and hospital insurance (Medi-on estimated tax, see Publication 505, Tax Withholding care) benefits.and Estimated Tax.
By not reporting all of your self-employment in-
come, you could cause your social security bene-What are my payment options? You can pay your esti-
fits to be lower when you retire.mated tax electronically using various options. If you pay
CAUTION
!
electronically, there is no need to mail in Form 1040-ES
How to become insured under social security. Youpayment vouchers. These options include:
must be insured under the social security system before
1. Paying electronically through the Electronic Federal you begin receiving social security benefits. You are in-
Tax Payment System (EFTPS). sured if you have the required number of credits (also
called quarters of coverage), discussed next.2. Paying by authorizing an electronic funds withdrawal
when you file Form 1040 electronically. Earning credits in 2007 and 2008. For 2007, you re-
ceived one credit, up to a maximum of four credits, for each3. Paying by credit card over the phone or by Internet. $1,000 ($1,050 for 2008) of income subject to social secur-
Other options include crediting an overpayment from your ity taxes. Therefore, for 2007, if you had income
(self-employment and wages) of $4,000 that was subject to2007 return to your 2008 estimated tax, or mailing a check
social security taxes, you received four credits ($4,000 ÷or money order with a Form 1040-ES payment voucher.
$1,000).
EFTPS For an explanation of the number of credits you must
have to be insured and the benefits available to you and1. To enroll in EFTPS, go to www.eftps.gov or call your family under the social security program, consult your1-800-555-4477. nearest Social Security Administration (SSA) office.
2. When you request a new EIN and you will have a tax Making false statements to get or to increase
obligation, you are automatically enrolled in EFTPS. social security benefits may subject you to penal-
ties.3. Benefits of EFTPS:
CAUTION
!
Page 8 Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes

Page 9 of 53 of Publication 334 9:31 - 20-DEC-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The Social Security Administration (SSA) time limit for For more information, see Publication 15 (Circular E),
posting self-employment income. Generally, the SSA Employer’s Tax Guide. That publication explains your tax
will give you credit only for self-employment income re- responsibilities as an employer.
ported on a tax return filed within 3 years, 3 months, and 15 To help you determine whether the people working fordays after the tax year you earned the income. If you file you are your employees, see Publication 15-A, Employer’syour tax return or report a change in your self-employment Supplemental Tax Guide. That publication has informationincome after this time limit, the SSA may change its rec- to help you determine whether an individual is an indepen-ords, but only to remove or reduce the amount. The SSA dent contractor or an employee.will not change its records to increase your
If you incorrectly classify an employee as anself-employment income.
independent contractor, you may be held liable
for employment taxes for that worker plus a pen-Who must pay self-employment tax. You must pay SE
CAUTION
!
alty.tax and file Schedule SE (Form 1040) if either of the
following applies. An independent contractor is someone who is
self-employed. You do not generally have to withhold or1. Your net earnings from self-employment (excluding pay any taxes on payments to an independent contractor. church employee income) were $400 or more.
2. You had church employee income of $108.28 or
more. Excise Taxes
The SE tax rules apply no matter how old you are This section identifies some of the excise taxes you mayand even if you are already receiving social se- have to pay and the forms you have to file if you do any ofcurity or Medicare benefits.CAUTION
!
the following.
• Manufacture or sell certain products.SE tax rate. The SE tax rate on net earnings is 15.3%
(12.4% social security tax plus 2.9% Medicare tax). • Operate certain kinds of businesses.
• Use various kinds of equipment, facilities, or prod-Maximum earnings subject to SE tax. Only the first ucts.$97,500 of your combined wages, tips, and net earnings in
• Receive payment for certain services.2007 is subject to any combination of the 12.4% social
security part of SE tax, social security tax, or railroad For more information on excise taxes, see Publication 510,retirement (tier 1) tax. Excise Taxes.All your combined wages, tips, and net earnings in 2007
are subject to any combination of the 2.9% Medicare part Form 720. The federal excise taxes reported on Formof SE tax, social security tax, or railroad retirement (tier 1) 720, Quarterly Federal Excise Tax Return, consist of sev-tax. eral broad categories of taxes, including the following.If your wages and tips are subject to either social secur-
• Environmental taxes on the sale or use ofity or railroad retirement (tier 1) tax, or both, and total at
ozone-depleting chemicals and imported productsleast $97,500, do not pay the 12.4% social security part of
containing or manufactured with these chemicals.the SE tax on any of your net earnings. However, you must
pay the 2.9% Medicare part of the SE tax on all your net • Communications and air transportation taxes.earnings.
• Fuel taxes.Deduct one-half of your SE tax as an adjustment
• Tax on the first retail sale of heavy trucks, trailers,to income on line 27 of Form 1040. 
and tractors.
TIP
• Manufacturers taxes on the sale or use of a variety
of different articles.More information. For information on methods of calcu-
lating SE tax, see Chapter 10, Self-Employment Tax.
Form 2290. There is a federal excise tax on the use of
certain trucks, truck tractors, and buses on public high-
Employment Taxes ways. The tax applies to vehicles having a taxable gross
weight of 55,000 pounds or more. Report the tax on Form
If you have employees, you will need to file forms to report 2290, Heavy Highway Vehicle Use Tax Return. For more
employment taxes. Employment taxes include the follow- information, see the instructions for Form 2290.
ing items.
Depositing excise taxes. If you have to file a quarterly• Social security and Medicare taxes.
excise tax return on Form 720, you may have to deposit• Federal income tax withholding. your excise taxes before the return is due. For details on
• Federal unemployment (FUTA) tax. depositing excise taxes, see the Instructions for Form 720.
Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes Page 9

Page 10 of 53 of Publication 334 9:31 - 20-DEC-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 1-2. Which Forms Must I File?
IF you are liable for: THEN use Form: DUE by: 1
Income tax 1040 and Schedule C or C-EZ 2 15th day of 4th month after end of
tax year.
Self-employment tax Schedule SE File with Form 1040.
Estimated tax 1040-ES 15th day of 4th, 6th, and 9th months
of tax year, and 15th day of 1st
month after the end of tax year.
Social security and Medicare taxes 941 or 944 April 30, July 31, October 31, and
and income tax withholding January 31
4.
8109 (to make deposits)3 See Publication 15.
Providing information on social W-2 (to employee) January 31 4.
security and Medicare taxes and
income tax withholding W-2 and W-3 (to the Social Security Last day of February (March 31 if
Administration) filing electronically)
4.
Federal unemployment (FUTA) tax 940 January 31 4.
8109 (to make deposits)3 April 30, July 31, October 31, and
January 31, but only if the liability for
unpaid tax is more than $500.
Filing information returns for See  Information Returns Forms 1099–to the recipient by
payments to nonemployees and January 31 and to the IRS by
transactions with other persons February 28 (March 31 if filing
electronically).
Other forms—see the General
Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098,
5498, and W-2G.
Excise tax See Excise Taxes See the instructions to the forms.
1 If a due date falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the due date is the next business day. For more information, see
Publication 509, Tax Calendars for 2008.
2 File a separate schedule for each business.
3 Do not use if you deposit taxes electronically.
4 See the form instructions if you go out of business, change the form of your business, or stop paying wages.
• Payments of $600 or more for services performed
for your business by people not treated as your em-Information Returns
ployees, such as fees to subcontractors, attorneys,
accountants, or directors.If you make or receive payments in your business, you
may have to report them to the IRS on information returns.
• Rent payments of $600 or more, other than rentsThe IRS compares the payments shown on the information paid to real estate agents.returns with each person’s income tax return to see if the
• Prizes and awards of $600 or more that are not forpayments were included in income. You must give a copy
services, such as winnings on TV or radio shows.of each information return you are required to file to the
recipient or payer. In addition to the forms described be- • Royalty payments of $10 or more.low, you may have to use other returns to report certain
• Payments to certain crew members by operators ofkinds of payments or transactions. For more details on
fishing boats.information returns and when you have to file them, see
the General Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098, 5498, and You also use Form 1099-MISC to report your sales ofW-2G. $5,000 or more of consumer goods to a person for resale
anywhere other than in a permanent retail establishment.Form 1099-MISC. Use Form 1099-MISC, Miscellaneous
Income, to report certain payments you make in your
Form W-2. You must file Form W-2, Wage and Tax State-business. These payments include the following items.
ment, to report payments to your employees, such as
wages, tips, and other compensation, withheld income,
social security, and Medicare taxes, and advance earned
income credit payments. For more information on what to
Page 10 Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes

Page 11 of 53 of Publication 334 9:31 - 20-DEC-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 1-3. Going Out of Business Checklists
(Note. The following checklists highlight the typical final forms and schedules you may need to file if you
ever go out of business. For more information, see the instructions for the listed forms.)
IF you are liable for: THEN you may need to:
Income tax ❏ File Schedule C or C-EZ with your Form 1040 for the year in which you go
out of business.
❏ File Form 4797 with your Form 1040 for each year in which you sell or
exchange property used in your business or in which the business use of
certain section 179 or listed property drops to 50% or less.
❏ File Form 8594 with your Form 1040 if you sold your business.
Self-employment tax ❏ File Schedule SE with your Form 1040 for the year in which you go out of
business.
Employment taxes ❏ File Form 941 (or Form 944) for the calendar quarter in which you make final
wage payments. Note. Do not forget to check the box and enter the date
final wages were paid on line 16 of Form 941 or line 15 of Form 944.
❏ File Form 940 for the calendar year in which final wages were paid. Note. Do
not forget to check box d, Business closed or stopped paying wages, under
Type of Return.
Information returns ❏ Provide Forms W-2 to your employees for the calendar year in which you
make final wage payments. Note. These forms are generally due by the due
date of your final Form 941 or Form 944.
❏ File Form W-3 to file Forms W-2. Note. These forms are generally due within
1 month after the due date of your final Form 941 or Form 944.
❏ Provide Forms 1099-MISC to each person to whom you have paid at least
$600 for services (including parts and materials) during the calendar year in
which you go out of business.
❏ File Form 1096 to file Forms 1099-MISC.
report on Form W-2, see the Instructions for Forms W-2 on a de minimis (small) number of information returns if
and W-3. you correct the errors by August 1 of the year the returns
are due. (A de minimis number of returns is the greater ofPenalties. The law provides for the following penalties if
10 or 
1/2 of 1% of the total number of returns you areyou do not file Form 1099-MISC or Form W-2 or do not
required to file for the year.)correctly report the information. For more information, see
the General Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098, 5498, and
W-2G. Form 8300. You must file Form 8300, Report of Cash
Payments Over $10,000 Received in a Trade or Business,
• Failure to file information returns. This penalty ap-
if you receive more than $10,000 in cash in one transac-plies if you do not file information returns by the due
tion, or two or more related business transactions. Cashdate, do not include all required information, or re-
port incorrect information. includes U.S. and foreign coin and currency. It also in-
cludes certain monetary instruments such as cashier’s and• Failure to furnish correct payee statements. This traveler’s checks and money orders. Cash does not in-penalty applies if you do not furnish a required state-
clude a check drawn on an individual’s personal accountment to a payee by the required date, do not include
(personal check). For more information, see Publicationall required information, or report incorrect informa-
1544, Reporting Cash Payments of Over $10,000 (Re-tion.
ceived in a Trade or Business).
Waiver of penalties. These penalties will not apply if Penalties. There are civil and criminal penalties, includ-you can show that the failure was due to reasonable cause ing up to 5 years in prison, for not filing Form 8300, filing (orand not willful neglect. causing the filing of) a false or fraudulent Form 8300, orIn addition, there is no penalty for failure to include all
structuring a transaction to evade reporting requirements.required information, or for including incorrect information,
Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes Page 11

Page 12 of 53 of Publication 334 9:31 - 20-DEC-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
change it without IRS approval. For more information, see
Change in tax year, later.
2. If you adopt the calendar tax year, you must maintain
your books and records and report your income and ex-
penses for the period from January 1 through December
Accounting Periods 31 of each year.
and Methods Fiscal tax year. A fiscal tax year is 12 consecutive
months ending on the last day of any month except De-
cember. A 52-53-week tax year is a fiscal tax year that
varies from 52 to 53 weeks but does not have to end on the
Introduction
last day of a month.You must figure your taxable income and file an income tax If you adopt a fiscal tax year, you must maintain yourreturn for an annual accounting period called a tax year. books and records and report your income and expensesAlso, you must consistently use an accounting method that using the same tax year.clearly shows your income and expenses for the tax year. For more information on a fiscal tax year, including a
52-53-week tax year, see Publication 538.
Useful Items
Change in tax year. Generally, you must file Form 1128,You may want to see:
Application To Adopt, Change, or Retain a Tax Year, to
request IRS approval to change your tax year. See thePublication
Instructions for Form 1128 for exceptions. If you qualify for❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methods an automatic approval request, a user fee is not required. If
you do not qualify for automatic approval, a ruling must beSee chapter 12 for information about getting publica-
requested. See the instructions for Form 1128 for informa-tions and forms.
tion about user fees if you are requesting a ruling.
Accounting Periods Accounting Methods
When preparing a statement of income and expenses
An accounting method is a set of rules used to determine(generally your income tax return), you must use your
when and how income and expenses are reported. Yourbooks and records for a specific interval of time called an
accounting method includes not only the overall method ofaccounting period. The annual accounting period for your
accounting you use, but also the accounting treatment youincome tax return is called a tax year. You can use one of
use for any material item.the following tax years.
You choose an accounting method for your business• A calendar tax year. when you file your first income tax return that includes a
Schedule C for the business. After that, if you want to• A fiscal tax year.
change your accounting method, you must generally getUnless you have a required tax year, you adopt a tax year IRS approval. See Change in Accounting Method, later.by filing your first income tax return using that tax year. A
required tax year is a tax year required under the Internal Kinds of methods. Generally, you can use any of the
Revenue Code or the Income Tax Regulations. following accounting methods.
• Cash method.Calendar tax year. A calendar tax year is 12 consecutive
months beginning January 1 and ending December 31. • An accrual method.
You must adopt the calendar tax year if any of the • Special methods of accounting for certain items offollowing apply. income and expenses.
• You keep no books. • Combination method using elements of two or more
• You have no annual accounting period. of the above.
• Your present tax year does not qualify as a fiscal You must use the same accounting method to figureyear. your taxable income and to keep your books. Also, you
• Your use of the calendar tax year is required under must use an accounting method that clearly shows your
the Internal Revenue Code or the Income Tax Regu- income.
lations.
Business and personal items. You can account for busi-
If you filed your first income tax return using the calendar ness and personal items under different accounting meth-
tax year and you later begin business as a sole proprietor, ods. For example, you can figure your business income
you must continue to use the calendar tax year unless you under an accrual method, even if you use the cash method
get IRS approval to change it or are otherwise allowed to to figure personal items.
Page 12 Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods

Page 13 of 53 of Publication 334 9:31 - 20-DEC-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Two or more businesses. If you have two or more sepa- Debts paid by another person or canceled. If your
debts are paid by another person or are canceled by yourrate and distinct businesses, you can use a different ac-
creditors, you may have to report part or all of this debtcounting method for each if the method clearly reflects the
relief as income. If you receive income in this way, youincome of each business. They are separate and distinct
constructively receive the income when the debt is can-only if you maintain complete and separate books and
celed or paid. For more information, see Canceled Debtrecords for each business.
under Kinds of Income in chapter 5.
Cash Method Repayment of income. If you include an amount in in-
come and in a later year you have to repay all or part of it,Most individuals and many sole proprietors with no inven- you can usually deduct the repayment in the year in whichtory use the cash method because they find it easier to you make it. If the amount you repay is over $3,000, akeep cash method records. However, if an inventory is special rule applies. For details about the special rule, seenecessary to account for your income, you must generally Repayments in chapter 11 of Publication 535, Businessuse an accrual method of accounting for sales and Expenses.
purchases. For more information, see Inventories, later.
ExpensesIncome
Under the cash method, you generally deduct expenses in
Under the cash method, include in your gross income all the tax year in which you actually pay them. This includes
items of income you actually or constructively receive business expenses for which you contest liability. How-
during your tax year. If you receive property or services, ever, you may not be able to deduct an expense paid in
you must include their fair market value in income. advance or you may be required to capitalize certain costs,
as explained later under Uniform Capitalization Rules.
Example. On December 30, 2006, Mrs. Sycamore sent
Expenses paid in advance. You can deduct an expenseyou a check for interior decorating services you provided to
you pay in advance only in the year to which it applies.her. You received the check on January 2, 2007. You must
include the amount of the check in income for 2007.
Example. You are a calendar year taxpayer and you
pay $1,000 in 2007 for a business insurance policy effec-Constructive receipt. You have constructive receipt of
tive for one year, beginning July 1. You can deduct $500 inincome when an amount is credited to your account or
2007 and $500 in 2008.made available to you without restriction. You do not need
to have possession of it. If you authorize someone to be
your agent and receive income for you, you are treated as
Accrual Method
having received it when your agent received it.
Under an accrual method of accounting, you generally
Example. Interest is credited to your bank account in report income in the year earned and deduct or capitalize
December 2007. You do not withdraw it or enter it into your expenses in the year incurred. The purpose of an accrual
passbook until 2008. You must include it in your gross method of accounting is to match income and expenses in
income for 2007. the correct year.
Delaying receipt of income. You cannot hold checks
or postpone taking possession of similar property from one Income—General Rule
tax year to another to avoid paying tax on the income. You
must report the income in the year the property is received Under an accrual method, you generally include an
or made available to you without restriction. amount in your gross income for the tax year in which all
events that fix your right to receive the income have oc-
Example. Frances Jones, a service contractor, was en- curred and you can determine the amount with reasonable
titled to receive a $10,000 payment on a contract in De- accuracy.
cember 2007. She was told in December that her payment
was available. At her request, she was not paid until Example. You are a calendar year accrual method tax-
January 2008. She must include this payment in her 2007 payer. You sold a computer on December 28, 2007. You
income because it was constructively received in 2007. billed the customer in the first week of January 2008, but
you did not receive payment until February 2008. You mustChecks. Receipt of a valid check by the end of the tax include the amount received for the computer in your 2007year is constructive receipt of income in that year, even if income.you cannot cash or deposit the check until the following
year.
Income—Special Rules
Example. Dr. Redd received a check for $500 on De-
cember 31, 2007, from a patient. She could not deposit the The following are special rules that apply to advance pay-
check in her business account until January 2, 2008. She ments, estimating income, and changing a payment
must include this fee in her income for 2007. schedule for services.
Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods Page 13

Page 14 of 53 of Publication 334 9:31 - 20-DEC-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Estimated income. If you include a reasonably estimated Economic performance. You generally cannot deduct or
amount in gross income, and later determine the exact capitalize a business expense until economic performance
amount is different, take the difference into account in the occurs. If your expense is for property or services provided
tax year in which you make the determination. to you, or for your use of property, economic performance
occurs as the property or services are provided or as the
Change in payment schedule for services. If you per- property is used. If your expense is for property or services
form services for a basic rate specified in a contract, you you provide to others, economic performance occurs as
must accrue the income at the basic rate, even if you agree you provide the property or services. An exception allows
to receive payments at a lower rate until you complete the certain recurring items to be treated as incurred during a
services and then receive the difference. tax year even though economic performance has not oc-
curred. For more information on economic performance,Advance payments for services. Generally, you report see Economic Performance under Accrual Method in Pub-an advance payment for services to be performed in a later lication 538.tax year as income in the year you receive the payment.
However, if you receive an advance payment for services Example. You are a calendar year taxpayer and use anyou agree to perform by the end of the next tax year, you accrual method of accounting. You buy office supplies incan elect to postpone including the advance payment in December 2007. You receive the supplies and the bill inincome until the next tax year. However, you cannot post- December, but you pay the bill in January 2008. You canpone including any payment beyond that tax year. deduct the expense in 2007 because all events that fix the
For more information, see Advance Payment for Serv- fact of liability have occurred, the amount of the liability
ices under Accrual Method in Publication 538. That publi- could be reasonably determined, and economic perform-
cation also explains special rules for reporting the following ance occurred in that year.
types of income. Your office supplies may qualify as a recurring expense.
In that case, you can deduct them in 2007 even if the
• Advance payments for service agreements.
supplies are not delivered until 2008 (when economic• Advance payments under guarantee or warranty performance occurs).contracts.
Keeping inventories. When the production, purchase, or• Prepaid interest.
sale of merchandise is an income-producing factor in your
• Prepaid rent. business, you must generally take inventories into account
at the beginning and the end of your tax year. If you must
account for an inventory, you must generally use an ac-Advance payments for sales. Special rules apply to in-
crual method of accounting for your purchases and sales.cluding income from advance payments on agreements for
For more information, see Inventories, later.future sales or other dispositions of goods you hold prima-
rily for sale to your customers in the ordinary course of your Special rule for related persons. You cannot deductbusiness. If the advance payments are for contracts involv- business expenses and interest owed to a related personing both the sale and service of goods, it may be necessary who uses the cash method of accounting until you maketo treat them as two agreements. An agreement includes a the payment and the corresponding amount is includible ingift certificate that can be redeemed for goods. Treat the related person’s gross income. Determine the relation-amounts that are due and payable as amounts you re- ship, for this rule, as of the end of the tax year for which theceived. expense or interest would otherwise be deductible. If aYou generally include an advance payment in income deduction is not allowed under this rule, the rule will con-for the tax year in which you receive it. However, you can tinue to apply even if your relationship with the personuse an alternative method. For information about the alter- ends before the expense or interest is includible in thenative method, see Publication 538. gross income of that person.
Related persons include members of your immediate
Expenses family, including only brothers and sisters (either whole or
half), your spouse, ancestors, and lineal descendants. ForUnder an accrual method of accounting, you generally a list of other related persons, see Related Persons underdeduct or capitalize a business expense when both the Accrual Method in Publication 538.following apply.
Combination Method1. The all-events test has been met. The test has been
met when:
You can generally use any combination of cash, accrual,
and special methods of accounting if the combinationa. All events have occurred that fix the fact of liabil-
clearly shows your income and expenses and you use itity, and
consistently. However, the following restrictions apply.b. The liability can be determined with reasonable
• If an inventory is necessary to account for your in-accuracy.
come, you must generally use an accrual method for
2. Economic performance has occurred. purchases and sales. (See, however, Inventories,
Page 14 Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods

Page 15 of 53 of Publication 334 9:31 - 20-DEC-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
later.) You can use the cash method for all other Business not owned or not in existence for 3 years. If
items of income and expenses. you did not own your business for all of the 3-tax-year
period used in figuring your average annual gross receipts,• If you use the cash method for figuring your income, include the period of any predecessor. If your business hasyou must use the cash method for reporting your not been in existence for the 3-tax-year period, base yourexpenses. average on the period it has existed including any short tax
• If you use an accrual method for reporting your ex- years, annualizing the short tax year’s gross receipts.
penses, you must use an accrual method for figuring Materials and supplies that are not incidental. If youyour income. account for inventoriable items as materials and supplies
• If you use a combination method that includes the that are not incidental, you will deduct the cost of the items
cash method, treat that combination method as the you would otherwise include in inventory in the year you
cash method. sell the items, or the year you pay for them, whichever is
later. If you are a producer, you can use any reasonable
method to estimate the raw material in your work in pro-
cess and finished goods on hand at the end of the year to
Inventories
determine the raw material used to produce finished goods
that were sold during the year.Generally, if you produce, purchase, or sell merchandise in
your business, you must keep an inventory and use the Changing accounting method. If you are a qualifyingaccrual method for purchases and sales of merchandise. taxpayer or qualifying small business taxpayer and want toHowever, the following taxpayers can use the cash method change to the cash method or to account for inventoriableof accounting even if they produce, purchase, or sell mer- items as non-incidental materials and supplies, you mustchandise. These taxpayers can also account for inventori- file Form 3115 , Application for Change in Accountingable items as materials and supplies that are not incidental Method.(discussed later).
More information.  For more information about the quali-1. A qualifying taxpayer under Revenue Procedure fying taxpayer exception, see Revenue Procedure2001-10 in Internal Revenue Bulletin 2001-2. 2001-10 in Internal Revenue Bulletin 2001-2. For more
information about the qualifying small business taxpayer2. A qualifying small business taxpayer under Revenue
exception, see Revenue Procedure 2002-28 in InternalProcedure 2002-28 in Internal Revenue Bulletin
Revenue Bulletin 2002-18.2002-18.
Items included in inventory. If you are required to ac-Qualifying taxpayer. You are a qualifying taxpayer if: count for inventories, include the following items when
accounting for your inventory.
• Your average annual gross receipts for each prior
tax year ending on or after December 17, 1998, is $1
• Merchandise or stock in trade.million or less. (Your average annual gross receipts
• Raw materials.for a tax year is figured by adding the gross receipts
for that tax year and the 2 preceding tax years and • Work in process.dividing by 3.)
• Finished products.• Your business is not a tax shelter, as defined under
• Supplies that physically become a part of the itemsection 448(d)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code.
intended for sale.
Qualifying small business taxpayer. You are a qualify-
Valuing inventory. You must value your inventory at theing small business taxpayer if:
beginning and end of each tax year to determine your cost• Your average annual gross receipts for each prior of goods sold (Schedule C, line 42). To determine thetax year ending on or after December 31, 2000, is value of your inventory, you need a method for identifyingmore than $1 million but not more than $10 million. the items in your inventory and a method for valuing these(Your average annual gross receipts for a tax year is items.figured by adding the gross receipts for that tax year Inventory valuation rules cannot be the same for alland the 2 preceding tax years and dividing the total kinds of businesses. The method you use to value yourby 3.) inventory must conform to generally accepted accounting
principles for similar businesses and must clearly reflect• You are not prohibited from using the cash method
income. Your inventory practices must be consistent fromunder section 448 of the Internal Revenue Code.
year to year.• Your principal business activity is an eligible busi-
ness (described in Publication 538 and Revenue More information. For more information about invento-
Procedure 2002-28). ries, see Publication 538.
Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods Page 15

Page 16 of 53 of Publication 334 9:31 - 20-DEC-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
another method. A change in your accounting methodUniform Capitalization Rules includes a change in:
Under the uniform capitalization rules, you must capitalize 1. Your overall method, such as from cash to an ac-the direct costs and part of the indirect costs for production crual method, andor resale activities. Include these costs in the basis of
property you produce or acquire for resale, rather than 2. Your treatment of any material item.
claiming them as a current deduction. You recover the To get approval, you must file Form 3115, Application forcosts through depreciation, amortization, or cost of goods Change in Accounting Method. You can get IRS approvalsold when you use, sell, or otherwise dispose of the prop- to change an accounting method under either the auto-erty. matic change procedures or the advance consent request
procedures. You may have to pay a user fee. For moreActivities subject to the uniform capitalization rules. information, see the form instructions. You may be subject to the uniform capitalization rules if
you do any of the following, unless the property is pro-
Automatic change procedures. Certain taxpayers canduced for your use other than in a business or an activity
presume to have IRS approval to change their method ofcarried on for profit.
accounting. The approval is granted for the tax year for
• Produce real or tangible personal property. For this which the taxpayer requests a change (year of change), if
purpose, tangible personal property includes a film, the taxpayer complies with the provisions of the automatic
sound recording, video tape, book, or similar prop- change procedures. No user fee is required for an applica-
erty. tion filed under an automatic change procedure generally
covered in Revenue Procedure 2002-9.• Acquire property for resale.
Generally, you must use Form 3115 to request an auto-
matic change. For more information, see the InstructionsExceptions. These rules do not apply to the following
for Form 3115.property.
1. Personal property you acquire for resale if your aver-
age annual gross receipts are $10 million or less.
2. Property you produce if you meet either of the follow-
ing conditions. 3.
a. Your indirect costs of producing the property are
$200,000 or less.
Dispositions ofb. You use the cash method of accounting and do
not account for inventories. For more information, Business Property
see Inventories, earlier.
IntroductionSpecial Methods
If you dispose of business property, you may have a gain
or loss that you report on Form 1040. However, in someThere are special methods of accounting for certain items
cases you may have a gain that is not taxable or a loss thatof income or expense. These include the following.
is not deductible. This chapter discusses whether you have• Amortization, discussed in chapter 8 of Publication a disposition, how to figure the gain or loss, and where to535, Business Expenses. report the gain or loss.
• Bad debts, discussed in chapter 10 of Publication
535. Useful Items
You may want to see:• Depletion, discussed in chapter 9 of Publication 535.
• Depreciation, discussed in Publication 946, How To PublicationDepreciate Property.
❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets• Installment sales, discussed in Publication 537, In-
stallment Sales. Form (and Instructions)
❏ 4797 Sales of Business Property
Change in ❏ Sch D (Form 1040) Capital Gains and Losses
Accounting Method See chapter 12 for information about getting publica-
tions and forms.Once you have set up your accounting method, you must
generally get IRS approval before you can change to
Page 16 Chapter 3 Dispositions of Business Property

Page 17 of 53 of Publication 334 9:31 - 20-DEC-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
as being sold separately for determining the treatment ofWhat Is a Disposition gain or loss.
Both the buyer and seller involved in the sale of aof Property? business must report to the IRS the allocation of the sales
price among the business assets. Use Form 8594, AssetA disposition of property includes the following transac- Acquisition Statement Under Section 1060, to provide thistions. information. The buyer and seller should each attach Form
• You sell property for cash or other property. 8594 to their federal income tax return for the year in which
the sale occurred. • You exchange property for other property. For more information about the sale of a business, see
• You receive money as a tenant for the cancellation chapter 2 of Publication 544.
of a lease.
• You receive money for granting the exclusive use of
a copyright throughout its life in a particular medium. How Do I Figure
• You transfer property to satisfy a debt. a Gain or Loss?
• You abandon property.
• Your bank or other financial institution forecloses on Table 3-1. How To Figure a Gain or Lossyour mortgage or repossesses your property.
IF your... THEN you have a...• Your property is damaged, destroyed, or stolen, and
you receive property or money in payment. Adjusted basis is more than the
amount realized Loss.• Your property is condemned, or disposed of under
the threat of condemnation, and you receive prop- Amount realized is more than
erty or money in payment. the adjusted basis Gain.
For details about damaged, destroyed, or stolen property,
Basis, adjusted basis, amount realized, fair marketsee Publication 547, Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts. For
value, and amount recognized are defined next. You needdetails about other dispositions, see chapter 1 in Publica-
to know these definitions to figure your gain or loss.tion 544.
Basis. The cost or purchase price of property is usually itsNontaxable exchanges. Certain exchanges of property basis for figuring the gain or loss from its sale or otherare not taxable. This means any gain from the exchange is disposition. However, if you acquired the property by gift,not recognized and you cannot deduct any loss. Your gain inheritance, or in some way other than buying it, you mustor loss will not be recognized until you sell or otherwise use a basis other than its cost. For more information aboutdispose of the property you receive. basis, see Publication 551, Basis of Assets.
Like-kind exchanges. A like-kind exchange is the ex-
change of property for the same kind of property. It is the Adjusted basis. The adjusted basis of property is your
most common type of nontaxable exchange. To be a original cost or other basis plus certain additions, and
like-kind exchange, the property traded and the property minus certain deductions such as depreciation and casu-
received must be both of the following. alty losses. In determining gain or loss, the costs of trans-
ferring property to a new owner, such as selling expenses,• Business or investment property. are added to the adjusted basis of the property.
• Like property.
Amount realized. The amount you realize from a disposi-
Report the exchange of like-kind property on Form tion is the total of all money you receive plus the fair market
8824. For more information about like-kind exchanges, value of all property or services you receive. The amount
see chapter 1 in Publication 544. you realize also includes any of your liabilities that were
assumed by the buyer and any liabilities to which the
Installment sales. An installment sale is a sale of prop- property you transferred is subject, such as real estate
erty where you receive at least one payment after the tax taxes or a mortgage.
year of the sale. If you finance the buyer’s purchase of your
property, instead of having the buyer get a loan or mort- Fair market value. Fair market value is the price at which
gage from a third party, you probably have an installment the property would change hands between a buyer and a
sale. seller, neither having to buy or sell, and both having rea-
For more information about installment sales, see Publi- sonable knowledge of all necessary facts.
cation 537, Installment Sales.
Amount recognized. Your gain or loss realized from a
Sale of a business. The sale of a business usually is not disposition of property is usually a recognized gain or loss
a sale of one asset. Instead, all the assets of the business for tax purposes. Recognized gains must be included in
are sold. Generally, when this occurs, each asset is treated gross income. Recognized losses are deductible from
Chapter 3 Dispositions of Business Property Page 17

Page 18 of 53 of Publication 334 9:31 - 20-DEC-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
gross income. However, a gain or loss realized from cer- Dispositions of business property and depreciable
tain exchanges of property is not recognized. See Nontax- property. Use Form 4797. If you have taxable gain, you
able exchanges, earlier. Also, you cannot deduct a loss may also have to use Schedule D (Form 1040). 
from the disposition of property held for personal use. Like-kind exchanges. Use Form 8824 , Like-Kind Ex-
changes. You may also have to use Form 4797 and
Is My Gain or Loss Schedule D (Form 1040). 
Ordinary or Capital? Installment sales. Use Form 6252, Installment Sale In-
come. You may also have to use Form 4797 and ScheduleYou must classify your gains and losses as either ordinary
D (Form 1040). or capital gains or losses. You must do this to figure your
net capital gain or loss. Generally, you will have a capital Casualties and thefts. Use Form 4684, Casualties andgain or loss if you dispose of a capital asset. For the most Thefts. You may also have to use Form 4797. part, everything you own and use for personal purposes or
investment is a capital asset. Condemned property. Use Form 4797 . You may also
Certain property you use in your business is not a have to use Schedule D (Form 1040).
capital asset. A gain or loss from a disposition of this
property is an ordinary gain or loss. However, if you held
the property longer than 1 year, you may be able to treat
the gain or loss as a capital gain or loss. These gains and
losses are called section 1231 gains and losses.
4.For more information about ordinary and capital gains
and losses, see chapters 2 and 3 in Publication 544.
General BusinessIs My Capital Gain or Loss
CreditsShort Term or Long Term?
If you have a capital gain or loss, you must determine
whether it is long term or short term. Whether a gain or loss
Introduction
is long or short term depends on how long you own the Your general business credit for the year consists of yourproperty before you dispose of it. The time you own prop- carryforward of business credits from prior years plus theerty before disposing of it is called the holding period. total of your current year business credits. In addition, your
general business credit for the current year may be in-Table 3-2. Do I Have a Short-Term or creased later by the carryback of business credits fromLong-Term Gain or Loss? later years. You subtract this credit directly from your tax.
IF you hold the Useful Itemsproperty... THEN you have a...
You may want to see:
1 year or less Short-term capital gain or loss.
PublicationMore than 1 year Long-term capital gain or loss.
❏ 954 Tax Incentives for Distressed Communities
For more information about short-term and long-term
capital gains and losses, see chapter 4 of Publication 544. Form (and Instructions)
❏ 3800 General Business Credit
❏ 6251 Alternative Minimum Tax—IndividualsWhere Do I Report
See chapter 12 for information about getting publica-Gains and Losses? tions and forms.
Report gains and losses from the following dispositions on
the forms indicated. The instructions for the forms explain
Business Creditshow to fill them out.
All of the following credits are part of the general business
credit. The form you use to figure each credit is shown in
parentheses. Be sure you also read How To Claim the
Credit, later, because, in most cases, you will also have to
complete Form 3800.
Alternative fuel vehicle refueling property credit (Form
8911). This credit applies to the cost of any qualified fuel
Page 18 Chapter 4 General Business Credits

Page 19 of 53 of Publication 334 9:31 - 20-DEC-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
vehicle refueling property you placed in service. For more have disabilities. You must pay or incur the expenses to
information, see Form 8911. enable your business to comply with the Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990. For more information, see FormAlternative motor vehicle credit (Form 8910). This 8826.credit consists of the following four credits for new vehicles
you placed in service. For more information, see Form Distilled spirits credit (Form 8906). This credit is avail-
8910. able to distillers and importers of distilled spirits and eligi-
ble wholesalers of distilled spirits. For more information,• Qualified fuel cell motor vehicle credit. see Form 8906.
• Advanced lean burn technology motor vehicle credit. Empowerment zone and renewal community employ-
• Qualified hybrid motor vehicle credit. ment credit (Form 8844). You may qualify for this credit if
you have employees and are engaged in a business in an• Qualified alternative fuel motor vehicle credit. empowerment zone or renewal community for which the
credit is available. For more information, see Form 8844
Biodiesel and renewable diesel fuels credit (Form and Publication 954.
8864) This credit applies to certain fuel sold or used in Energy efficient appliance credit (Form 8909). Thisyour business. For more information, see Form 8864. credit is available for manufacturers of eligible appliances.
Credit for alcohol used as fuel (Form 6478). This credit For more information, see Form 8909.
consists of the alcohol mixture credit, alcohol credit, and
Energy efficient home credit (Form 8908). This credit issmall ethanol producer credit. For more information, see
available for eligible contractors of certain homes sold forForm 6478.
use as a residence. For more information, see Form 8908.
Credit for contributions to selected community devel-
Indian employment credit (Form 8845). This credit ap-opment corporations Form 8847. This credit applies to
plies to qualified wages and health insurance costs youcertain contributions made to a selected community devel-
paid or incurred for qualified employees. For more informa-opment corporation before June 30, 1999. For more infor-
tion, see Form 8845 and Publication 954.mation, see Form 8847.
Investment credit (Form 3468). The investment credit isCredit for employer social security and Medicare taxes
the total of the following credits. For more information, seepaid on certain employee tips (Form 8846). This credit
Form 3468.is generally equal to your (employer’s) portion of social
security and Medicare taxes paid on tips received by em- • Rehabilitation credit.ployees of your food and beverage establishment where
• Energy credit.tipping is customary. The credit applies regardless of
whether the food is consumed on or off your business • Qualifying advanced coal project credit.premises. However, you cannot get credit for your part of
• Qualifying gasification project credit.social security and Medicare taxes on those tips that are
used to meet the federal minimum wage rate that applies
to the employee under the Fair Labor Standards Act. For Low sulfur diesel fuel production credit (Form 8896).more information, see Form 8846. This credit is for the production of low sulfur diesel by a
qualified small business. For more information, see FormCredit for employer-provided childcare facilities and
8896.services (Form 8882). This credit applies to the qualified
expenses you paid for employee childcare and qualified Low-income housing credit (Form 8586). This creditexpenses you paid for childcare resource and referral generally applies to each new qualified low-income build-services. For more information, see Form 8882. ing placed in service after 1986. For more information, see
Form 8586.Credit for increasing research activities (Form 6765).
This credit is designed to encourage businesses to in- Mine rescue team training credit (Form 8923). Thiscrease the amounts they spend on research and experi- credit applies to training program costs you pay or incur formental activities, including energy research. For more certain mine rescue team employees. For more informa-information, see Form 6765. tion, see Form 8923.
Credit for small employer pension plan startup costs New markets credit (Form 8874). This credit is for quali-(Form 8881). This credit applies to pension plan startup fied equity investments made in qualified community de-costs of a new qualified defined benefit or defined contribu- velopment entities. For more information, see Form 8874.tion plan (including a 401(k) plan), SIMPLE plan, or simpli-
Nonconventional source fuel credit (Form 8907). Thisfied employee pension. For more information, see
credit is for gas produced from biomass; liquid, gaseous, orPublication 560, Retirement Plans for Small Business
solid synthetic fuels produced from coal; and coke or coke(SEP, Simple, and Qualified Plans).
gas. For more information, see Form 8907.Disabled access credit (Form 8826). This credit is a
nonrefundable tax credit for an eligible small business that Orphan drug credit (Form 8820). This credit applies to
pays or incurs expenses to provide access to persons who qualified expenses incurred in testing certain drugs, known
Chapter 4 General Business Credits Page 19

Page 20 of 53 of Publication 334 9:31 - 20-DEC-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
as “orphan drugs for rare diseases and conditions.” For on Form 6251 if you claim a general business credit. After
you fill in Form 6251, attach it to your tax return. more information, see Form 8820.
Qualified railroad track maintenance credit (Form
8900). This credit applies to certain regional and switching
railroads who may be able to claim a credit for expenses
made to upgrade their railroad tracks (including roadbed, 5.bridges, and related track structures). For more informa-
tion, see Form 8900.
Business Income
Renewable electricity, refined coal, and Indian coal
production credit (Form 8835). This credit is for the sale
of electricity, refined coal, or Indian coal produced in the
IntroductionUnited States or U. S. possessions from qualified energy
resources at a qualified facility. For more information, see This chapter primarily explains business income and howForm 8835. to account for it on your tax return, what items are not
considered income, and gives guidelines for selected oc-
Welfare-to-work credit (Form 8861). This credit pro- cupations.
vided businesses with an incentive to hire long-term family If there is a connection between any income you receive
assistance recipients. It is still available for employees who and your business, the income is business income. A
began work for you before January 1, 2007. For more connection exists if it is clear that the payment of income
information see Form 8861 and Form 5884. would not have been made if you did not have the busi-
ness.
Work opportunity credit (Form 5884). This credit pro- You can have business income even if you are not
vides businesses with an incentive to hire individuals from involved in the activity on a regular full-time basis. Income
targeted groups that have a particularly high unemploy- from work you do on the side in addition to your regular job
ment rate or other special employment needs. The wel- can be business income.
fare-to-work credit and the work opportunity credit have You report most business income, such as income from
been combined with respect to employees who began the sale of your products or services, on Schedule C or
work for you after December 31, 2006. For more informa- C-EZ. But you report the income from the sale of business
tion, see Form 5884. assets, such as land and office buildings, on other forms
instead of Schedule C or C-EZ. For information on selling
business assets, see chapter 3.
How To Claim the Credit Nonemployee compensation. Business income
includes amounts you received in your business
To claim a general business credit, you will first have to get that were properly shown on Forms 1099-MISC.
TIP
the forms you need to claim your current year business This includes amounts reported as nonemployee compen-
credits. sation in box 7 of the form. You can find more information
in the instructions on the back of the Form 1099-MISC youIn addition to the credit form, in most cases you may
received. also need to file Form 3800.
Who must file Form 3800? You must file Form 3800 if
you have any of the credits listed above other than the Kinds of Income
work opportunity credit (Form 5884), the credit for alcohol
used as a fuel (Form 6478), the renewable electricity, You must report on your tax return all income you receive
refined coal, and Indian coal production credit (Form 8835, from your business unless it is excluded by law. In most
Section B), the empowerment zone and renewal commu- cases, your business income will be in the form of cash,
nity employment credit (Form 8844), and the credit for checks, and credit card charges. But business income can
employer social security and Medicare taxes paid on cer- be in other forms, such as property or services. These and
tain employee tips  (Form 8846). other types of income are explained next.
Forms 5884, 6478, 8835 (Section B), 8844, and 8846 If you are a U.S. citizen who has business incomehave special tax liability limits and are not reported on from sources outside the United States (foreignForm 3800. Any carryback, carryforward, and passive ac- income), you must report that income on your tax
CAUTION
!
tivity limitation of these credits is computed separately on return unless it is exempt from tax under U.S. law. If youthe forms on which they are claimed. live outside the United States, you may be able to exclude
part or all of your foreign-source business income. For
Alternative minimum tax (AMT). Although you may not details, see Publication 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens
owe AMT, you must still figure your tentative minimum tax and Resident Aliens Abroad.
Page 20 Chapter 5 Business Income

Page 21 of 53 of Publication 334 9:31 - 20-DEC-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Members contact each other directly and request serv-Bartering for Property or Services ices to be performed. You are not required to provide
services unless requested by another member, but youBartering is an exchange of property or services. You must
can use as many of the offered services as you wishinclude in your gross receipts, at the time received, the fair
without paying a fee.market value of property or services you receive in bar-
You must include the fair market value of any servicestering. If you exchange services with another person and
you receive from club members in your gross receiptsyou both have agreed ahead of time on the value of the
when you receive them even if you have not provided anyservices, that value will be accepted as the fair market
services to club members.value unless the value can be shown to be otherwise.
Information returns. If you are involved in a barteringExample 1. You are a self-employed lawyer. You per- transaction, you may have to file either of the followingform legal services for a client, a small corporation. In forms.payment for your services, you receive shares of stock in
the corporation. You must include the fair market value of • Form 1099-B, Proceeds From Broker and Barter Ex-
change Transactions. the shares in income.
• Form 1099-MISC, Miscellaneous Income. Example 2. You are an artist and create a work of art to
For information about these forms, see the General In-compensate your landlord for the rent-free use of your
structions for Forms 1099, 1098, 5498, and W-2G.apartment. You must include the fair rental value of the
apartment in your gross receipts. Your landlord must in-
clude the fair market value of the work of art in his or her
Real Estate Rentsrental income.
If you are a real estate dealer who receives income fromExample 3. You are a self-employed accountant. Both renting real property or an owner of a hotel, motel, etc.,you and a house painter are members of a barter club, an who provides services (maid services, etc.) for guests,organization that each year gives its members a directory report the rental income and expenses on Schedule C orof members and the services each member provides. C-EZ. If you are not a real estate dealer or the kind ofMembers get in touch with other members directly and owner described in the preceding sentence, report thebargain for the value of the services to be performed. rental income and expenses on Schedule E. For more
In return for accounting services you provided for the information, see Publication 527, Residential Rental Prop-
house painter’s business, the house painter painted your erty.
home. You must include in gross receipts the fair market
value of the services you received from the house painter. Real estate dealer You are a real estate dealer if you are
The house painter must include the fair market value of engaged in the business of selling real estate to customers
your accounting services in his or her gross receipts. with the purpose of making a profit from those sales. Rent
you receive from real estate held for sale to customers is
Example 4. You are a member of a barter club that subject to SE tax. However, rent you receive from real
uses credit units to credit or debit members’ accounts for estate held for speculation or investment is not subject to
SE tax.goods or services provided or received. As soon as units
are credited to your account, you can use them to buy
Trailer park owner. Rental income from a trailer park isgoods or services or sell or transfer the units to other
subject to SE tax if you are a self-employed trailer parkmembers.
owner who provides trailer lots and facilities and substan-You must include the value of credit units you received tial services for the convenience of your tenants.in your gross receipts for the tax year in which the units are  You generally are considered to provide substantialcredited to your account. services for tenants if they are primarily for the tenants’The dollar value of units received for services by an convenience and normally are not provided to maintain theemployee of the club, who can use the units in the same lots in a condition for occupancy. Services are substantial ifmanner as other members, must be included in the em- the compensation for the services makes up a materialployee’s gross income for the tax year in which received. It part of the tenants’ rental payments.is wages subject to social security and Medicare taxes Examples of services that are not normally provided for(FICA), federal unemployment taxes (FUTA), and income the tenants’ convenience include supervising and main-
tax withholding. See Publication 15 (Circular E), Em- taining a recreational hall provided by the park, distributing
ployer’s Tax Guide. a monthly newsletter to tenants, operating a laundry facil-
ity, and helping tenants buy or sell their trailers.
Example 5. You operate a plumbing business and use Examples of services that are normally provided to
the cash method of accounting. You join a barter club and maintain the lots in a condition for tenant occupancy in-
agree to provide plumbing services to any member for a clude city sewerage, electrical connections, and roadways.
specified number of hours. Each member has access to a
directory that lists the members of the club and the serv- Hotels, boarding houses, and apartments. Rental in-
ices available. come you receive for the use or occupancy of hotels,
Chapter 5 Business Income Page 21

Page 22 of 53 of Publication 334 9:31 - 20-DEC-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
boarding houses, or apartment houses is subject to SE tax interest accrued up to the time the loan became uncollecti-
if you provide services for the occupants. ble. If the accrued interest later becomes uncollectible, you
Generally, you are considered to provide services for may be able to take a bad debt deduction. See Bad Debts
the occupants if the services are primarily for their conve- in chapter 8.
nience and are not services normally provided with the Unstated interest. If little or no interest is charged onrental of rooms for occupancy only. An example of a an installment sale, you may have to treat a part of eachservice that is not normally provided for the convenience of payment as unstated interest. See Unstated Interest andthe occupants is maid service. However, providing heat Original Issue Discount in Publication 537, Installmentand light, cleaning stairways and lobbies, and collecting Sales.trash are services normally provided for the occupants’
convenience. Dividends. Generally, dividends are business income to
dealers in securities. For most sole proprietors and statu-Prepaid rent. Advance payments received under a lease
tory employees, however, dividends are nonbusiness in-that does not put any restriction on their use or enjoyment
come. If you hold stock as a personal investmentare income in the year you receive them. This is true no
separately from your business activity, the dividends frommatter what accounting method or period you use.
the stock are nonbusiness income.
Lease bonus. A bonus you receive from a lessee for If you receive dividends from business insurance premi-granting a lease is an addition to the rent. Include it in your ums you deducted in an earlier year, you must report all orgross receipts in the year received. part of the dividend as business income on your return. To
find out how much you have to report, see Recovery ofLease cancellation payments. Report payments you re- items previously deducted under Other Income, later.ceive from your lessee for canceling a lease in your gross
receipts in the year received.
Canceled Debt
Payments to third parties. If your lessee makes pay-
ments to someone else under an agreement to pay your The following explains the general rule for including can-
debts or obligations, include the payments in your gross celed debt in income and the exceptions to the general
receipts when the lessee makes the payments. A common rule.
example of this kind of income is a lessee’s payment of
your property taxes on leased real property.
General Rule
Settlement payments. Payments you receive in settle-
Generally, if your debt is canceled or forgiven, other thanment of a lessee’s obligation to restore the leased property
as a gift or bequest to you, you must include the canceledto its original condition are income in the amount that the
amount in your gross income for tax purposes. Report thepayments exceed the adjusted basis of the leasehold im-
canceled amount on line 6 of Schedule C if you incurredprovements destroyed, damaged, removed, or discon-
the debt in your business. If the debt is a nonbusiness debt,nected by the lessee.
report the canceled amount on line 21 of Form 1040.
Personal Property Rents
ExceptionsIf you are in the business of renting personal property
(equipment, vehicles, formal wear, etc.), include the rental The following discussion covers some exceptions to the
amount you receive in your gross receipts on Schedule C general rule for canceled debt.
or C-EZ. Prepaid rent and other payments described in the
preceding Real Estate Rents discussion can also be re- Price reduced after purchase. If you owe a debt to the
ceived for renting personal property. If you receive any of seller for property you bought and the seller reduces the
those payments, include them in your gross receipts as amount you owe, you generally do not have income from
explained in that discussion. the reduction. Unless you are bankrupt or insolvent, treat
the amount of the reduction as a purchase price adjust-
ment and reduce your basis in the property.
Interest and Dividend Income
Interest and dividends may be considered business in- Deductible debt. You do not realize income from a can-
come. celed debt to the extent the payment of the debt would
have led to a deduction.Interest. Interest received on notes receivable that you
have accepted in the ordinary course of business is busi- Example. You get accounting services for your busi-ness income. Interest received on loans is business in- ness on credit. Later, you have trouble paying your busi-come if you are in the business of lending money. ness debts, but you are not bankrupt or insolvent. Your
accountant forgives part of the amount you owe for theUncollectible loans. If a loan payable to you becomes
accounting services. How you treat the canceled debtuncollectible during the tax year and you use an accrual
depends on your method of accounting.method of accounting, you must include in gross income
Page 22 Chapter 5 Business Income

Page 23 of 53 of Publication 334 9:31 - 20-DEC-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Cash method — You do not include the canceled b. After December 31, 1992, if incurred or assumed
debt in income because payment of the debt would to acquire, construct, or substantially improve the
have been deductible as a business expense. real property.
• Accrual method — You include the canceled debt in 4. It is debt to which you choose to apply these rules.income because the expense was deductible when
you incurred the debt. Qualified real property business debt includes refinanc-
ing of debt described in (3) earlier, but only to the extent it
For information on the cash and accrual methods of does not exceed the debt being refinanced.
accounting, see chapter 2. You cannot exclude more than either of the following
amounts.
Exclusions 1. The excess (if any) of:
Do not include canceled debt in income in the following a. The outstanding principal of qualified real property
situations. However, you may be required to file Form 982, business debt (immediately before the cancella-
Reduction of Tax Attributes Due to Discharge of Indebted- tion), over
ness. For more information, see Form 982.  b. The fair market value (immediately before the
cancellation) of the business real property that is1. The cancellation takes place in a bankruptcy case
security for the debt, reduced by the outstandingunder title 11 of the U.S. Code (relating to bank-
principal amount of any other qualified real prop-ruptcy). See Publication 908, Bankruptcy Tax Guide.
erty business debt secured by this property imme-2. The cancellation takes place when you are insolvent. diately before the cancellation.You can exclude the canceled debt to the extent you
are insolvent. See Publication 908. 2. The total adjusted bases of depreciable real property
held by you immediately before the cancellation.3. The canceled debt is a qualified farm debt owed to a
These adjusted bases are determined after any basisqualified person. See chapter 3 in Publication 225,
reduction due to a cancellation in bankruptcy, insol-Farmer’s Tax Guide.
vency, or of qualified farm debt. Do not take into4. The canceled debt is a qualified real property busi- account depreciable real property acquired in con-ness debt. This situation is explained later. templation of the cancellation.
If a canceled debt is excluded from income because it
takes place in a bankruptcy case, the exclusions in situa- Election. To make this election, complete Form 982
tions 2, 3, and 4 do not apply. If it takes place when you are and attach it to your income tax return for the tax year in
insolvent, the exclusions in situations 3 and 4 do not apply which the cancellation occurs. You must file your return by
to the extent you are insolvent. the due date (including extensions). If you timely filed your
return for the year without making the election, you can stillDebt. For purposes of this discussion, debt includes any make the election by filing an amended return within 6debt for which you are liable or which attaches to property months of the due date of the return (excluding exten-you hold. sions). For more information, see When to file in the form
Qualified real property business debt. You can choose instructions.
to exclude (up to certain limits) the cancellation of qualified
real property business debt. If you make the choice, you Other Incomemust reduce the basis of your depreciable real property by
the amount excluded. Make this reduction at the beginning The following discussion explains how to treat other types
of your tax year following the tax year in which the cancel- of business income you may receive.
lation occurs. However, if you dispose of the property
before that time, you must reduce its basis immediately Restricted property. Restricted property is property that
before the disposition. has certain restrictions that affect its value. If you receive
restricted stock or other property for services performed,Cancellation of qualified real property business the fair market value of the property in excess of your costdebt. Qualified real property business debt is debt (other is included in your income on Schedule C or C-EZ whenthan qualified farm debt) that meets all the following condi- the restriction is lifted. However, you can choose to betions. taxed in the year you receive the property. For more
information on including restricted property in income, see1. It was incurred or assumed in connection with real
Publication 525, Taxable and Nontaxable Income.property used in a trade or business.
2. It was secured by such real property. Gains and losses. Do not report on Schedule C or C-EZ
a gain or loss from the disposition of property that is neither3. It was incurred or assumed at either of the following
stock in trade nor held primarily for sale to customers.times.
Instead, you must report these gains and losses on other
forms. For more information, see chapter 3.a. Before January 1, 1993.
Chapter 5 Business Income Page 23

Page 24 of 53 of Publication 334 9:31 - 20-DEC-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Promissory notes. Report promissory notes and other Recapture of depreciation. In the following situations,
you have to recapture the depreciation deduction. Thisevidences of debt issued to you in a sale or exchange of
means you include in income part or all of the depreciationproperty that is stock in trade or held primarily for sale to
you deducted in previous years.customers on Schedule C or C-EZ. In general, you report
them at their stated principal amount (minus any unstated Listed property. If your business use of listed propertyinterest) when you receive them. (explained in chapter 8 under Depreciation) falls to 50% or
less in a tax year after the tax year you placed the propertyLost income payments. If you reduce or stop your busi- in service, you may have to recapture part of the deprecia-ness activities, report on Schedule C or C-EZ any payment tion deduction. You do this by including in income onyou receive for the lost income of your business from Schedule C part of the depreciation you deducted in previ-insurance or other sources. Report it on Schedule C or ous years. Use Part IV of Form 4797, Sales of BusinessC-EZ even if your business is inactive when you receive Property, to figure the amount to include on Schedule C.the payment. For more information, see What is the Business-Use Re-
quirement in chapter 5 of Publication 946, How To Depre-Damages. You must include in gross income compensa-
ciate Property. That chapter explains how to determinetion you receive during the tax year as a result of any of the
whether property is used more than 50% in your business.following injuries connected with your business.
Section 179 property. If you take a section 179 deduc-• Patent infringement.
tion (explained in chapter 8 under Depreciation) for an
• Breach of contract or fiduciary duty. asset and before the end of the asset’s recovery period the
percentage of business use drops to 50% or less, you must• Antitrust injury.
recapture part of the section 179 deduction. You do this by
including in income on Schedule C part of the deductionEconomic injury. You may be entitled to a deduction
you took. Use Part IV of Form 4797 to figure the amount toagainst the income if it compensates you for actual eco-
include on Schedule C. See chapter 2 in Publication 946 tonomic injury. Your deduction is the smaller of the following
find out when you recapture the deduction.amounts.
Sale or exchange of depreciable property. If you sell• The amount you receive or accrue for damages in or exchange depreciable property at a gain, you may havethe tax year reduced by the amount you pay or incur to treat all or part of the gain due to depreciation asin the tax year to recover that amount. ordinary income. You figure the income due to deprecia-
• Your loss from the injury that you have not yet de- tion recapture in Part III of Form 4797. For more informa-
ducted. tion, see chapter 4 in Publication 544, Sales and Other
Dispositions of Assets.
Punitive damages. You must also include punitive
damages in income.
Items That Are Not IncomeKickbacks. If you receive any kickbacks, include them in
your income on Schedule C or C-EZ. However, do not In some cases the property or money you receive is notinclude them if you properly treat them as a reduction of a income.related expense item, a capital expenditure, or cost of
goods sold. Appreciation. Increases in value of your property are not
income until you realize the increases through a sale orRecovery of items previously deducted. If you recover other taxable disposition.a bad debt or any other item deducted in a previous year,
Consignments. Consignments of merchandise to othersinclude the recovery in income on Schedule C or C-EZ.
to sell for you are not sales. The title of merchandiseHowever, if all or part of the deduction in earlier years did
remains with you, the consignor, even after the consigneenot reduce your tax, you can exclude the part that did not
possesses the merchandise. Therefore, if you ship goodsreduce your tax. If you exclude part of the recovery from
on consignment, you have no profit or loss until the con-income, you must include with your return a computation
signee sells the merchandise. Merchandise you haveshowing how you figured the exclusion.
shipped out on consignment is included in your inventory
until it is sold.Example. Joe Smith, a sole proprietor, had gross in-
Do not include merchandise you receive on consign-come of $8,000, a bad debt deduction of $300, and other
ment in your inventory. Include your profit or commissionallowable deductions of $7,700. He also had 2 personal
on merchandise consigned to you in your income whenexemptions for a total of $6,800. He would not pay income
you sell the merchandise or when you receive your profit ortax even if he did not deduct the bad debt. Therefore, he
commission, depending upon the method of accountingwill not report as income any part of the $300 he may
you use.recover in any future year.
Exception for depreciation. This rule does not apply Construction allowances. If you enter into a lease after
to depreciation. You recover depreciation using the rules August 5, 1997, you can exclude from income the con-
explained next. struction allowance you receive (in cash or as a rent
Page 24 Chapter 5 Business Income

Page 25 of 53 of Publication 334 9:31 - 20-DEC-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
reduction) from your landlord if you receive it under both
the following conditions. Guidelines for Selected
• Under a short-term lease of retail space.
Occupations• For the purpose of constructing or improving quali-
fied long-term real property for use in your business  This section provides information to determine whether
at that retail space. your earnings should be reported on Schedule C (Form
1040) or C-EZ (Form 1040).
Amount you can exclude. You can exclude the con-
struction allowance to the extent it does not exceed the Direct seller. You must report all income you receive as aamount you spent for construction or improvements. direct seller on Schedule C or C-EZ. This includes any of
Short-term lease. A short-term lease is a lease (or the following.
other agreement for occupancy or use) of retail space for
• Income from sales—payments you receive from15 years or less. The following rules apply in determining customers for products they buy from you.
whether the lease is for 15 years or less.
• Commissions, bonuses, or percentages you receive
• Take into account options to renew when figuring for sales and the sales of others who work under
whether the lease is for 15 years or less. But do not you.
take into account any option to renew at fair market • Prizes, awards, and gifts you receive from your sell-value determined at the time of renewal. ing business.
• Two or more successive leases that are part of the You must report this income regardless of whether it issame transaction (or a series of related transactions) reported to you on an information return.for the same or substantially similar retail space are
You are a direct seller if you meet all the followingtreated as one lease.
conditions.
Retail space. Retail space is real property leased, oc- 1. You are engaged in one of the following trades orcupied, or otherwise used by you as a tenant in your businesses.business of selling tangible personal property or services
to the general public. a. Selling or soliciting the sale of consumer products
either in a home or other place that is not a per-Qualified long-term real property. Qualified long-term manent retail establishment, or to any buyer on areal property is nonresidential real property that is part of, buy-sell basis or a deposit-commission basis foror otherwise present at, your retail space and that reverts resale in a home or other place of business that isto the landlord when the lease ends. not a permanent retail establishment.
b. Delivering or distributing newspapers or shoppingExchange of like-kind property. If you exchange your news (including any services directly related tobusiness property or property you hold for investment that trade or business).
solely for property of a like kind to be used in your business
or to be held for investment, no gain or loss is recognized. 2. Substantially all your pay (whether paid in cash or
This means that the gain is not taxable and the loss is not not) for services described above is directly related
deductible. A common type of nontaxable exchange is the to sales or other output (including performance of
services) rather than to the number of hours worked.trade-in of a business automobile for another business
automobile. For more information see Form 8824. 3. Your services are performed under a written contract
between you and the person for whom you perform
the services, and the contract provides that you willLeasehold improvements. If a tenant erects buildings or
not be treated as an employee for federal tax pur-makes improvements to your property, the increase in the
poses.value of the property due to the improvements is not
income to you. However, if the facts indicate that the
improvements are a payment of rent to you, then the Executor or administrator. If you administer a deceasedincrease in value would be income. person’s estate, your fees are reported on Schedule C or
C-EZ if you are one of the following:
Loans. Money borrowed through a bona fide loan is not 1. A professional fiduciary.income.
2. A nonprofessional fiduciary (personal representative)
and both of the following apply.Sales tax. State and local sales taxes imposed on the
buyer, which you were required to collect and pay over to a. The estate includes an active trade or business in
state or local governments, are not income. which you actively participate.
Chapter 5 Business Income Page 25

Page 26 of 53 of Publication 334 9:31 - 20-DEC-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
b. Your fees are related to the operation of that trade • Substantially all your pay for these services directly
or business. relates to your sales or other output rather than to
the number of hours you work.
3. A nonprofessional fiduciary of a single estate that • You perform the services under a written contractrequires extensive managerial activities on your part that says you will not be treated as an employee forfor a long period of time, provided these activities are federal tax purposes.enough to be considered a trade or business.
 If the fees do not meet the above requirements, report This rule applies whether or not you hire others to help
them on line 21 of Form 1040. you make deliveries. It also applies whether you buy the
papers from the publisher or are paid based on the number
Fishing crew member.  If you are a member of the crew of papers you deliver.
that catches fish or other water life, your earnings are
Newspaper or magazine vendor. If you are 18 or olderreported on Schedule C or C-EZ if you meet all the require-
and you sell newspapers or magazines, your earnings arements shown in chapter 10 under Fishing crew member.
reported on Schedule C or C-EZ if all the following condi-
Insurance agent, former. Termination payments you re- tions apply.
ceive as a former self-employed insurance agent from an • You sell newspapers or magazines to ultimate con-insurance company because of services you performed for sumers.that company are not reported on Schedule C or C-EZ if all
the following conditions are met. • You sell them at a fixed price.
• You received payments after your agreement to per- • Your earnings are based on the difference between
form services for the company ended. the sales price and your cost of goods sold.
• You did not perform any services for the company This rule applies whether or not you are guaranteed aafter your service agreement ended and before the minimum amount of earnings. It also applies whether orend of the year in which you received the payment. not you receive credit for unsold newspapers or magazines
• You entered into a covenant not to compete against you return to your supplier.
the company for at least a 1-year period beginning
Notary public. Fees you receive for services you performon the date your service agreement ended.
as a notary public are reported on Schedule C or C-EZ.• The amount of the payments depended primarily on These payments are not subject to self-employment taxpolicies sold by you or credited to your account dur- (see the instructions for Schedule SE (Form 1040)).ing the last year of your service agreement or the
extent to which those policies remain in force for Public official. Public officials generally do not report
some period after your service agreement ended, or what they earn for serving in public office on Schedule C or
both. C-EZ. This rule applies to payments received by an elected
tax collector from state funds on the basis of a fixed• The amount of the payment did not depend to any
percentage of the taxes collected. Public office includesextent on length of service or overall earnings from
any elective or appointive office of the United States or itsservices performed for the company (regardless of
possessions, the District of Columbia, a state or its politicalwhether eligibility for the payments depended on
subdivisions, or a wholly owned instrumentality of any oflength of service).
these.
Public officials of state or local governments report their
Insurance agent, retired. Income paid by an insurance fees on Schedule C or C-EZ if they are paid solely on a fee
company to a retired self-employed insurance agent based basis and if their services are eligible for, but not covered
on a percentage of commissions received before retire- by, social security under a federal-state agreement.
ment is reported on Schedule C or C-EZ. Also, renewal
commissions and deferred commissions for sales made Real estate agent or direct seller. If you are a licensed
before retirement are generally reported on Schedule C or real estate agent or a direct seller, your earnings are
C-EZ. reported on Schedule C or C-EZ if both the following apply.
However, renewal commissions paid to the survivor of • Substantially all your pay for services as a real es-an insurance agent are not reported on Schedule C or tate agent or direct seller directly relates to yourC-EZ. sales or other output rather than to the number of
hours you work.Newspaper carrier or distributor. You are a direct seller
and your earnings are reported on Schedule C or C-EZ if • You perform the services under a written contract
all the following conditions apply. that says you will not be treated as an employee for
federal tax purposes.• You are in the business of delivering or distributing
newspapers or shopping news (including directly re-
lated services such as soliciting customers and col- Securities dealer. If you are a dealer in options or com-
lecting receipts). modities, your gains and losses from dealing or trading in
Page 26 Chapter 5 Business Income

Page 27 of 53 of Publication 334 9:31 - 20-DEC-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
section 1256 contracts (regulated futures contracts, for- charged to the customer. Do not enter these discounts on
eign currency contracts, nonequity options, dealer equity your books of account. Instead, use only the net amount as
options, and dealer securities futures contracts) or prop- the cost of the merchandise purchased. For more informa-
erty related to those contracts (such as stock used to tion, see Trade discounts in chapter 6.
hedge options) are reported on Schedule C or C-EZ. For
Payment placed in escrow. If the buyer of your propertymore information, see sections 1256 and 1402(i).
places part or all of the purchase price in escrow, you do
Securities trader. You are a trader in securities if you are not include any part of it in gross sales until you actually or
engaged in the business of buying and selling securities for constructively receive it. However, upon completion of the
your own account. As a trader in securities, your gain or terms of the contract and the escrow agreement, you will
loss from the disposition of securities is not reported on have taxable income, even if you do not accept the money
Schedule C or C-EZ. However, see Securities dealer , until the next year.
earlier, for an exception that applies to section 1256 con-
tracts. For more information about securities traders, see Sales returns and allowances. Credits you allow cus-
Publication 550, Investment Income and Expenses. tomers for returned merchandise and any other al-
lowances you make on sales are deductions from gross
sales in figuring net sales.
Accounting for Your Income Advance payments. Special rules dealing with an ac-
crual method of accounting for payments received in ad-Accounting for your income for income tax purposes differs vance are discussed in chapter 2 under Accrual Method.at times from accounting for financial purposes. This sec-
tion discusses some of the more common differences that Insurance proceeds. If you receive insurance or anothermay affect business transactions. type of reimbursement for a casualty or theft loss, you mustFigure your business income on the basis of a tax year subtract it from the loss when you figure your deduction.and according to your regular method of accounting (see You cannot deduct the reimbursed part of a casualty orchapter 2). If the sale of a product is an income-producing theft loss.factor in your business, you usually have to use inventories For information on casualty or theft losses, see Publica-to clearly show your income. Dealers in real estate are not tion 547, Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts.allowed to use inventories. For more information on inven-
tories, see chapter 2.
Income paid to a third party. All income you earn is
taxable to you. You cannot avoid tax by having the income
paid to a third party. 6.
Example. You rent out your property and the rental
agreement directs the lessee to pay the rent to your son. How To Figure
The amount paid to your son is gross income to you.
Cost of Goods SoldCash discounts. These are amounts the seller permits
you to deduct from the invoice price for prompt payment.
For income tax purposes, you can use either of the follow- Introductioning two methods to account for cash discounts.
If you make or buy goods to sell, you can deduct the cost of1. Deduct the cash discount from purchases (see Line goods sold from your gross receipts on Schedule C. How-36, Purchases Less Cost of Items Withdrawn for ever, to determine these costs, you must value your inven-Personal Use in chapter 6). tory at the beginning and end of each tax year.
This chapter applies to you if you are a manufacturer,2. Credit the cash discount to a discount income ac-
wholesaler, or retailer or if you are engaged in any busi-count.
ness that makes, buys, or sells goods to produce income.You must use the chosen method every year for all your This chapter does not apply to a personal service busi-purchase discounts. ness, such as the business of a doctor, lawyer, carpenter,If you use the second method, the credit balance in the or painter. However, if you work in a personal serviceaccount at the end of your tax year is business income. business and also sell or charge for the materials andUnder this method, you do not reduce the cost of goods supplies normally used in your business, this chapter ap-sold by the cash discounts you received. When valuing plies to you.your closing inventory, you cannot reduce the invoice price
If you must account for an inventory in your busi-of merchandise on hand at the close of the tax year by the
ness, you must generally use an accrual methodaverage or estimated discounts received on the merchan-
of accounting for your purchases and sales. Fordise. CAUTION
!
more information, see chapter 2.
Trade discounts. These are reductions from list or cata-
log prices and usually are not written into the invoice or
Chapter 6 How To Figure Cost of Goods Sold Page 27

Page 28 of 53 of Publication 334 9:31 - 20-DEC-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
value of $600. The closing inventory at the end of 2006Figuring Cost of Goods Sold properly included $400 of costs due to the acquisition of
the property, and in 2006, you properly deducted $50 ofon Schedule C Lines 35 administrative and other expenses attributable to the prop-
erty as business expenses. The charitable contribution
Through 42
allowed for 2007 is $400 ($600 − $200). The $200 is the
amount that would be ordinary income if you had sold theFigure your cost of goods sold by filling out lines 35 through
contributed inventory at fair market value on the date of the42 of Schedule C. These lines are reproduced below and
gift. The cost of goods sold you use in determining grossare explained in the discussion that follows.
income for 2007 must not include the $400. You remove
35 Inventory at beginning of year. If different from last that amount from opening inventory for 2007.year’s closing inventory, attach explanation ........
36 Purchases less cost of items withdrawn for personal Example 2. If, in Example 1, you acquired the contrib-u s e ................................... uted property in 2007 at a cost of $400, you would include
37 Cost of labor. Do not include any amounts paid to the $400 cost of the property in figuring the cost of goodsyourself ................................ sold for 2007 and deduct the $50 of administrative and
38 Materials and supplies ...................... other expenses attributable to the property for that year.
39 Other costs .............................. You would not be allowed any charitable contribution de-
duction for the contributed property.40 Add lines 35 through 39 .....................
41 Inventory at end of year .....................
Line 3642 Cost of goods sold.  Subtract line 41 from line 40.
Enter the result here and on page 1, line 4 ......... Purchases Less Cost of Items
Withdrawn for Personal UseLine 35
If you are a merchant, use the cost of all merchandise youInventory at Beginning of Year bought for sale. If you are a manufacturer or producer, this
includes the cost of all raw materials or parts purchased forIf you are a merchant, beginning inventory is the cost of
manufacture into a finished product.merchandise on hand at the beginning of the year that you
will sell to customers. If you are a manufacturer or pro- Trade discounts. The differences between the statedducer, it includes the total cost of raw materials, work in prices of articles and the actual prices you pay for them areprocess, finished goods, and materials and supplies used called trade discounts. You must use the prices you payin manufacturing the goods (see Inventories in chapter 2). (not the stated prices) in figuring your cost of purchases.Opening inventory usually will be identical to the closing Do not show the discount amount separately as an item ininventory of the year before. You must explain any differ- gross income.ence in a schedule attached to your return. An automobile dealer must record the cost of a car in
inventory reduced by any manufacturer’s rebate that rep-Donation of inventory. If you contribute inventory (prop- resents a trade discount.erty that you sell in the course of your business), the
amount you can claim as a contribution deduction is the Cash discounts. Cash discounts are amounts your sup-smaller of its fair market value on the day you contributed it pliers let you deduct from your purchase invoices foror its basis. The basis of donated inventory is any cost prompt payments. There are two methods of accountingincurred for the inventory in an earlier year that you would for cash discounts. You can either credit them to a sepa-otherwise include in your opening inventory for the year of rate discount account or deduct them from total purchasesthe contribution. You must remove the amount of your for the year. Whichever method you use, you must becontribution deduction from your opening inventory. It is consistent. If you want to change your method of figuringnot part of the cost of goods sold. inventory cost, you must file Form 3115, Application for
If the cost of donated inventory is not included in your Change in Accounting Method. For more information, see
opening inventory, the inventory’s basis is zero and you Change in Accounting Method in chapter 2.
cannot claim a charitable contribution deduction. Treat the If you credit cash discounts to a separate account, youinventory’s cost as you would ordinarily treat it under your must include this credit balance in your business income atmethod of accounting. For example, include the purchase the end of the tax year. If you use this method, do notprice of inventory bought and donated in the same year in reduce your cost of goods sold by the cash discounts.the cost of goods sold for that year.
A special rule applies to certain donations of food inven- Purchase returns and allowances. You must deduct all
tory. See Food Inventory  in Publication 526, Charitable returns and allowances from your total purchases during
Contributions. the year.
Example 1. You are a calendar year taxpayer who uses Merchandise withdrawn from sale. If you withdraw mer-
an accrual method of accounting. In 2007 you contributed chandise for your personal or family use, you must exclude
property from inventory to a church. It had a fair market this cost from the total amount of merchandise you bought
Page 28 Chapter 6 How To Figure Cost of Goods Sold

Page 29 of 53 of Publication 334 9:31 - 20-DEC-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
for sale. Do this by crediting the purchases or sales ac- Containers. Containers and packages that are an integral
count with the cost of merchandise you withdraw for per- part of the product manufactured are a part of your cost of
sonal use. You must also charge the amount to your goods sold. If they are not an integral part of the manufac-
drawing account. tured product, their costs are shipping or selling expenses.
A drawing account is a separate account you should
Freight-in. Freight-in, express-in, and cartage-in on rawkeep to record the business income you withdraw to pay
materials, supplies you use in production, and merchan-for personal and family expenses. As stated above, you
dise you purchase for sale are all part of cost of goods sold.also use it to record withdrawals of merchandise for per-
sonal or family use. This account is also known as a Overhead expenses. Overhead expenses include ex-“withdrawals account” or “personal account.” penses such as rent, heat, light, power, insurance, depre-
ciation, taxes, maintenance, labor, and supervision. The
Line 37 overhead expenses you have as direct and necessary
Cost of Labor expenses of the manufacturing operation are included in
your cost of goods sold.
Labor costs are usually an element of cost of goods sold
only in a manufacturing or mining business. Small mer-
Line 40chandisers (wholesalers, retailers, etc.) usually do not
Add Lines 35 through 39have labor costs that can properly be charged to cost of
goods sold. In a manufacturing business, labor costs prop- The total of lines 35 through 39 equals the cost of theerly allocable to the cost of goods sold include both the goods available for sale during the year.direct and indirect labor used in fabricating the raw material
into a finished, saleable product.
Line 41
Direct labor. Direct labor costs are the wages you pay to Inventory at End of Yearthose employees who spend all their time working directly
on the product being manufactured. They also include a Subtract the value of your closing inventory (including, aspart of the wages you pay to employees who work directly appropriate, the allocable parts of the cost of raw materialson the product part time if you can determine that part of and supplies, direct labor, and overhead expenses) fromtheir wages. line 40. Inventory at the end of the year is also known as
closing or ending inventory. Your ending inventory willIndirect labor. Indirect labor costs are the wages you pay usually become the beginning inventory of your next taxto employees who perform a general factory function that year.does not have any immediate or direct connection with
making the saleable product, but that is a necessary part of
the manufacturing process.
Line 42
Cost of Goods SoldOther labor. Other labor costs not properly chargeable to
the cost of goods sold can be deducted as selling or When you subtract your closing inventory (inventory at theadministrative expenses. Generally, the only kinds of labor end of the year) from the cost of goods available for sale,costs properly chargeable to your cost of goods sold are the remainder is your cost of goods sold during the taxthe direct or indirect labor costs and certain other costs year.treated as overhead expenses properly charged to the
manufacturing process, as discussed later under Line 39
Other Costs.
Line 38 7.Materials and Supplies
Materials and supplies, such as hardware and chemicals, Figuring Gross Profitused in manufacturing goods are charged to cost of goods
sold. Those that are not used in the manufacturing process
are treated as deferred charges. You deduct them as a
Introductionbusiness expense when you use them. Business ex-
penses are discussed in chapter 8. After you have figured the gross receipts from your busi-
ness (chapter 5) and the cost of goods sold (chapter 6),
Line 39 you are ready to figure your gross profit. You must deter-
mine gross profit before you can deduct any business
Other Costs
expenses. These expenses are discussed in chapter 8.
If you are filing Schedule C-EZ, your gross profit is yourExamples of other costs incurred in a manufacturing or
gross receipts plus certain other amounts, explained latermining process that you charge to your cost of goods sold
under Additions to Gross Profit.are as follows.
Chapter 7 Figuring Gross Profit Page 29

Page 30 of 53 of Publication 334 9:31 - 20-DEC-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Businesses that sell products. If you are filing Schedule Inventory at beginning of year. Compare this figure with
C, figure your gross profit by first figuring your net receipts. last year’s ending inventory. The two amounts should
Figure net receipts on Schedule C by subtracting any usually be the same.
returns and allowances (line 2) from gross receipts (line 1).
Purchases. If you take any inventory items for your per-Returns and allowances include cash or credit refunds you
sonal use (use them yourself, provide them to your family,make to customers, rebates, and other allowances off the
or give them as personal gifts, etc.) be sure to removeactual sales price.
them from the cost of goods sold. For details on how toNext, subtract the cost of goods sold (line 4) from net
adjust cost of goods sold, see Merchandise withdrawnreceipts (line 3). The result is the gross profit from your
from sale in chapter 6.business.
Inventory at end of year. Check to make sure your pro-Businesses that sell services. You do not have to figure cedures for taking inventory are adequate. These proce-the cost of goods sold if the sale of merchandise is not an dures should ensure all items have been included inincome-producing factor for your business. Your gross inventory and proper pricing techniques have been used.profit is the same as your net receipts (gross receipts
Use inventory forms and adding machine tapes as theminus any refunds, rebates, or other allowances). Most
only evidence for your inventory. Inventory forms are avail-professions and businesses that sell services rather than
able at office supply stores. These forms have columns forproducts can figure gross profit directly from net receipts in
recording the description, quantity, unit price, and value ofthis way.
each inventory item. Each page has space to record who
made the physical count, who priced the items, who madeIllustration. This illustration of the gross profit section of
the extensions, and who proofread the calculations. Thesethe income statement of a retail business shows how gross
forms will help satisfy you that the total inventory is accu-profit is figured.
rate. They will also provide you with a permanent record to
Income Statement support its validity.
Year Ended December 31, 2007 Inventories are discussed in chapter 2.
Gross receipts ............................... $400,000
Minus: Returns and allowances ................... 14,940
Net receipts ................................ $385,060 Testing GrossMinus: Cost of goods sold ....................... 288,140
Gross profit ................................ $96,920
Profit AccuracyThe cost of goods sold for this business is figured as
follows: If you are in a retail or wholesale business, you can check
the accuracy of your gross profit figure. First, divide grossInventory at beginning of year ................... $37,845
Plus: Purchases .................... $285,900 profit by net receipts. The resulting percentage measures
Minus: Items withdrawn for personal use .... 2,650 283,250 the average spread between the merchandise cost ofGoods available for sale ....................... $321,095
goods sold and the selling price.Minus: Inventory at end of year .................. 32,955
Cost of goods sold .......................... $288,140 Next, compare this percentage to your markup policy.
Little or no difference between these two percentages
shows that your gross profit figure is accurate. A large
difference between these percentages may show that you
Items To Check did not accurately figure sales, purchases, inventory, or
other items of cost. You should determine the reason for
Consider the following items before figuring your gross the difference.
profit. Example. Joe Able operates a retail business. On the
average, he marks up his merchandise so that he willGross receipts. At the end of each business day, make
realize a gross profit of 33
1/3% on its sales. The net receiptssure your records balance with your actual cash and credit
(gross receipts minus returns and allowances) shown onreceipts for the day. You may find it helpful to use cash
his income statement is $300,000. His cost of goods sold isregisters to keep track of receipts. You should also use a
$200,000. This results in a gross profit of $100,000proper invoicing system and keep a separate bank account
($300,000 − $200,000). To test the accuracy of this year’sfor your business.
results, Joe divides gross profit ($100,000) by net receipts
($300,000). The resulting 331/3% confirms his markup per-Sales tax collected. Check to make sure your records
centage of 331/3%.show the correct sales tax collected.
If you collect state and local sales taxes imposed on you
as the seller of goods or services from the buyer, you must
include the amount collected in gross receipts. Additions to Gross Profit
If you are required to collect state and local taxes im-
posed on the buyer and turn them over to state or local If your business has income from a source other than its
governments, you generally do not include these amounts regular business operations, enter the income on line 6 of
in income. Schedule C and add it to gross profit. The result is gross
Page 30 Chapter 7 Figuring Gross Profit

Page 31 of 53 of Publication 334 9:31 - 20-DEC-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
business income. If you use Schedule C-EZ, include the 1. Created or acquired in your business.
income on line 1 of the schedule. Some examples include 2. Closely related to your business when it becameincome from an interest-bearing checking account, income partly or totally worthless.from scrap sales, and amounts recovered from bad debts.
A debt is closely related to your business if your primary
motive for incurring the debt is a business reason.
Business bad debts are mainly the result of credit sales
to customers. They can also be the result of loans to
suppliers, clients, employees, or distributors. Goods and
8. services customers have not paid for are shown in your
books as either accounts receivable or notes receivable. If
you are unable to collect any part of these accounts or
Business Expenses notes receivable, the uncollectible part is a business bad
debt.
You can take a bad debt deduction for theseIntroduction accounts and notes receivable only if the amount
owed you was included in your gross incomeYou can deduct the costs of running your business. These
CAUTION
!
either for the year the deduction is claimed or for a priorcosts are known as business expenses. These are costs
year.you do not have to capitalize or include in the cost of goods
sold. Accrual method. If you use an accrual method of ac-To be deductible, a business expense must be both counting, you normally report income as you earn it. Youordinary and necessary. An ordinary expense is one that is can take a bad debt deduction for an uncollectible receiva-common and accepted in your field of business. A neces- ble if you have included the uncollectible amount in in-sary expense is one that is helpful and appropriate for your come.business. An expense does not have to be indispensable
to be considered necessary. Cash method. If you use the cash method of account-
ing, you normally report income when you receive pay-For more information about the general rules for deduct-
ment. You cannot take a bad debt deduction for amountsing business expenses, see chapter 1 in Publication 535,
owed to you that you have not received and cannot collectBusiness Expenses.
if you never included those amounts in income.If you have an expense that is partly for business
and partly personal, separate the personal part More information. For more information about businessfrom the business part.CAUTION
!
bad debts, see chapter 10 in Publication 535.
Nonbusiness bad debts. All other bad debts are non-Useful Items business bad debts and are deductible as short-term capi-You may want to see: tal losses on Schedule D (Form 1040). For more
information on nonbusiness bad debts, see PublicationPublication 550, Investment Income and Expenses.
❏ 463 Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Expenses
Car and Truck Expenses❏ 535 Business Expenses
❏ 946 How To Depreciate Property If you use your car or truck in your business, you may be
able to deduct the costs of operating and maintaining yourSee chapter 12 for information about getting publica-
vehicle. You also may be able to deduct other costs of localtions and forms.
transportation and traveling away from home overnight on
business.
You may be entitled to a tax credit for an alterna-Bad Debts
tive motor vehicle  (Form 8910) you place in
service during the year. The vehicle must meetIf someone owes you money you cannot collect, you have
TIP
certain requirements and you do not have to use it in youra bad debt. There are two kinds of bad debts, business bad
business to qualify for the credit. Alternative motor vehicledebts and nonbusiness bad debts.
includes qualified fuel cell motor vehicles, advanced leanA business bad debt is generally one that comes from
burn technology motor vehicles, qualified hybrid motoroperating your trade or business. You may be able to
vehicles, and qualified alternative fuel motor vehicles. deduct business bad debts as an expense on your busi-
ness tax return.
Local transportation expenses. Local transportation ex-
Business bad debt. A business bad debt is a loss from penses include the ordinary and necessary costs of all the
the worthlessness of a debt that was either of the following. following.
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 31

Page 32 of 53 of Publication 334 9:31 - 20-DEC-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Getting from one workplace to another in the course purposes. For 2007, the standard mileage rate is 48.5
of your business or profession when you are travel- cents a mile for all business miles.
ing within the city or general area that is your tax If you choose to use the standard mileage rate forhome. Tax home is defined later. a year, you cannot deduct your actual expenses
• Visiting clients or customers. for that year except for business-related parkingCAUTION
!
fees and tolls.• Going to a business meeting away from your regular
workplace. Choosing the standard mileage rate. If you want to
use the standard mileage rate for a car or truck you own,• Getting from your home to a temporary workplace
you must choose to use it in the first year the car iswhen you have one or more regular places of work.
available for use in your business. In later years, you canThese temporary workplaces can be either within the
choose to use either the standard mileage rate or actualarea of your tax home or outside that area.
expenses.
Local business transportation does not include expenses If you use the standard mileage rate for a car you lease,
you have while traveling away from home overnight. Those you must choose to use it for the entire lease period
expenses are deductible as travel expenses and are dis- (including renewals).
cussed later under Travel, Meals, and Entertainment.
Standard mileage rate not allowed. You cannot useHowever, if you use your car while traveling away from
the standard mileage rate if you:home overnight, use the rules in this section to figure your
car expense deduction. 1. Use the car for hire (such as a taxi),
Generally, your tax home is your regular place of busi- 2. Operate five or more cars at the same time,ness, regardless of where you maintain your family home.
It includes the entire city or general area in which your 3. Claimed a depreciation deduction using any method
business or work is located. other than straight line, for example, ACRS or
MACRS,
Example. You operate a printing business out of rented 4. Claimed a section 179 deduction on the car,office space. You use your van to deliver completed jobs to
your customers. You can deduct the cost of round-trip 5. Claimed the special depreciation allowance on the
transportation between your customers and your print car,
shop. 6. Claimed actual car expenses for a car you leased, or
You cannot deduct the costs of driving your car or 7. Are a rural mail carrier who received a qualified reim-truck between your home and your main or regu- bursement.lar workplace. These costs are personal commut-CAUTION
!
ing expenses. Parking fees and tolls. In addition to using the stan-
dard mileage rate, you can deduct any business-relatedOffice in the home. Your workplace can be your home
parking fees and tolls. (Parking fees you pay to park yourif you have an office in your home that qualifies as your
car at your place of work are nondeductible commutingprincipal place of business. For more information, see
expenses.)Business Use of Your Home, later.
Actual expenses. If you do not choose to use the stan-Example. You are a graphics designer. You operate dard mileage rate, you may be able to deduct your actualyour business out of your home. Your home qualifies as car or truck expenses.your principal place of business. You occasionally have to
drive to your clients to deliver your completed work. You If you qualify to use both methods, figure your
can deduct the cost of the round-trip transportation be- deduction both ways to see which gives you a
tween your home and your clients. larger deduction.
TIP
Actual car expenses include the costs of the following
Methods for Deducting items.
Car and Truck Expenses Depreciation Lease payments Registration
Garage rent Licenses RepairsFor local transportation or overnight travel by car or truck, Gas Oil Tires
you generally can use one of the following methods to Insurance Parking fees Tolls
figure your expenses. If you use your vehicle for both business and personal
• Standard mileage rate. purposes, you must divide your expenses between busi-
ness and personal use. You can divide your expenses• Actual expenses. based on the miles driven for each purpose.
Standard mileage rate. You may be able to use the Example. You are the sole proprietor of a flower shop.
standard mileage rate to figure the deductible costs of You drove your van 20,000 miles during the year. 16,000
operating your car, van, pickup, or panel truck for business miles were for delivering flowers to customers and 4,000
Page 32 Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 33 of 53 of Publication 334 9:31 - 20-DEC-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
miles were for personal use. You can claim only 80% Depreciation method. The method for depreciating most
business and investment property placed in service after(16,000 ÷ 20,000) of the cost of operating your van as a
1986 is called the Modified Accelerated Cost Recoverybusiness expense.
System (MACRS). MACRS is discussed in detail in Publi-
cation 946.More information. For more information about the rules
for claiming car and truck expenses, see Publication 463.
Section 179 deduction. You can elect to deduct a limited
amount of the cost of certain depreciable property in theReimbursing Your Employees year you place the property in service. This deduction is
for Expenses known as the “section 179 deduction.” The maximum
amount you can elect to deduct during 2007 is $125,000
You generally can deduct the amount you reimburse your ($160,000 for qualified enterprise zone, and renewal com-
employees for car and truck expenses. The reimburse- munity property). This limit is reduced by the amount by
ment you deduct and the manner in which you deduct it which the cost of the property placed in service during the
depend in part on whether you reimburse the expenses tax year exceeds $500,000. For qualified section 179 Gulf
under an accountable plan or a nonaccountable plan. For Opportunity Zone property, the maximum deduction is
details, see chapter 11 in Publication 535. That chapter higher than the deduction for most section 179 property.
explains accountable and nonaccountable plans and tells The total amount of depreciation (including the section 179
you whether to report the reimbursement on your em- deduction) you can take for a passenger automobile you
ployee’s Form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement. use in your business and first place in service in 2007 is
$3,060. Special rules apply to electric vehicles and trucks
and vans. For more information, see Publication 946. It
explains what property qualifies for the deduction, what
Depreciation limits apply to the deduction, and when and how to recap-
ture the deduction.If property you acquire to use in your business is expected
to last more than one year, you generally cannot deduct Your section 179 election for the cost of any sport
the entire cost as a business expense in the year you utility vehicle (SUV) and certain other vehicles is
acquire it. You must spread the cost over more than one limited to $25,000. For more information, see the
CAUTION
!
tax year and deduct part of it each year on Schedule C. Instructions for Form 4562 or Publication 946.
This method of deducting the cost of business property is
called depreciation. Listed property. You must follow special rules and re-
The discussion here is brief. You will find more informa- cordkeeping requirements when depreciating listed prop-
erty. Listed property is any of the following.tion about depreciation in Publication 946.
• Most passenger automobiles.What property can be depreciated? You can depreciate
• Most other property used for transportation.property if it meets all the following requirements.
• Any property of a type generally used for entertain-• It must be property you own.
ment, recreation, or amusement.• It must be used in business or held to produce in-
• Certain computers and related peripheral equipment.come. You never can depreciate inventory (ex-
plained in chapter 2) because it is not held for use in • Any cellular telephone (or similar telecommunica-your business. tions equipment).
• It must have a useful life that extends substantially
For more information about listed property, see Publica-beyond the year it is placed in service.
tion 946.• It must have a determinable useful life, which means
that it must be something that wears out, decays, Form 4562. Use Form 4562, Depreciation and Amortiza-
gets used up, becomes obsolete, or loses its value tion, if you are claiming any of the following.
from natural causes. You never can depreciate the • Depreciation on property placed in service during thecost of land because land does not wear out, be- current tax year.come obsolete, or get used up.
• A section 179 deduction.• It must not be excepted property. This includes prop-
erty placed in service and disposed of in the same • Depreciation on any listed property (regardless of
year. when it was placed in service).
Repairs.  You cannot depreciate repairs and replace- If you have to use Form 4562, you must file
ments that do not increase the value of your property, Schedule C. You cannot use Schedule C-EZ.
make it more useful, or lengthen its useful life. You can CAUTION
!
deduct these amounts on line 21 of Schedule C or line 2 of
Schedule C-EZ.
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 33

Page 34 of 53 of Publication 334 9:31 - 20-DEC-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Adoption assistance.Employees’ Pay
• Cafeteria plans.
You can generally deduct on Schedule C the pay you give • Dependent care assistance.your employees for the services they perform for your
• Educational assistance.business. The pay may be in cash, property, or services.
To be deductible, your employees’ pay must be an • Group-term life insurance coverage.ordinary and necessary expense and you must pay or
• Welfare benefit funds.incur it in the tax year. In addition, the pay must meet both
the following tests.
You can generally deduct the cost of fringe benefits you• The pay must be reasonable. provide on your Schedule C in whatever category the cost
• The pay must be for services performed. falls. For example, if you allow an employee to use a car or
other property you lease, deduct the cost of the lease as aChapter 2 in Publication 535 explains and defines these rent or lease expense. If you own the property, includerequirements.
your deduction for its cost or other basis as a section 179
You cannot deduct your own salary or any personal deduction or a depreciation deduction.
withdrawals you make from your business. As a sole pro-
You may be able to exclude all or part of the fringeprietor, you are not an employee of the business.
benefits you provide from your employees’
If you had employees during the year, you must wages. For more information about fringe bene-
TIP
use Schedule C. You cannot use Schedule C-EZ. fits and the exclusion of benefits, see Publication 15-B,
CAUTION
!
Employer’s Tax Guide to Fringe Benefits.
Kinds of pay. Some of the ways you may provide pay to
Insuranceyour employees are listed below. For an explanation of
each of these items, see chapter 2 in Publication 535.
You can generally deduct premiums you pay for the follow-• Awards. ing kinds of insurance related to your business. 
• Bonuses. 1. Fire, theft, flood, or similar insurance.
• Education expenses. 2. Credit insurance that covers losses from business
• Fringe benefits (discussed later). bad debts.
• Loans or advances you do not expect the employee 3. Group hospitalization and medical insurance for em-
to repay if they are for personal services actually ployees, including long-term care insurance.
performed.
4. Liability insurance.
• Property you transfer to an employee as payment for
5. Malpractice insurance that covers your personal lia-services.
bility for professional negligence resulting in injury or• Reimbursements for employee business expenses. damage to patients or clients.
• Sick pay. 6. Workers’ compensation insurance set by state law
that covers any claims for bodily injuries or• Vacation pay.
job-related diseases suffered by employees in your
business, regardless of fault.Fringe benefits. A fringe benefit is a form of pay for the
performance of services. The following are examples of 7. Contributions to a state unemployment insurancefringe benefits. fund are deductible as taxes if they are considered
• Benefits under qualified employee benefit programs. taxes under state law.
• Meals and lodging. 8. Overhead insurance that pays for business overhead
expenses you have during long periods of disability• The use of a car. caused by your injury or sickness.
• Flights on airplanes. 9. Car and other vehicle insurance that covers vehicles
• Discounts on property or services. used in your business for liability, damages, and
other losses. If you operate a vehicle partly for per-• Memberships in country clubs or other social clubs.
sonal use, deduct only the part of the insurance pre-• Tickets to entertainment or sporting events. mium that applies to the business use of the vehicle.
If you use the standard mileage rate to figure yourEmployee benefit programs include the following. car expenses, you cannot deduct any car insurance
• Accident and health plans. premiums.
Page 34 Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 35 of 53 of Publication 334 9:31 - 20-DEC-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
10. Life insurance covering your employees if you are • You have more than one source of income subject to
not directly or indirectly the beneficiary under the self-employment tax.
contract. • You file Form 2555 or Form 2555-EZ (relating to
11. Business interruption insurance that pays for lost foreign earned income).
profits if your business is shut down due to a fire or • You are using amounts paid for qualified long-termother cause. care insurance to figure the deduction.
Nondeductible premiums. You cannot deduct premiums
Prepayment. You cannot deduct expenses in advance,on the following kinds of insurance.
even if you pay them in advance. This rule applies to any
1. Self-insurance reserve funds. You cannot deduct expense paid far enough in advance to, in effect, create an
amounts credited to a reserve set up for asset with a useful life extending substantially beyond the
self-insurance. This applies even if you cannot get end of the current tax year.
business insurance coverage for certain business
risks. However, your actual losses may be deducti- Example. In 2007, you signed a 3-year insurance con-
ble. For more information, see Publication 547, Cas- tract. Even though you paid the premiums for 2007, 2008,
ualties, Disasters, and Thefts. and 2009 when you signed the contract, you can only
deduct the premium for 2007 on your 2007 tax return. You2. Loss of earnings. You cannot deduct premiums for a
can deduct in 2008 and 2009 the premium allocable topolicy that pays for your lost earnings due to sick-
those years.ness or disability. However, see item (8) in the previ-
ous list.
More information. For more information about deducting3. Certain life insurance and annuities. insurance, see chapter 6 in Publication 535.
a. For contracts issued before June 9, 1997, you
cannot deduct the premiums on a life insurance
policy covering you, an employee, or any person Interest
with a financial interest in your business if you are
directly or indirectly a beneficiary of the policy. You can generally deduct as a business expense all inter-
You are included among possible beneficiaries of est you pay or accrue during the tax year on debts related
the policy if the policy owner is obligated to repay to your business. Interest relates to your business if you
a loan from you using the proceeds of the policy. use the proceeds of the loan for a business expense. It
A person has a financial interest in your business does not matter what type of property secures the loan.if the person is an owner or part owner of the You can deduct interest on a debt only if you meet all of thebusiness or has lent money to the business. following requirements.
b. For contracts issued after June 8, 1997, you gen-
• You are legally liable for that debt.erally cannot deduct the premiums on any life
• Both you and the lender intend that the debt beinsurance policy, endowment contract, or annuity
repaid.contract if you are directly or indirectly a benefi-
ciary. The disallowance applies without regard to • You and the lender have a true debtor-creditor rela-whom the policy covers. tionship.
4. Insurance to secure a loan. If you take out a policy You cannot deduct on Schedule C or C-EZ the intereston your life or on the life of another person with a you paid on personal loans. If a loan is part business andfinancial interest in your business to get or protect a part personal, you must divide the interest between thebusiness loan, you cannot deduct the premiums as a personal part and the business part.business expense. Nor can you deduct the premiums
as interest on business loans or as an expense of Example. In 2007, you paid $600 interest on a car loan.financing loans. In the event of death, the proceeds During 2007, you used the car 60% for business and 40%of the policy are not taxed as income even if they are for personal purposes. You are claiming actual expensesused to liquidate the debt. on the car. You can only deduct $360 (60% × $600) for
2007 on Schedule C or C-EZ. The remaining interest ofSelf-employed health insurance deduction. You may $240 is a nondeductible personal expense.be able to deduct the amount you paid for medical and
dental insurance and qualified long-term care insurance More information. For more information about deductingfor you and your family. interest, see chapter 4 in Publication 535. That chapter
explains the following items.How to figure the deduction. Generally, you can use
the worksheet in the Form 1040 instructions to figure your • Interest you can deduct.deduction. However, if any of the following apply, you must
• Interest you cannot deduct.use the worksheet in chapter 6 of Publication 535.
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 35

Page 36 of 53 of Publication 334 9:31 - 20-DEC-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• How to allocate interest between personal and busi- (including a 401(k) plan), SIMPLE plan, or simplified em-
ployee pension.ness use.
Under certain plans, employees can have you contrib-• When to deduct interest. ute limited amounts of their before-tax pay to a plan. These
amounts (and earnings on them) are generally tax free• The rules for a below-market interest rate loan. (This
until your employees receive distributions from the plan.is generally a loan on which no interest is charged or
For more information on retirement plans for small busi-on which interest is charged at a rate below the
ness, see Publication 560, Retirement Plans for Smallapplicable federal rate.)
Business (SEP, SIMPLE, and Qualified Plans).
Publication 590, Individual Retirement Arrange-
ments (IRAs), discusses other tax favored waysLegal and Professional Fees to save for retirement.
TIP
Legal and professional fees, such as fees charged by
accountants, that are ordinary and necessary expenses
directly related to operating your business are deductible Rent Expense
on Schedule C or C-EZ. However, you usually cannot
deduct legal fees you pay to acquire business assets. Add Rent is any amount you pay for the use of property you do
them to the basis of the property. not own. In general, you can deduct rent as a business
expense only if the rent is for property you use in yourIf the fees include payments for work of a personal
business. If you have or will receive equity in or title to thenature (such as making a will), you can take a business
property, you cannot deduct the rent.deduction only for the part of the fee related to your
business. The personal part of legal fees for producing or Unreasonable rent. You cannot take a rental deductioncollecting taxable income, doing or keeping your job, or for for unreasonable rents. Ordinarily, the issue of reasona-tax advice may be deductible on Schedule A (Form 1040) if bleness arises only if you and the lessor are related. Rentyou itemize deductions. For more information, see Publi- paid to a related person is reasonable if it is the samecation 529, Miscellaneous Deductions. amount you would pay to a stranger for use of the same
property. Rent is not unreasonable just because it is fig-Tax preparation fees. You can deduct on Schedule C
ured as a percentage of gross receipts.or C-EZ the cost of preparing that part of your tax return
Related persons include members of your immediaterelating to your business as a sole proprietor or statutory
family, including only brothers and sisters (either whole oremployee. You can deduct the remaining cost on Schedule
half), your spouse, ancestors, and lineal descendants. ForA (Form 1040) if you itemize your deductions.
a list of the other related persons, see Publication 538,You can also deduct on Schedule C or C-EZ the amount Accounting Periods and Methods.you pay or incur in resolving asserted tax deficiencies for
your business as a sole proprietor or statutory employee. Rent on your home. If you rent your home and use part of
it as your place of business, you may be able to deduct the
rent you pay for that part. You must meet the requirements
for business use of your home. For more information, see
Pension Plans Business Use of Your Home, later.
You can set up and maintain the following small business Rent paid in advance. Generally, rent paid in your busi-
retirement plans for yourself and your employees. ness is deductible in the year paid or accrued. If you pay
rent in advance, you can deduct only the amount that• SEP (Simplified Employee Pension) plans.
applies to your use of the rented property during the tax
• SIMPLE (Savings Incentive Match Plan for Employ- year. You can deduct the rest of your payment only over
ees) plans. the period to which it applies.
• Qualified plans (including Keogh or H.R. 10 plans). More information. For more information about rent, see
chapter 3 in Publication 535.SEP, SIMPLE, and qualified plans offer you and your
employees a tax favored way to save for retirement. You
can deduct contributions you make to the plan for your Taxesemployees on line 19 of Schedule C. If you are a sole
proprietor, you can deduct contributions you make to the You can deduct on Schedule C or C-EZ various federal,plan for yourself on line 28 of Form 1040. You can also state, local, and foreign taxes directly attributable to yourdeduct trustees’ fees if contributions to the plan do not business.cover them. Earnings on the contributions are generally tax
free until you or your employees receive distributions from Income taxes. You can deduct on Schedule C or C-EZ a
the plan. You may also be able to claim a tax credit of 50% state tax on gross income (as distinguished from net in-
of the first $1,000 of qualified startup costs if you begin a come) directly attributable to your business. You can de-
new qualified defined benefit or defined contribution plan duct other state and local income taxes on Schedule A
Page 36 Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 37 of 53 of Publication 334 9:31 - 20-DEC-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
(Form 1040) if you itemize your deductions. Do not deduct Do not deduct state and local sales taxes im-
posed on the buyer that you must collect and payfederal income tax.
over to the state or local government. Do notCAUTION
!
include these taxes in gross receipts or sales.Employment taxes. You can deduct the social security,
Medicare, and federal unemployment (FUTA) taxes you
Excise taxes. You can deduct on Schedule C or C-EZ allpaid out of your own funds as an employer. Employment
excise taxes that are ordinary and necessary expenses oftaxes are discussed briefly in chapter 1. You can also
carrying on your business. Excise taxes are discusseddeduct payments you made as an employer to a state
briefly in chapter 1.unemployment compensation fund or to a state disability
benefit fund. Deduct these payments as taxes. Fuel taxes. Taxes on gasoline, diesel fuel, and other
motor fuels you use in your business are usually includedSelf-employment tax. You can deduct one-half of your as part of the cost of the fuel. Do not deduct these taxes asself-employment tax on line 27 of Form 1040. a separate item.Self-employment tax is discussed in chapters 1 and 10. You may be entitled to a credit or refund for federal
excise tax you paid on fuels used for certain purposes. ForPersonal property tax. You can deduct on Schedule C or more information, see Publication 510, Excise Taxes.C-EZ any tax imposed by a state or local government on
personal property used in your business.
You can also deduct registration fees for the right to use Travel, Meals,property within a state or local area.
and EntertainmentExample. May and Julius Winter drove their car 7,000
business miles out of a total of 10,000 miles. They had to This section briefly explains the kinds of travel and enter-
pay $25 for their annual state license tags and $20 for their tainment expenses you can deduct on Schedule C or
city registration sticker. They also paid $235 in city per- C-EZ.
sonal property tax on the car, for a total of $280. They are
claiming their actual car expenses. Because they used the Travel expenses. These are the ordinary and necessary
car 70% for business, they can deduct 70% of the $280, or expenses of traveling away from home for your business.
$196, as a business expense. You are traveling away from home if both the following
conditions are met.
Real estate taxes. You can deduct on Schedule C or
1. Your duties require you to be away from the generalC-EZ the real estate taxes you pay on your business
area of your tax home (defined later) substantiallyproperty. Deductible real estate taxes are any state, local,
longer than an ordinary day’s work.or foreign taxes on real estate levied for the general public
welfare. The taxing authority must base the taxes on the 2. You need to get sleep or rest to meet the demands
assessed value of the real estate and charge them uni- of your work while away from home.
formly against all property under its jurisdiction. Generally, your tax home is your regular place of busi-For more information about real estate taxes, see chap- ness, regardless of where you maintain your family home.ter 5 in Publication 535. That chapter explains special rules It includes the entire city or general area in which yourfor deducting the following items. business is located. See Publication 463 for more informa-
tion.• Taxes for local benefits, such as those for sidewalks,
The following is a brief discussion of the expenses youstreets, water mains, and sewer lines.
can deduct.• Real estate taxes when you buy or sell property
Transportation. You can deduct the cost of travel byduring the year.
airplane, train, bus, or car between your home and your• Real estate taxes if you use an accrual method of business destination.accounting and choose to accrue real estate tax
Taxi, commuter bus, and limousine. You can deductrelated to a definite period ratably over that period.
fares for these and other types of transportation between
the airport or station and your hotel, or between the hotel
Sales tax. Treat any sales tax you pay on a service or on and your work location away from home.
the purchase or use of property as part of the cost of the
Baggage and shipping. You can deduct the cost ofservice or property. If the service or the cost or use of the
sending baggage and sample or display material betweenproperty is a deductible business expense, you can deduct
your regular and temporary work locations.the tax as part of that service or cost. If the property is
merchandise bought for resale, the sales tax is part of the Car or truck. You can deduct the costs of operating and
cost of the merchandise. If the property is depreciable, add maintaining your vehicle when traveling away from home
the sales tax to the basis for depreciation. For information on business. You can deduct actual expenses or the stan-
on the basis of property, see Publication 551, Basis of dard mileage rate (discussed earlier under Car and Truck
Assets. Expenses), as well as business-related tolls and parking. If
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 37

Page 38 of 53 of Publication 334 9:31 - 20-DEC-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 8-1. When Are Entertainment Expenses Deductible?
(Note. The following is a summary of the rules for deducting entertainment expenses. For more details
about these rules, see Publication 463.) 
General rule You can deduct ordinary and necessary expenses to entertain a client, customer, or employee
if the expenses meet the directly-related test or the associated test.
Definitions • Entertainment includes any activity generally considered to provide entertainment,
amusement, or recreation, and includes meals provided to a customer or client.
• An ordinary expense is one that is common and accepted in your field of business,
trade, or profession.
• A necessary expense is one that is helpful and appropriate, although not necessarily
required, for your business.
Tests to be met Directly-related test
• Entertainment took place in a clear business setting, or
• Main purpose of entertainment was the active conduct of business, and
You did engage in business with the person during the entertainment period, and
You had more than a general expectation of getting income or some other specific
business benefit.
Associated test
• Entertainment is associated with your trade or business, and
• Entertainment directly precedes or follows a substantial business discussion.
Other rules • You cannot deduct the cost of your meal as an entertainment expense if you are claiming
the meal as a travel expense.
• You cannot deduct expenses that are lavish or extravagant under the circumstances.
• You generally can deduct only 50% of your unreimbursed entertainment expenses.
you rent a car while away from home on business, you can • Providing meals, a hotel suite, or a car to business
customers or their families.deduct only the business-use portion of the expenses.
To be deductible, the expenses must meet the rules listedMeals and lodging. You can deduct the cost of meals
in Table 8-1. For details about these rules, see Publicationand lodging if your business trip is overnight or long
463.enough that you need to stop for sleep or rest to properly
perform your duties. In most cases, you can deduct only Reimbursing your employees for expenses. You gen-50% of your meal expenses. erally can deduct the amount you reimburse your employ-
Cleaning. You can deduct the costs of dry cleaning and ees for travel and entertainment expenses. The
reimbursement you deduct and the manner in which youlaundry while on your business trip.
deduct it depend in part on whether you reimburse theTelephone. You can deduct the cost of business calls expenses under an accountable plan or a nonaccountablewhile on your business trip, including business communi- plan. For details, see chapter 11 in Publication 535. Thatcation by fax machine or other communication devices. chapter explains accountable and nonaccountable plans
and tells you whether to report the reimbursement on yourTips. You can deduct the tips you pay for any expense
employee’s Form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement.in this list.
More information. For more information about travel
expenses, see Publication 463.
Business Use
Entertainment expenses. You may be able to deduct of Your Homebusiness-related entertainment expenses for entertaining
a client, customer, or employee. In most cases, you can To deduct expenses related to the part of your home used
deduct only 50% of these expenses. for business, you must meet specific requirements. Even
The following are examples of entertainment expenses. then, your deduction may be limited.
• Entertaining guests at nightclubs, athletic clubs, the- To qualify to claim expenses for business use of your
aters, or sporting events. home, you must meet the following tests.
Page 38 Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 39 of 53 of Publication 334 9:31 - 20-DEC-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1. Your use of the business part of your home must be: • You use it exclusively and regularly for administra-
tive or management activities of your business.
a. Exclusive (however, see Exceptions to exclusive
• You have no other fixed location where you conductuse, later),
substantial administrative or management activities
b. Regular, of your business.
c. For your business, and
Alternatively, if you use your home exclusively and regu-
larly for your business, but your home office does not2. The business part of your home must be one of the
qualify as your principal place of business based on thefollowing:
previous rules, you determine your principal place of busi-
a. Your principal place of business (defined later), ness based on the following factors.
b. A place where you meet or deal with patients, • The relative importance of the activities performed at
clients, or customers in the normal course of your each location.
business, or • If the relative importance factor does not determine
c. A separate structure (not attached to your home) your principal place of business, you can also con-
you use in connection with your business. sider the time spent at each location.
If, after considering your business locations, your home
Exclusive use. To qualify under the exclusive use test, cannot be identified as your principal place of business,
you must use a specific area of your home only for your you cannot deduct home office expenses. However, for
trade or business. The area used for business can be a other ways to qualify to deduct home office expenses, see
room or other separately identifiable space. The space Publication 587.
does not need to be marked off by a permanent partition. Deduction limit. If your gross income from the businessYou do not meet the requirements of the exclusive use use of your home equals or exceeds your total businesstest if you use the area in question both for business and expenses (including depreciation), you can deduct all yourfor personal purposes. business expenses related to the use of your home. If your
gross income from the business use is less than your totalExample. You are an attorney and use a den in your business expenses, your deduction for certain expenseshome to write legal briefs and prepare clients’ tax returns. for the business use of your home is limited.Your family also uses the den for recreation. The den is not Your deduction of otherwise nondeductible expenses,used exclusively in your profession, so you cannot claim a such as insurance, utilities, and depreciation (with depreci-business deduction for its use. ation taken last), allocable to the business is limited to the
Exceptions to exclusive use. You do not have to meet gross income from the business use of your home minus
the exclusive use test if you use part of your home in either the sum of the following.
of the following ways.
1. The business part of expenses you could deduct
1. For the storage of inventory or product samples. even if you did not use your home for business (such
as mortgage interest, real estate taxes, and casualty2. As a daycare facility. and theft losses that are allowable as itemized de-
For an explanation of these exceptions, see Publication ductions on Schedule A (Form 1040)).
587, Business Use of Your Home (Including Use by Day- 2. The business expenses that relate to the businesscare Providers). activity in the home (for example, business phone,
supplies, and depreciation on equipment), but not toRegular use. To qualify under the regular use test, you the use of the home itself.must use a specific area of your home for business on a
continuing basis. You do not meet the test if your business Do not include in (2) above your deduction for one-half of
use of the area is only occasional or incidental, even if you your self-employment tax.
do not use that area for any other purpose. Use Form 8829, Expenses for Business Use of Your
Home, to figure your deduction. 
Principal place of business. You can have more than More information. For more information on deductingone business location, including your home, for a single expenses for the business use of your home, see Publica-trade or business. To qualify to deduct the expenses for tion 587.the business use of your home under the principal place of
business test, your home must be your principal place of
business for that business. To determine your principal
place of business, you must consider all the facts and
circumstances.
Your home office will qualify as your principal place of
business for deducting expenses for its use if you meet the
following requirements.
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 39

Page 40 of 53 of Publication 334 9:31 - 20-DEC-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Other Expenses 9.
You Can Deduct
Figuring Net ProfitYou may also be able to deduct the following expenses.
See Publication 535 to find out whether you can deduct or Loss
them.
• Advertising.
Introduction• Bank fees.
After figuring your business income and expenses, you are• Donations to business organizations. ready to figure the net profit or net loss from your business.
You do this by subtracting business expenses from busi-• Education expenses.
ness income. If your expenses are less than your income,• Energy efficient commercial buildings deduction ex- the difference is net profit and becomes part of your in-
penses. come on page 1 of Form 1040. If your expenses are more
than your income, the difference is a net loss. You usually• Environmental cleanup costs.
can deduct it from gross income on page 1 of Form 1040.• Impairment-related expenses. But in some situations your loss is limited. This chapter
briefly explains two of those situations. Other situations• Interview expense allowances.
that may limit your loss are explained in the Instructions for• Licenses and regulatory fees. Schedule C, line G and line 32.
• Moving machinery. If you have more than one business, you must
figure your net profit or loss for each business on• Outplacement services.
a separate Schedule C.CAUTION
!
• Penalties and fines you pay for late performance or
nonperformance of a contract.
• Repairs that keep your property in a normal efficient Net Operating Losses (NOLs)operating condition.
• Repayments of income. If your deductions for the year are more than your income
for the year (line 41 of your Form 1040 is a negative• Subscriptions to trade or professional publications. number), you may have a net operating loss (NOL). You
• Supplies and materials. can use an NOL by deducting it from your income in
another year or years.• Utilities. Examples of typical losses that may produce an NOL
include, but are not limited to, losses incurred from the
following.
• Your trade or business.Expenses You Cannot Deduct
• Your work as an employee (unreimbursed employeeYou usually cannot deduct the following as business ex- business expenses).penses. For more information, see Publication 535.
• A casualty or theft.
• Bribes and kickbacks. • Moving expenses.
• Charitable contributions. • Rental property.
• Demolition expenses or losses.
A loss from operating a business is the most common• Dues to business, social, athletic, luncheon, sport- reason for an NOL.ing, airline, and hotel clubs. For details about NOLs, see Publication 536, Net Oper-
ating Losses (NOLs) for Individuals, Estates, and Trusts. It• Lobbying expenses.
explains how to figure an NOL, when to use it, how to claim• Penalties and fines you pay to a governmental an NOL deduction, and how to figure an NOL carryover.agency or instrumentality because you broke the
law.
• Political contributions. Not-for-Profit Activities
• Repairs that add to the value of your property or If you do not carry on your business to make a profit, theresignificantly increase its life. is a limit on the deductions you can take. You cannot use a
Page 40 Chapter 9 Figuring Net Profit or Loss

Page 41 of 53 of Publication 334 9:31 - 20-DEC-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
loss from the activity to offset other income. Activities you Rico, Guam, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana
do as a hobby, or mainly for sport or recreation, come Islands, or American Samoa, however, are subject to the
under this limit. tax. For SE tax purposes, they are not nonresident aliens.
For details about not-for-profit activities, see chapter 1 For more information on aliens, see Publication 519, U.S.
in Publication 535, Business Expenses. That chapter ex- Tax Guide for Aliens.
plains how to determine whether your activity is carried on
Church employee.  If you work for a church or a qualifiedto make a profit and how to figure the amount of loss you
church-controlled organization (other than as a minister orcan deduct.
member of a religious order) that elected an exemption
from social security and Medicare taxes, you are subject to
SE tax if you receive $108.28 or more in wages from the
church or organization. For more information, see Publica-
tion 517, Social Security and Other Information for Mem-
10. bers of the Clergy and Religious Workers.
Fishing crew member. If you are a member of the crew
Self-Employment (SE) on a boat that catches fish or other water life, your earnings
are subject to SE tax if all the following conditions apply.
Tax
1. You do not get any pay for the work except your
share of the catch or a share of the proceeds fromThe SE tax rules apply no matter how old you are the sale of the catch, unless the pay meets all theand even if you are already receiving social se- following conditions.curity and Medicare benefits.CAUTION
!
a. The pay is not more than $100 per trip.
b. The pay is received only if there is a minimum
catch.Who Must Pay SE Tax?
c. The pay is solely for additional duties (such as Generally, you must pay SE tax and file Schedule SE mate, engineer, or cook) for which additional cash(Form 1040) if your net earnings from self-employment pay is traditional in the fishing industry.were $400 or more. Use Schedule SE to figure net earn-
ings from self-employment. 2. You get a share of the catch or a share of the pro-
ceeds from the sale of the catch.Sole proprietor or independent contractor. If you are
self-employed as a sole proprietor or independent contrac- 3. Your share depends on the amount of the catch.
tor, you generally use Schedule C or C-EZ (Form 1040) to 4. The boat’s operating crew normally numbers fewerfigure your earnings subject to SE tax. than 10 individuals. (An operating crew is considered
as normally made up of fewer than 10 if the averageSE tax rate.  The SE tax rate on net earnings is 15.3%
size of the crew on trips made during the last four(12.4% social security tax plus 2.9% Medicare tax).
calendar quarters is fewer than 10.)
Maximum earnings subject to self-employment tax. You are not subject to SE tax if you are under age 18Only the first $97,500 of your combined wages, tips, and and you are working for your father or mother.net earnings in 2007 is subject to any combination of the
12.4% social security part of SE tax, social security tax, or Notary public. Fees you receive for services you performrailroad retirement (tier 1) tax. as a notary public are reported on Schedule C or C-EZ butAll of your combined wages, tips, and net earnings in are not subject to self-employment tax (see the Instruc-2007 are subject to any combination of the 2.9% Medicare tions for Schedule SE (Form 1040)).part of SE tax, social security tax, or railroad retirement
(tier 1) tax. State or local government employee. You are subject to
If your wages and tips are subject to either social secur- SE tax if you are an employee of a state or local govern-
ity or railroad retirement (tier 1) tax, or both, and total at ment, are paid solely on a fee basis, and your services are
least $97,500, do not pay the 12.4% social security part of not covered under a federal-state social security agree-
the SE tax on any of your net earnings. However, you must ment.
pay the 2.9% Medicare part of the SE tax on all your net
Foreign government or international organization em-earnings.
ployee. You are subject to SE tax if both the following
conditions are true.Special Rules and Exceptions
1. You are a U.S. citizen employed in the United States,
Aliens. Resident aliens are generally subject to the same Puerto Rico, Guam, American Samoa, the Common-
rules that apply to U.S. citizens. Nonresident aliens are not wealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, or the Virgin
subject to SE tax. Residents of the Virgin Islands, Puerto Islands by:
Chapter 10 Self-Employment (SE) Tax Page 41

Page 42 of 53 of Publication 334 9:31 - 20-DEC-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
a. A foreign government, Figuring Earnings Subject to SE Tax
b. A wholly-owned instrumentality of a foreign gov-
ernment, or Methods for Figuring Net Earnings
c. An international organization. There are three ways to figure your net earnings from
self-employment.2. Your employer is not required to withhold social se-
curity and Medicare taxes from your wages. 1. The regular method.
2. The nonfarm optional method.U.S. citizen or resident alien residing abroad.  If you
3. The farm optional method.are a self-employed U.S. citizen or resident alien living
outside the United States, in most cases you must pay SE You must use the regular method unless you are eligibletax. Do not reduce your foreign earnings from to use one or both of the optional methods.self-employment by your foreign earned income exclusion.
Why use an optional method?  You may want to use theException.  The United States has social security optional methods (discussed later) when you have a lossagreements with many countries to eliminate double taxa- or a small net profit and any one of the following applies.tion under two social security systems. Under these agree-
• You want to receive credit for social security benefitments, you generally must only pay social security and
coverage.Medicare taxes to the country in which you live. The coun-
try to which you must pay the tax will issue a certificate • You incurred child or dependent care expenses forwhich serves as proof of exemption from social security tax which you could claim a credit. (An optional methodin the other country. may increase your earned income, which could in-For more information, see the Instructions for Schedule crease your credit.)SE (Form 1040).
• You are entitled to the earned income credit. (An
optional method may increase your earned income,
More Than One Business which could increase your credit.)
• You are entitled to the additional child tax credit. (AnIf you have earnings subject to SE tax from more than one
optional method may increase your earned income,trade, business, or profession, you must combine the net
which could increase your credit.)profit (or loss) from each to determine your total earnings
subject to SE tax. A loss from one business reduces your
profit from another business. Effects of using an optional method. Using an optional
method could increase your SE tax. Paying more SE tax
could result in your getting higher benefits when you retire.
Community Property Income
If you use either or both optional methods, you must
If any of the income from a trade or business, other than a figure and pay the SE tax due under these methods even if
partnership, is community property income under state you would have had a smaller tax or no tax using the
law, it is included in the earnings subject to SE tax of the regular method.
spouse carrying on the trade or business. The optional methods may be used only to figure your
SE tax. To figure your income tax, include your actual
earnings in gross income, regardless of which method you
Gain or Loss use to determine SE tax.
Do not include in earnings subject to SE tax a gain or loss
from the disposition of property that is neither stock in trade Regular Method
nor held primarily for sale to customers. It does not matter
whether the disposition is a sale, exchange, or an involun- Multiply your total earnings subject to SE tax by 92.35%
tary conversion. (.9235) to get your net earnings under the regular method.
See Short Schedule SE, line 4, or Long Schedule SE, line
4a.
Lost Income Payments Net earnings figured using the regular method are also
called actual net earnings.If you are self-employed and reduce or stop your business
activities, any payment you receive from insurance or other
sources for the lost business income is included in earn-
Nonfarm Optional Method
ings subject to SE tax. If you are not working when you
receive the payment, it still relates to your business and is Use the nonfarm optional method only for earnings that do
included in earnings subject to SE tax, even though your not come from farming. You may use this method if you
business is temporarily inactive. meet all the following tests.
Page 42 Chapter 10 Self-Employment (SE) Tax

Page 43 of 53 of Publication 334 9:31 - 20-DEC-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1. You are self-employed on a regular basis. This Optional net earnings less than actual net earnings.
means that your actual net earnings from You cannot use this method to report an amount less than
self-employment were $400 or more in at least 2 of your actual net earnings from self-employment.
the 3 tax years before the one for which you use this
Gross nonfarm income of $2,400 or less. The followingmethod. The net earnings can be from either farm or
examples illustrate how to figure net earnings when grossnonfarm earnings or both.
nonfarm income is $2,400 or less.
2. You have used this method less than 5 years. (There
is a 5-year lifetime limit.) The years do not have to be Example 1. Net nonfarm profit less than $1,733 and
one after another. less than 72.189% of gross nonfarm income. Ann
Green runs a craft business. Her actual net earnings from3. Your net nonfarm profits were:
self-employment were $800 in 2005 and $900 in 2006. She
meets the test for being self-employed on a regular basis.a. Less than $1,733, and
She has used the nonfarm optional method less than 5b. Less than 72.189% of your gross nonfarm in- years. Her gross income and net profit in 2007 are ascome. follows:
Gross nonfarm income ................... $2,100Net nonfarm profits. Net nonfarm profit generally is the Net nonfarm profit ....................... $1,200total of the amounts from:
Ann’s actual net earnings for 2007 are $1,108 ($1,200 ×
• Line 31, Schedule C (Form 1040), .9235). Because her net profit is less than $1,733 and less
• Line 3, Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040), than 72.189% of her gross income, she can use the non-
farm optional method to figure net earnings of $1,400 (2/3 ×• Box 14, code A, Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) (from $2,100). Because these net earnings are higher than hernonfarm partnerships), and actual net earnings, she can report net earnings of $1,400
• Box 9, code J1, Schedule K-1 (Form 1065-B). for 2007.
However, you may need to adjust the amount reported Example 2. Net nonfarm profit less than $1,733 but
on Schedule K-1 if you are a general partner or if it is a loss. not less than 72.189% of gross nonfarm income. As-
sume that in Example 1 Ann’s gross income is $1,000 andGross nonfarm income. Your gross nonfarm income her net profit is $800. She must use the regular method togenerally is the total of the amounts from: figure her net earnings. She cannot use the nonfarm op-
tional method because her net profit is not less than• Line 7, Schedule C (Form 1040),
72.189% of her gross income.• Line 1, Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040),
Example 3. Net loss from a nonfarm business. As-• Box 14, code C, Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) (from
sume that in Example 1 Ann has a net loss of $700. Shenonfarm partnerships), and
can use the nonfarm optional method and report $1,400 (2/3
• Box 9, code J2, Schedule K-1 (Form 1065-B). × $2,100) as her net earnings.
Example 4. Nonfarm net earnings less than $400.Figuring Nonfarm Net Earnings
Assume that in Example 1 Ann has gross income of $525
and a net profit of $175. In this situation, she would not payIf you meet the three tests explained earlier, use the
any SE tax under either the regular method or the nonfarmfollowing table to figure your net earnings from
optional method because her net earnings under bothself-employment under the nonfarm optional method.
methods are less than $400.
Table 10-1. Figuring Nonfarm Net Earnings Gross nonfarm income of more than $2,400. The fol-
lowing examples illustrate how to figure net earnings whenIF your gross nonfarm THEN your net earnings gross nonfarm income is more than $2,400.income is ... are equal to ...
$2,400 or less Two-thirds of your gross Example 1. Net nonfarm profit less than $1,733 and
nonfarm income. less than 72.189% of gross nonfarm income. John
White runs an appliance repair shop. His actual net earn-More than $2,400 $1,600
ings from self-employment were $10,500 in 2005 and
$9,500 in 2006. He meets the test for being self-employed
Actual net earnings. Your actual net earnings are on a regular basis. He has used the nonfarm optional
92.35% of your total earnings subject to SE tax (that is, method less than 5 years. His gross income and net profit
multiply total earnings subject to SE tax by 92.35% (.9235) in 2007 are as follows:
to get actual net earnings). Actual net earnings are
equivalent to net earnings figured using the regular Gross nonfarm income ................... $12,000
Net nonfarm profit ....................... $1,200method.
Chapter 10 Self-Employment (SE) Tax Page 43

Page 44 of 53 of Publication 334 9:31 - 20-DEC-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
John’s actual net earnings for 2007 are $1,108 ($1,200 Table 10-2. Example—Farm and Nonfarm
× .9235). Because his net profit is less than $1,733 and Earnings
less than 72.189% of his gross income, he can use the
nonfarm optional method to figure net earnings of $1,600. Income and
Because these net earnings are higher than his actual net Earnings Farm Nonfarm
earnings, he can report net earnings of $1,600 for 2007. Gross income $1,200 $1,500
Example 2. Net nonfarm profit not less than $1,733. Actual net earnings $900 $500
Assume that in Example 1 John’s net profit is $1,800. He Optional netmust use the regular method. He cannot use the nonfarm earnings (2/3 of grossoptional method because his net nonfarm profit is not less income) $800 $1,000than $1,733.
Table 10-3 shows four methods or combinations ofExample 3. Net loss from a nonfarm business. As- methods you can use to figure net earnings fromsume that in Example 1 John has a net loss of $700. He self-employment using the farm and nonfarm gross in-can use the nonfarm optional method and report $1,600 as come and actual net earnings shown in Table 10-2.his net earnings from self-employment.
• Method 1. Using the regular method for both farm
and nonfarm income.Farm Optional Method
• Method 2. Using the optional method for farm in-Use the farm optional method only for earnings from a come and the regular method for nonfarm income.farming business. See Publication 225 for information
• Method 3. Using the regular method for farm incomeabout this method.
and the optional method for nonfarm income.
• Method 4. Using the optional method for both farmUsing Both Optional Methods
and nonfarm income.
If you have both farm and nonfarm earnings, you may be Note. Actual net earnings is the same as net earningsable to use both optional methods to determine your net figured using the regular method.earnings from self-employment.
 To figure your net earnings using both optional meth-
Table 10-3. Example—Net Earningsods, you must:
• Figure your farm and nonfarm net earnings sepa- Netrately under each method. Do not combine farm Earnings 1 2 3 4earnings with nonfarm earnings to figure your net
earnings under either method. Actual
• Add the net earnings figured under each method to farm $ 900 $ 900
arrive at your total net earnings from
Optionalself-employment.
farm $ 800 $ 800You can report less than your total actual farm and non-
farm net earnings but not less than actual nonfarm net Actualearnings. If you use both optional methods, you can report nonfarm $ 500 $ 500no more than $1,600 as your combined net earnings from
self-employment. Optional
nonfarm $1,000 $1,000
Example. You are a self-employed farmer. You also
operate a retail grocery store. Your gross income, actual Amount
net earnings from self-employment, and optional farm and you can
optional nonfarm net earnings from self-employment are report: $1,400 $1,300 $1,900 $1,600*
shown in Table 10-2.
*Limited to $1,600 because you used both optional methods.
Fiscal Year Filer
If you use a tax year other than the calendar year, you must
use the tax rate and maximum earnings limit in effect at the
beginning of your tax year. Even if the tax rate or maximum
earnings limit changes during your tax year, continue to
use the same rate and limit throughout your tax year.
Page 44 Chapter 10 Self-Employment (SE) Tax

Page 45 of 53 of Publication 334 9:31 - 20-DEC-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Reporting Self-Employment
Tax
11.Use Schedule SE (Form 1040) to figure and report your SE
tax. Then enter the SE tax on line 58 of Form 1040 and
attach Schedule SE to Form 1040. Your RightsMost taxpayers can use Section A—Short Schedule SE
to figure their SE tax. However, certain taxpayers must use as a TaxpayerSection B—Long Schedule SE.
The first part of this chapter explains some of your mostIf you have to pay SE tax, you must file Form
important rights as a taxpayer. The second part explains1040 (with Schedule SE attached) even if you do
the examination, appeal, collection, and refund processes.not otherwise have to file a federal income taxCAUTION
!
return.
Joint return. Even if you file a joint return, you cannot file Declaration ofa joint Schedule SE. This is true whether one spouse or
both spouses have earnings subject to SE tax. If both of Taxpayer Rightsyou have earnings subject to SE tax, each of you must
complete a separate Schedule SE. However, if one spouse
Protection of your rights. IRS employees will explainuses the Short Schedule SE and the other spouse has to
and protect your rights as a taxpayer throughout youruse the Long Schedule SE, both can use the same form.
contact with us.Attach both schedules to the joint return.
More than one business. If you have more than one Privacy and confidentiality. The IRS will not disclose to
trade or business, you must combine the net profit (or loss) anyone the information you give us, except as authorized
from each business to figure your SE tax. A loss from one by law. You have the right to know why we are asking you
business will reduce your profit from another business. File for information, how we will use it, and what happens if you
one Schedule SE showing the earnings from do not provide requested information.
self-employment, but file a separate Schedule C, C-EZ, or
Professional and courteous service. If you believe thatF for each business.
an IRS employee has not treated you in a professional,
fair, and courteous manner, you should tell that em-Example. You are the sole proprietor of two separate
ployee’s supervisor. If the supervisor’s response is notbusinesses. You operate a restaurant that made a net
satisfactory, you should write to the IRS director for yourprofit of $25,000. You also have a cabinetmaking business
area or the center where you file your return.that had a net loss of $500. You must file a Schedule C for
the restaurant showing your net profit of $25,000 and Representation. You can either represent yourself or,another Schedule C for the cabinetmaking business show- with proper written authorization, have someone else rep-ing your net loss of $500. You file Schedule SE showing resent you in your place. Your representative must be atotal earnings subject to SE tax of $24,500. person allowed to practice before the IRS, such as an
attorney, certified public accountant, or enrolled agent. If
you are in an interview and ask to consult such a person,
then we must stop and reschedule the interview in most
cases.
You can have someone accompany you at an interview.
You can make sound recordings of any meetings with our
examination, appeal, or collection personnel, provided you
tell us in writing 10 days before the meeting.
Payment of only the correct amount of tax. You are
responsible for paying only the correct amount of tax due
under the law—no more, no less. If you cannot pay all of
your tax when it is due, you may be able to make monthly
installment payments.
Help with unresolved tax problems. The Taxpayer Ad-
vocate Service can help you if you have tried unsuccess-
fully to resolve a problem with the IRS. Your local Taxpayer
Advocate can offer you special help if you have a signifi-
cant hardship as a result of a tax problem. For more
information, call toll free 1-877-777-4778 (1-800-829-4059
Chapter 11 Your Rights as a Taxpayer Page 45

Page 46 of 53 of Publication 334 9:31 - 20-DEC-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
for TTY/TDD) or write to the Taxpayer Advocate at the IRS Repeat examinations. If we examined your return for
office that last contacted you. the same items in either of the 2 previous years and
proposed no change to your tax liability, please contact usAppeals and judicial review. If you disagree with us as soon as possible so we can see if we should discontinueabout the amount of your tax liability or certain collection the examination.actions, you have the right to ask the Appeals Office to
review your case. You can also ask a court to review your Appeals. If you do not agree with the examiner’s pro-
case. posed changes, you can appeal them to the Appeals Office
of IRS. Most differences can be settled without expensiveRelief from certain penalties and interest. The IRS will and time-consuming court trials. Your appeal rights arewaive penalties when allowed by law if you can show you explained in detail in both Publication 5, Your Appealacted reasonably and in good faith or relied on the incor- Rights and How To Prepare a Protest If You Don’t Agree,rect advice of an IRS employee. We will waive interest that and Publication 556, Examination of Returns, Appealis the result of certain errors or delays caused by an IRS Rights, and Claims for Refund.employee. If you do not wish to use the Appeals Office or disagree
with its findings, you may be able to take your case to the
U.S. Tax Court, U.S. Court of Federal Claims, or the U.S.
Examinations, Appeals, District Court where you live. If you take your case to court,
the IRS will have the burden of proving certain facts if you
Collections, and Refunds kept adequate records to show your tax liability, cooper-
ated with the IRS, and meet certain other conditions. If the
Examinations (audits). We accept most taxpayers’ re- court agrees with you on most issues in your case and
turns as filed. If we inquire about your return or select it for finds that our position was largely unjustified, you may be
examination, it does not suggest that you are dishonest. able to recover some of your administrative and litigation
The inquiry or examination may or may not result in more costs. You will not be eligible to recover these costs unless
tax. We may close your case without change; or, you may you tried to resolve your case administratively, including
receive a refund. going through the appeals system, and you gave us the
The process of selecting a return for examination usu- information necessary to resolve the case.
ally begins in one of two ways. First, we use computer Collections. Publication 594, The IRS Collection Pro-programs to identify returns that may have incorrect cess, explains your rights and responsibilities regardingamounts. These programs may be based on information payment of federal taxes. It describes:returns, such as Forms 1099 and W-2, on studies of past
examinations, or on certain issues identified by compli-
• What to do when you owe taxes. It describes what to
ance projects. Second, we use information from outside do if you get a tax bill and what to do if you think
sources that indicates that a return may have incorrect your bill is wrong. It also covers making installment
amounts. These sources may include newspapers, public payments, delaying collection action, and submitting
records, and individuals. If we determine that the informa- an offer in compromise.
tion is accurate and reliable, we may use it to select a • IRS collection actions. It covers liens, releasing areturn for examination. lien, levies, releasing a levy, seizures and sales, andPublication 556, Examination of Returns, Appeal release of property.Rights, and Claims for Refund, explains the rules and
procedures that we follow in examinations. The following Your collection appeal rights are explained in detail insections give an overview of how we conduct examina- Publication 1660, Collection Appeal Rights.tions.
Innocent spouse relief. Generally, both you and yourBy mail. We handle many examinations and inquiries
spouse are responsible, jointly and individually, for payingby mail. We will send you a letter with either a request for
the full amount of any tax, interest, or penalties due on yourmore information or a reason why we believe a change to
joint return. To seek relief from any liability related to youryour return may be needed. You can respond by mail or
spouse (or former spouse), you must file a claim on Formyou can request a personal interview with an examiner. If
8857, Request for Innocent Spouse Relief. Form 8857you mail us the requested information or provide an expla-
must be filed within 2 years from the IRS’s first attempt tonation, we may or may not agree with you, and we will
collect the tax from you after July 22, 1998, such as byexplain the reasons for any changes. Please do not hesi-
applying your refund from one year to the joint liability. Fortate to write to us about anything you do not understand.
more information, see Publication 971, Innocent SpouseBy interview. If we notify you that we will conduct your Relief, and Form 8857. examination through a personal interview, or you request
such an interview, you have the right to ask that the Refunds. You can file a claim for refund if you think you
examination take place at a reasonable time and place that paid too much tax. You must generally file the claim within
is convenient for both you and the IRS. If our examiner 3 years from the date you filed your original return or 2
proposes any changes to your return, he or she will explain years from the date you paid the tax, whichever is later.
the reasons for the changes. If you do not agree with these The law generally provides for interest on your refund if it is
changes, you can meet with the examiner’s supervisor. not paid within 45 days of the date you filed your return or
Page 46 Chapter 11 Your Rights as a Taxpayer

Page 47 of 53 of Publication 334 9:31 - 20-DEC-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
claim for refund. Publication 556, Examination of Returns, second language. Publication 4134, Low Income Taxpayer
Appeal Rights, and Claims for Refund, has more informa- Clinic List, provides information on clinics in your area. It is
tion on refunds. available at www.irs.gov or at your local IRS office.
If you were due a refund but you did not file a return, you Small business workshops. Small business workshopsmust file within 3 years from the date the return was due are designed to help the small business owner understand(including extensions) to get that refund. and fulfill their federal tax responsibilities. Workshops are
sponsored and presented by IRS partners who are federal
tax specialists. Workshop topics vary from a general over-
view of taxes to more specific topics such as recordkeep-
ing and retirement plans. Although most are free, some
workshops have fees associated with them. Any fees
12.
charged for a workshop are paid to the sponsoring organi-
zation, not the IRS.
How To Get For more information, visit www.irs.gov/businesses/
small.
More Information
Subscribe to e-news for small businesses. Join the
e-News for Small Businesses mailing list to receive up-This section describes the help the IRS and other federal dates, reminders, and other information useful to smallagencies offer to taxpayers who operate their own busi- business owners and self employed individuals. Visit thenesses. website at www.irs.gov/businesses/small and click on
“Join mailing list.”
Free tax services. To find out what services are avail-Internal Revenue Service
able, get Publication 910, IRS Guide to Free Tax Services.
It contains a list of free tax publications and describes otherYou can get help with unresolved tax issues, order free
free tax information services, including tax education andpublications and forms, ask tax questions, and get informa-
assistance programs and a list of TeleTax topics.tion from the IRS in several ways. By selecting the method
Accessible versions of IRS published products arethat is best for you, you will have quick and easy access to
available on request in a variety of alternative formats fortax help.
people with disabilities.
Contacting your Taxpayer Advocate. The Taxpayer Internet. You can access the IRS website atAdvocate Service (TAS) is an independent organization www.irs.gov 24 hours a day, 7 days a week to:within the IRS whose employees assist taxpayers who are
experiencing economic harm, who are seeking help in
resolving tax problems that have not been resolved • E-file your return. Find out about commercial taxthrough normal channels, or who believe that an IRS preparation and e-file services available free to eligi-system or procedure is not working as it should. ble taxpayers.You can contact the TAS by calling the TAS toll-free
case intake line at 1-877-777-4778 or TTY/TDD • Check the status of your 2007 refund. Click on
1-800-829-4059 to see if you are eligible for assistance. Where’s My Refund. Wait at least 6 weeks from the
You can also call or write to your local taxpayer advocate, date you filed your return (3 weeks if you filed elec-
whose phone number and address are listed in your local tronically). Have your 2007 tax return available be-
telephone directory and in Publication 1546, Taxpayer cause you will need to know your social security
Advocate Service — Your Voice at the IRS. You can file number, your filing status, and the exact whole dollar
Form 911, Request for Taxpayer Advocate Service Assis- amount of your refund.
tance (And Application for Taxpayer Assistance Order), or • Download forms, instructions, and publications.ask an IRS employee to complete it on your behalf. For
more information, go to www.irs.gov/advocate. • Order IRS products online.
Taxpayer Advocacy Panel (TAP). The TAP listens to • Research your tax questions online.
taxpayers, identifies taxpayer issues, and makes sugges- • Search publications online by topic or keyword.tions for improving IRS services and customer satisfaction.
If you have suggestions for improvements, contact the • View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs) published in
TAP, toll free at 1-888-912-1227 or go to the last few years.
www.improveirs.org. • Figure your withholding allowances using the with-
Low Income Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs). LITCs are in- holding calculator online at www.irs.gov/individuals.
dependent organizations that provide low income taxpay- • Determine if Form 6251 must be filed using our Al-ers with representation in federal tax controversies with the ternative Minimum Tax (AMT) Assistant.IRS for free or for a nominal charge. The clinics also
provide tax education and outreach for taxpayers with • Sign up to receive local and national tax news by
limited English proficiency or who speak English as a email.
Chapter 12 How To Get More Information Page 47

Page 48 of 53 of Publication 334 9:31 - 20-DEC-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Get information on starting and operating a small Also, some IRS offices and libraries have the Inter-
nal Revenue Code, regulations, Internal Revenuebusiness.
Bulletins, and Cumulative Bulletins available for re-
search purposes.
Phone. Many services are available by phone. • Services. You can walk in to your local Taxpayer
Assistance Center every business day for personal,
face-to-face tax help. An employee can explain IRS
letters, request adjustments to your tax account, or
• Ordering forms, instructions, and publications. Call help you set up a payment plan. If you need to
1-800-829-3676 to order current-year forms, instruc- resolve a tax problem, have questions about how the
tions, and publications, and prior-year forms and in- tax law applies to your individual tax return, or you
structions. You should receive your order within 10 are more comfortable talking with someone in per-
days. son, visit your local Taxpayer Assistance Center
where you can spread out your records and talk with• Asking tax questions. Call the IRS with your tax an IRS representative face-to-face. No appointmentquestions at 1-800-829-1040. is necessary, but if you prefer, you can call your
• Solving problems. You can get face-to-face help local Center and leave a message requesting an
solving tax problems every business day in IRS Tax- appointment to resolve a tax account issue. A repre-
payer Assistance Centers. An employee can explain sentative will call you back within 2 business days to
IRS letters, request adjustments to your account, or schedule an in-person appointment at your conve-
help you set up a payment plan. Call your local nience. To find the number, go to www.irs.gov/local-
Taxpayer Assistance Center for an appointment. To contacts or look in the phone book under United
find the number, go to www.irs.gov/localcontacts or States Government, Internal Revenue Service.
look in the phone book under United States Govern-
ment, Internal Revenue Service. Mail. You can send your order for forms, instruc-
tions, and publications to the address below. You• TTY/TDD equipment. If you have access to TTY/
should receive a response within 10 days afterTDD equipment, call 1-800-829-4059 to ask tax
your request is received.questions or to order forms and publications.
• TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 to listen to National Distribution Centerpre-recorded messages covering various tax topics. P.O. Box 8903
Bloomington, IL 61702-8903• Refund information. To check the status of your
2007 refund, call 1-800-829-4477 and press 1 for CD/DVD for tax products. You can order Publi-automated refund information or call cation 1796, IRS Tax Products CD/DVD, and1-800-829-1954. Be sure to wait at least 6 weeks obtain:from the date you filed your return (3 weeks if you
filed electronically). Have your 2007 tax return avail- • Current-year forms, instructions, and publications.
able because you will need to know your social se- • Prior-year forms, instructions, and publications.curity number, your filing status, and the exact whole
dollar amount of your refund. • Bonus: Historical Tax Products DVD—Ships with
the final release.
• Tax Map: an electronic research tool and finding aid.Evaluating the quality of our telephone services. To
ensure IRS representatives give accurate, courteous, and • Tax law frequently asked questions.professional answers, we use several methods to evaluate
• Tax Topics from the IRS telephone response sys-the quality of our telephone services. One method is for a
tem.second IRS representative to listen in on or record random
telephone calls. Another is to ask some callers to complete • Fill-in, print, and save features for most tax forms.a short survey at the end of the call.
• Internal Revenue Bulletins.
Walk-in. Many products and services are avail- • Toll-free and email technical support.
able on a walk-in basis. • The CD/DVD which is released twice during the
year.
• Products. You can walk in to many post offices, – The first release will ship the beginning of January
libraries, and IRS offices to pick up certain forms, 2008.
instructions, and publications. Some IRS offices, li- – The final release will ship the beginning of March
braries, grocery stores, copy centers, city and county 2008.
government offices, credit unions, and office supply
stores have a collection of products available to print Purchase the CD/DVD from National Technical Informa-
from a CD or photocopy from reproducible proofs. tion Service (NTIS) at www.irs.gov/cdorders for $35 (no
Page 48 Chapter 12 How To Get More Information

Page 49 of 53 of Publication 334 9:31 - 20-DEC-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
handling fee) or call 1-877-CDFORMS (1-877-233-6767) BICs also offer one-on-one assistance. Individuals who
toll free to buy the CD/DVD for $35 (plus a $5 handling are in business or are interested in starting a business can
fee). Price is subject to change. use BICs as often as they wish at no charge.
CD for small businesses. Publication 3207, The Service Corps of Retired Executives (SCORE).Small Business Resource Guide CD for 2007, is a
SCORE provides small business counseling and trainingmust for every small business owner or any tax-
to current and prospective small business owners. SCOREpayer about to start a business. This year’s CD includes:
is made up of current and former business people who
• Helpful information, such as how to prepare a busi- offer their expertise and knowledge to help people start,ness plan, find financing for your business, and manage, and expand a small business. SCORE also offersmuch more. a variety of small business workshops.
• All the business tax forms, instructions, and publica- Internet. You can visit the SBA website at www.tions needed to successfully manage a business. sba.gov. While visiting the SBA website, you can
find a variety of information of interest to small• Tax law changes for 2007.
business owners.• Tax Map: an electronic research tool and finding aid.
Phone.  Call the SBA Answer Desk at• Web links to various government agencies, business 1-800-UASK-SBA (1-800-827-5722) for generalassociations, and IRS organizations. information about programs available to assist
• “Rate the Product” survey—your opportunity to sug- small business owners.
gest changes for future editions.
Walk-in. You can walk in to a Small Business• A site map of the CD to help you navigate the pages Development Center or Business Informationof the CD with ease. Center to request assistance with your small
business. To find the location nearest you, visit the SBA• An interactive “Teens in Biz” module that gives prac-
website or call the SBA Answer Desk.tical tips for teens about starting their own business,
creating a business plan, and filing taxes.
An updated version of this CD is available each year in
Other Federal Agenciesearly April. You can get a free copy by calling
1-800-829-3676 or by visiting www.irs.gov/smallbiz.
Other federal agencies also publish publications and pam-
phlets to assist small businesses. Most of these are avail-
able from the Superintendent of Documents at the
 Small Business Government Printing Office. You can get information and
order these publications and pamphlets in several ways.
Administration
Internet. You can visit the GPO website at www.
access.gpo.gov.The Small Business Administration (SBA) offers training
and educational programs, counseling services, financial
programs, and contract assistance for small business own-
ers. The SBA also has publications and videos on a variety
Mail. Write to the GPO at the following address.of business topics. The following briefly describes assis-
tance provided by the SBA.
Small Business Development Centers (SBDCs). Superintendent of DocumentsSBDCs provide counseling, training, and technical serv- U.S. Government Printing Officeices to current and prospective small business owners who P.O. Box 979050cannot afford the services of a private consultant. Help is St. Louis, MO 63917-9000available when beginning, improving, or expanding a small
business. Phone. Call the GPO toll-free at 1-866-512-1800
or at 202-512-1800 from the Washington, DCBusiness Information Centers (BICs). BICs offer a
area.small business reference library, management video
tapes, and computer technology to help plan a business.
Chapter 12 How To Get More Information Page 49

Page 50 of 53 of Publication 334 9:31 - 20-DEC-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.
Index
 See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Condemned property ............ 1 8AD
Consignments ................... 2 4Accounting method: Damages ......................... 2 4
Construction allowances ........ 2 4Accrual ..................... 13, 31 Debt:
Cost of goods sold .............. 2 7Automatic procedures .......... 1 6 B a d ............................. 3 1
Cash ........................ 13, 31 Canceled ....................... 2 2Credit:
Qualified real propertyChange in ...................... 1 6 Advanced lean burn technology
business ..................... 2 3motor vehicle credit .......... 1 9Combination .................... 1 4
Refund offset against ............ 7Alcohol used as fuel ............ 1 9Special ......................... 1 6
Alternative fuel vehicle refueling Definitions:Accounting periods ............. 1 2
property ...................... 1 8 Accounting methods ............ 1 2Accrual method:
Alternative motor vehicle ....... 1 9 Accounting periods ............. 1 2Income - general rule ........... 1 3
Barter ........................... 2 1Biodiesel fuels .................. 1 9Income - special rules .......... 1 3
Basis ........................... 1 7Diesel fuels, renewable ......... 1 9Of accounting ................... 1 3
Business bad debt .............. 3 1Disabled access ................ 1 9Adjusted basis ................... 1 7
Calendar tax year ............... 1 2Distilled spirits .................. 1 9Administrator .................... 2 5 Cash discount .............. 27, 28Employer-providedAlternative fuel vehicle refueling Disposition of property .......... 1 7childcare ..................... 1 9property credit ................. 1 8 Drawing account ................ 2 9Empowerment zoneAlternative minimum tax ........ 2 0 Entertainment expenses ........ 3 8employment .................. 1 9Alternative motor vehicle Fair market value ............... 1 7Energy efficient appliance ...... 1 9credit ........................... 1 9 Fiscal tax year .................. 1 2Energy efficient home .......... 1 9Appeal rights .................... 4 6 Fringe benefit ................... 3 4How to claim .................... 2 0Appreciation ..................... 2 4 Local transportationIndian coal ...................... 2 0Audits ............................ 4 6 expenses ..................... 3 1Indian employment ............. 1 9
Automobile  (See Car expenses) Necessary expense............. 3 1Investment ...................... 1 9
Net operating loss .............. 4 0Low sulfur diesel fuel
Nonbusiness bad debt .......... 3 1production .................... 1 9B Ordinary expense ............... 3 1Low-income housing ............ 1 9Bad debts ........................ 3 1 Principal place of business ..... 3 9Mine rescue team training ...... 1 9Barter income .................... 2 1 Qualified long-term realNew markets ................... 1 9Basis of property ................ 1 7 property ...................... 2 5Nonconventional sourceBiodiesel and renewable diesel Qualified real property businessfuel ........................... 1 9fuels credit ..................... 1 9 debt .......................... 2 3Orphan drug .................... 1 9Bribes ............................ 4 0 Rent ............................ 3 6Qualified alternative fuel motorBusiness expenses .............. 3 1 Restricted property ............. 2 3vehicle credit ................. 1 9 Retail space .................... 2 5Business income ................ 2 0 Qualified fuel cell motor vehicle Self-employment (SE) tax ....... 8Business use of your home ..... 3 8 credit ......................... 1 9 Sole proprietor ................... 2Qualified hybrid motor vehicle Tax home ....................... 3 2credit ......................... 1 9C Trade discount .............. 27, 28Qualified railroad trackCanceled debt ................... 2 2 Travel expenses ................ 3 7maintenance ................. 2 0Cancellation of qualified real Depreciation:Refined coal .................... 2 0property business debt ....... 2 3 Deduction....................... 3 3Renewable electricity ........... 2 0Capital gain or loss .............. 1 8 Listed property .................. 3 3Research ....................... 1 9Car expenses ................ 31, 32 Depreciation, recapture ......... 2 4Small employer pension plan
Cash discount ............... 27, 28 Direct seller .................. 25, 26startup costs ................. 1 9
Cash method: Disabled access credit .......... 1 9Taxes paid on certain employee
Expenses ....................... 1 3 Disposition of property:tips ........................... 1 9
Income ......................... 1 3 Business property .............. 1 6Welfare-to-work ................. 2 0
Changing accounting Installment sale ............. 17, 18Work opportunity ............... 2 0
method ......................... 1 5 Like-kind exchange ..... 17, 18, 25Credit for alcohol used as
Nontaxable exchange .......... 1 7Charitable contributions ........ 4 0 fuel ............................. 1 9
Sale of a business .............. 1 7Claim for refund ................. 4 6 Credit for employer-provided
Distilled spirits credit ............ 1 9Collection of tax ................. 4 6 childcare facilities ............. 1 9
Dividend income ................. 2 2Combination method of Credit for small employer pension
accounting ..................... 1 4 plan startup costs ............. 1 9 Donation of inventory ........... 2 8
Page 50 Publication 334 (2007)

Page 51 of 53 of Publication 334 9:31 - 20-DEC-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Drawing account ................. 2 9 944 (annual employment tax) .... 9 8881 (pension plan startup costs
credit) ........................ 1 9982 (discharge ofDue date of return ................ 8
8882 (employer-provided childcareindebtedness) ................ 2 3
credit) ........................ 1 91040 (tax return) ...............6 ,  9E 8886 (transaction statement) .... 41040-ES (estimated tax) .......8 ,  9Economic injury ................. 2 4 8896 (low sulfur diesel1040-V (voucher) ................ 7e-file ............................... 6 credit) ........................ 1 91099-B (barter) ................. 2 1EFTPS ............................. 8 8900 (railroad track maintenance1099-MISC
Electric vehicle credit ............ 3 credit) ........................ 2 0(miscellaneous) .......... 10, 21
Electronic filing ................... 6 8906 (distilled spirits credit) ..... 1 91128 (change tax year) ......... 1 2
8907 (nonconventional fuelEmployee ......................... 6 2210 (underpayment of estimated
credit) ........................ 1 9Employee benefit programs ..... 3 4 tax) ............................ 8
8908 (energy efficient homeEmployees’ pay.................. 3 4 2290 (excise tax for heavy
credit) ........................ 1 9trucks) ......................... 9Employer identification number
8909 (appliance credit) ......... 1 93115 (change accounting(EIN) ............................. 5
8910 (alternative vehiclemethod) ...................... 1 6Employment taxes: credit) .................... 19, 313468 (investment credit) ........ 1 9About ............................ 9 8911 (alternative fuel refueling3800 (general businessDeduction for ................... 3 7 property credit) ............... 1 8credit) .................... 18, 20Empowerment zone employment Final ............................ 1 14562 (depreciation) ............. 3 3credit ........................... 1 9 Information returns .............. 94684 (casualty and theft) ....... 1 8Energy efficient appliance Schedule C (sole proprietor) .....6 ,4797 (sale of businesscredit ........................... 1 9 9property) ................. 18, 24Energy efficient home credit .... 1 9 Schedule C-EZ (sole4868 (extension) ................. 8Entertainment expenses  (See proprietor) ..................... 65884 (work opportunityTravel expenses) Schedule SE (self-employmentcredit) ........................ 2 0Escrow, payments placed in .... 2 7 tax) ............................ 96251 (alternative minimumEstimated tax ..................... 8 SS-4 (application for EIN) ........ 5tax) ....................... 18, 20Examinations (audits) ........... 4 6 SS-5 (application for SSN) ....... 56252 (installment sale) .......... 1 8Excise taxes: W-2 (report wages) .......... 9 ,  1 06478 (alcohol used as fuelAbout ............................ 9 W-3 (transmittal of W-2) ......... 9credit) ........................ 1 9Deduction for ................... 3 7 W-4 (employee withholding) ..... 66765 (research credit) .......... 1 9Executor ......................... 2 5 W-7 (application for ITIN) ........ 58109 (deposit coupon) ........... 9 W-9 (request for TIN) ............ 6Expenses ........................ 3 1 8300 (cash payments over When to file ...................... 9Bad debts....................... 3 1 $10,000) ..................... 1 1 Which to file ..................... 9C a r ............................. 3 1 8453 (e-file signature) ........... 6Depreciation .................... 3 3 Fringe benefits ................... 3 48453-OL (e-file signature) ....... 6Employees’ pay................. 3 4 Fuel taxes ........................ 3 78586 (low-income housingEntertainment................... 3 7 credit) ........................ 1 9Home, business use ............ 3 8 8594 (asset acquisition) ........ 1 7 GInsurance ....................... 3 4 8820 (orphan drug credit) ....... 1 9 Gains and losses ................ 2 3Interest ......................... 3 5 8824 (like-kind exchange) ..... 1 7 , General business credits ........ 1 8Legal and professional fees .... 3 6 18Meals ........................... 3 7 Gross profit:8826 (disabled accessNondeductible .................. 4 0 Accuracy ....................... 3 0credit) ........................ 1 9Other ........................... 4 0 Additions to ..................... 3 08829 (business in home) ....... 3 9Pension plans .................. 3 6 Guidelines for selected8835 (renewable electricity, coalRent ............................ 3 6 occupations  (See alsocredit) ........................ 2 0Taxes ........................... 3 6 Occupations, selected) ......... 2 58844 (empowerment zoneTravel........................... 3 7 credit) ........................ 1 9Truck ........................... 3 1 8845 (Indian employment H
credit) ........................ 1 9 Health insurance, deduction forF 8846 (credit for social security on self-employed ................. 3 5
Fair market value ................ 1 7 tip income) ................... 1 9 Home, business use of .......... 3 8
Filing business taxes ............. 5 8857 (innocent spouse) ......... 4 6 Hotels, boarding houses, and
Fishing crew member ....... 26, 41 8861 (welfare-to-work apartments .................... 2 1
credit) ........................ 2 0Form: Husband and wife business ...... 28864 (biodiesel/renewable diesel720 (excise tax return) ........... 9
credit) ........................ 1 9940 (unemployment tax) ......... 9
I8874 (new markets credit) ...... 1 9941 (quarterly employment
tax) ............................ 9 8879 (self-selected PIN) ......... 7 Identification numbers ........... 5
Publication 334 (2007) Page 51

Page 52 of 53 of Publication 334 9:31 - 20-DEC-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Income  (See also Not Like-kind exchanges ........ 17, 25 Insurance agent, former ........ 2 6
income) ......................... 2 4 Insurance agent, retired ........ 2 6Limited liability company ........ 2
Newspaper carrier orAccounting for your ............. 2 7 Listed property .................. 2 4
distributor .................... 2 6Barter ........................... 2 1 Lobbying expense ............... 4 0
Newspaper or magazineBusiness ........................ 2 0 Local transportation vendor ........................ 2 6Damages ....................... 2 4 expenses ...................... 3 1 Notary public ................... 2 6Gains and losses ............... 2 3 Lodging .......................... 3 8 Public official ................... 2 6Kickbacks ....................... 2 4 Long-term capital gain or Real estate agent ............... 2 6Kinds of income ................ 2 0 loss ............................ 1 8 Securities dealer ................ 2 6Lost income payments .......... 2 4 Lost income payments .......... 2 4 Securities trader ................ 2 7Other ........................... 2 3 Low sulfur diesel fuel productionPaid to a third party ............. 2 7 Office in the home  (See alsocredit ........................... 1 9 Business use of your home) .... 3 2Personal property rent .......... 2 2 Low-income housing credit ..... 1 9Promissory notes ............... 2 4 Optional methods, using
Recapture of depreciation ...... 2 4 both ............................ 4 4
Recovery of items previously Ordinary gain or loss ............ 1 8M
deducted ..................... 2 4 Orphan drug credit .............. 1 9Meals  (See Travel expenses)Rental ...................... 21, 22 Methods for figuring netRestricted property ............. 2 3 earnings ....................... 4 2 PIncome tax: Mileage rate for vehicles ........ 3 2 Parking fees ..................... 3 2About ............................ 6 Mine rescue team training Partners, husband and wife ...... 2Deduction for ................... 3 6 credit ........................... 1 9 Pay, kinds of ..................... 3 4How to pay ...................... 8 Motor vehicle, alternative Paying:Underpayment penalty ........... 8 credit ........................... 1 9 Business taxes .................. 5Income tax return, who must
Income tax ....................... 8file ............................... 6
Payments to third parties ....... 2 2NIndependent contractor ....2 ,  9 ,  4 1
Penalties and fines .............. 4 0Net operating losses ............ 4 0Indian employment credit ....... 1 9
Penalty:Net profit or loss ................. 4 0Individual taxpayer identification
Failure to file Form 8300 ........ 1 1number (ITIN) ................... 5 New markets credit .............. 1 9
Failure to file informationInformation returns .............. 1 0 Newspaper carrier or returns ....................... 1 1distributor ..................... 2 6Information, How to get Failure to furnish correct payeemore ........................... 4 7 Newspaper or magazine statements ................... 1 1vendor ......................... 2 6Innocent spouse relief ........... 4 6 Underpayment of tax ............ 8Nonbusiness bad debt .......... 3 1Installment sales ................. 1 7 Waiver of ....................... 1 1Nonconventional source fuelInsurance: Pension plans .................... 3 6credit ........................... 1 9Expense ........................ 3 4 Personal property tax ........... 3 7Nondeductible premiums ....... 3 5 Nondeductible insurance Prepaid expense:Prepayment .................... 3 5 premiums ...................... 3 5 Extends useful life .............. 3 5Proceeds ....................... 2 7 Nonemployee Rent ............................ 3 6Self-employed health ........... 3 5 compensation ................. 2 0 Professional fees ................ 3 6Insurance agent: Nontaxable exchanges .......... 1 7 Promissory notes ................ 2 4Former.......................... 2 6 Not income: Public official .................... 2 6Retired.......................... 2 6 Appreciation .................... 2 4 Punitive damages................ 2 4Interest: Consignments .................. 2 4
Expenses ....................... 3 5 Constructions allowances ....... 2 4
Income ......................... 2 2 Exchange of like-kind Q
property ...................... 2 5Inventories ....................... 1 5 Qualified railroad track
Leasehold improvements ....... 2 5Investment credit ................ 1 9 maintenance credit ............ 2 0
Loans ........................... 2 5IRS mission ....................... 3 Qualified real property business
Sales tax ....................... 2 5 debt ............................ 2 3
Notary public ................ 26, 41
K Not-for-profit activities .......... 4 0 RKickbacks .................... 24, 40
Real estate:
O Agent ........................... 2 6
L Dealer .......................... 2 1Occupations, selected:
Lease bonus ..................... 2 2 Rent ............................ 2 1Administrator ................... 2 5
Lease cancellation Taxes ........................... 3 7Direct seller ................. 25, 26
payments ...................... 2 2 Executor ........................ 2 5 Recovery of items previously
Legal fees ........................ 3 6 Fishing crew member ........... 2 6 deducted ....................... 2 4
Page 52 Publication 334 (2007)

Page 53 of 53 of Publication 334 9:31 - 20-DEC-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Refund: Maximum earnings: T
Inquiries ......................... 7 For 2006 ....................3 ,  9 Tax help  (See Information, How to
Offsets against debts ............ 7 For 2007 ...................... 3 get more)
Subject to .................... 4 1Related persons: Tax home .................... 32, 37Methods for figuring netUnreasonable rent .............. 3 6 Tax preparation fees............. 3 6earnings ...................... 4 2Renewable electricity, refined coal, Tax refund:More than one business .... 42, 45and Indian coal production Claim for ........................ 4 6Nonfarm optional method ....... 4 2credit ........................... 2 0 Offset against debts ............. 7Notary public ................... 4 1Rent expense .................... 3 6 Tax return:Optional methods:Rental income ................... 2 1 How to file ....................... 6Farm ......................... 4 4Repayment of income ........... 1 3 Who must file .................... 6Nonfarm ...................... 4 2Reportable transaction disclosure Tax year .......................... 1 2Rate ............................ 4 1statement ....................... 4 Calendar ........................ 1 2Regular method ................ 4 2Reporting self-employment Change in ...................... 1 2Residing abroad ................ 4 2tax .............................. 4 5 Fiscal ........................... 1 2Special rules andResearch credit .................. 1 9 Taxes:exceptions .................... 4 1
Deduction for ................... 3 6Restricted property .............. 2 3 Tax rate ......................... 9
Employment ................. 9 ,  3 7Retirement plans  (See Pension Time limit for posting income .... 9
Excise ....................... 9 ,  3 7plans) Who must pay .................. 4 1
Fuel............................. 3 7Why use an optional
Income ...................... 6 ,  3 6method ....................... 4 2S Paid on certain employeeSection 179:Salaries .......................... 3 4 tips ........................... 1 9Deduction....................... 3 3Sale of a business ............... 1 7 Personal property ............... 3 7Increased deduction limit ........ 3Sale of property  (See also Real estate ..................... 3 7Property ........................ 2 4Disposition of property) ......... 1 7 Sales ........................... 3 7Securities:Sales of assets .................. 1 6 Self-employment............. 8 ,  3 7Dealer .......................... 2 6Sales tax ......................... 3 7 Taxpayer Advocate .............. 4 7Trader .......................... 2 7Schedule C ........................ 6 Taxpayer rights .................. 4 5Self-employed health insuranceSchedule C-EZ .................... 6 Third parties, Payments to ...... 2 2deduction ...................... 3 5Schedule SE (Form 1040) ........ 9 Tolls .............................. 3 2Self-employment tax  (See SE tax)Schedule SE, filing Trade discount ............... 27, 28Settlement payments ............ 2 2requirement .................... 4 5 Trade or business ................ 2Short-term capital gain orSE tax: Trailer park owner ............... 2 1loss ............................ 1 8About ............................ 8 Transportation expenses ........ 3 1Signature, electronic ............. 6Aliens ........................... 4 1 Travel expenses ................. 3 7Small BusinessChurch employee ............... 4 1 Administration ................. 4 9Community property income .... 4 2
Social security coverage ......... 8 UDeduction for ................... 3 7
Social security number (SSN) .... 5 Underpayment of tax penalty .... 8Earning credits .................. 8
Sole proprietor ................ 2 ,  4 1 Uniform capitalization rules ..... 1 6Effects of using an optional
method ....................... 4 2 Sport utility vehicle .............. 3 3
Farm optional method .......... 4 4 Standard mileage rate ........... 3 2 W
Fiscal year filer ................. 4 4 For 2006 ......................... 3 Wages ............................ 3 4Fishing crew member ........... 4 1 For 2007 ......................... 3 Welfare-to-work credit ........... 2 0Gain or loss ..................... 4 2 Statutory employee ............... 2 Work opportunity credit ......... 2 0Government employee ......... 4 1 Suggestions for publication ..... 3
Joint return ..................... 4 5 ■SUV ............................... 3 3Lost income payments .......... 4 2
Publication 334 (2007) Page 53