Userid: ________ Leading adjust: 0% ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: P334.SGM (22-Feb-2006) (Init. & date)
Filename: D:\USERS\LXPDB\documents\epicfiles\05p334 corrected.sgm
Page 1 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 334
Catalog Number 11063PTax Guide for
Department Small Business For use in
of the
preparingTreasury
(For Individuals Who UseInternal 2005Revenue
Service Schedule C or C-EZ) Returns
Get forms and other information faster and easier by:
Internet • www.irs.gov
www.irs.gov/efile

Page 2 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.

Page 3 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Independent contractor. People such as doctors, den-
tists, veterinarians, lawyers, accountants, contractors,Contents
subcontractors, public stenographers, or auctioneers who
Introduction.............................. 3 are in an independent trade, business, or profession in
which they offer their services to the general public areWhat’s New for 2005........................ 4 generally independent contractors. However, whether they
are independent contractors or employees depends on theWhat’s New for 2006........................ 5
facts in each case. The general rule is that an individual is
Reminders ................................ 5 an independent contractor if the payer has the right to
control or to direct only the result of the work and not how itPhotographs of Missing Children............. 5 will be done. The earnings of a person who is working as
an independent contractor are subject to self-employment1. Filing and Paying Business Taxes......... 6
tax. For more information on determining whether you are2. Accounting Periods and Methods.......... 12 an independent contractor or an employee, see Publica-
tion 15-A, Employer’s Supplemental Tax Guide.3. Dispositions of Business Property......... 17
4. General Business Credits................ 19 Statutory employee. A statutory employee has a
checkmark in box 13 of his or her Form W-2, Wage and5. Business Income....................... 21 Tax Statement. Statutory employees use Schedule C or
C-EZ to report their wages and expenses.6. How To Figure Cost of Goods Sold......... 28
7. Figuring Gross Profit.................... 30 Limited liability company (LLC).A limited liability com-
pany (LLC) is an entity formed under state law by filing8. Business Expenses..................... 32 articles of organization. Generally, a single-member LLC is
disregarded as an entity separate from its owner and9. Figuring Net Profit or Loss............... 41
reports its income and deductions on its owner’s federal
10. Self-Employment (SE) Tax................ 42 income tax return. An owner who is an individual may use
Schedule C or C-EZ.11. Your Rights as a Taxpayer............... 46
Husband and wife business.If you and your spouse12. How To Get More Information............. 48
jointly own and operate an unincorporated business andIndex .................................... 51 share in the profits and losses, you are partners in a
partnership, whether or not you have a formal partnership
agreement. Do not use Schedule C or C-EZ. Instead, file
Form 1065. For more information, see Publication 541.
Introduction
Exception. If you and your spouse wholly own an unin-The purpose of this publication is to provide general infor-corporated business as community property under themation about the federal tax laws that apply to smallcommunity property laws of a state, foreign country, orbusiness owners who are sole proprietors and to statutoryU.S. possession, you can treat the business either as aemployees. sole proprietorship or a partnership. The only states with
community property laws are Arizona, California, Idaho,Are you self-employed?You are self-employed if you
Louisiana, Nevada, New Mexico, Texas, Washington, andcarry on a trade or business as a sole proprietor or an
Wisconsin. A change in your reporting position will beindependent contractor.
treated as a conversion of the entity.
Sole proprietor.A sole proprietor is someone who owns
This publication does not cover the topics listed inan unincorporated business by himself or herself. How-
the following table.ever, if you are the sole member of a domestic limited
liability company (LLC), you are not a sole proprietor if you
elect to treat the LLC as a corporation.
IF you need information about: THEN you should
see:Trade or business. A trade or business is generally an
activity carried on to make a profit. The facts and circum-Corporations................. Publication 542stances of each case determine whether or not an activityFarming .................... Publication 225is a trade or business. You do not need to actually make aFishermen (Capital Construction Publication 595profit to be in a trade or business as long as you have aFund) ......................profit motive. You do need to make ongoing efforts toPartnerships................. Publication 541further the interests of your business. Passive activities............. Publication 925You do not have to carry on regular full-time businessRecordkeeping............... Publication 583activities to be self-employed. Having a part-time businessS corporations............... Instructions forin addition to your regular job or business may be self-em- Form 1120Sployment.
Page 3

Page 4 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table A. What You Need To Know About Federal Taxes
(Note. The following is a list of questions you may need to answer so you can fill out your federal income tax
return. Chapters are given to help you find the related discussion in this publication.)
 What must I know  Where to find the answer
What kinds of federal taxes do I have to pay? How do I pay them? See chapter 1.
What forms must I file? See chapter 1.
What must I do if I have employees? See Employment Taxes in chapter 1.
Do I have to start my tax year in January? Or can I start it in any other See Accounting Periods in chapter 2.
month?
What method can I use to account for my income and expenses? See Accounting Methods in chapter 2.
What kinds of business income do I have to report on my tax return? See chapter 5.
What kinds of business expenses can I deduct on my tax return? See chapter 8.
What kinds of expenses are not deductible as business expenses? See Expenses You Cannot Deduct in
chapter 8.
What happens if I have a business loss? Can I deduct it? See chapter 9.
What must I do if I disposed of business property during the year? See chapter 3.
What are my rights as a taxpayer? See chapter 11.
Where do I go if I need help with federal tax matters? See chapter 12.
What you need to know. Table A (shown above) pro-
vides a list of questions you need to answer to help youWhat’s New for 2005meet your federal tax obligations. After each question is
the location in this publication where you will find theThe following are some of the tax changes for 2005. Forrelated discussion. information on other changes, see Publication 553, High-
lights of 2005 Tax Changes.IRS mission.Provide America’s taxpayers top quality
service by helping them understand and meet their tax
responsibilities and by applying the tax law with integrityAt the time this publication went to print, Con-
and fairness to all. gress was considering legislation that would pro-
vide additional tax relief for individuals affected
CAUTION
!
Comments and suggestions. We welcome your com- by Hurricane Katrina, Rita, and Wilma. For more details,ments about this publication and your suggestions forand to find out if this legislation was enacted, see Publica-future editions. tion 4492.You can email us at *taxforms@irs.gov. (The asterisk
must be included in the address.) Please put “PublicationsStandard mileage rate.The standard mileage rate for theComment” on the subject line. Although we cannot re-cost of operating your car, van, pickup, or panel truck inspond individually to each email, we do appreciate your2005 is 40.5 cents a mile for all business miles drivenfeedback and will consider your comments as we revisebefore September 1, 2005. The rate is 48.5 cents a mile forour tax products. business miles driven after August 31, 2005, and beforeYou can write us at the following address: January 1, 2006. For more information, see Car and Truck
Expenses in chapter 8.Internal Revenue Service
Business Forms and Publications Branch Self-employment tax.The maximum net self-employ-SE:W:CAR:MP:T:B ment earnings subject to the social security part (12.4%) of1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6406 the self-employment tax is $90,000 for 2005. For moreWashington, DC 20224 information, see Self-Employment (SE) Tax in chapter 1
and chapter 10.We respond to many letters by telephone. Therefore, it
would be helpful if you would include your daytime phoneDomestic production activities deduction. You may
number, including the area code, in your correspondence.be able to deduct up to 3% of your qualified production
activities income from certain business activities. For moreTax questions. If you have a tax question, visit
information, see Form 8903, Domestic Production Activi-www.irs.gov or call 1-800-829-1040. We cannot answer
ties Deduction.tax questions at either of the addresses listed above.
Page 4

Page 5 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Increased section 179 deduction dollar limit.The max-
imum section 179 deduction you can elect for property youReminders
purchased and placed in service beginning in 2005 has
increased from $102,000 to $105,000. For more informa-Accounting Methods. Certain small business taxpayers
tion, see Publication 946. may be eligible to adopt or change to the cash method of
accounting and may not be required to account for invento-New and revised credits.The following credits were cre-ries. For more information, see Inventories in chapter 2.ated or revised by recent legislation. Some are effective for
tax year 2005 and some for 2006. See chapter 4 for aReportable transactions.You must file Form 8886, Re-
complete list of the credits and the form numbers.portable Transaction Disclosure Statement, to report cer-
tain transactions. You may have to pay a penalty if you are
• Alcohol fuel credit.
required to file Form 8886 but do not do so. You may also
• Alternative fuel vehicle refueling property credit.have to pay interest and penalties on any reportable trans-
action understatements. Reportable transactions include• Alternative motor vehicle credit.
(1) transactions the same as or substantially similar to tax
• Biodiesel and renewable diesel fuels credit. avoidance transactions identified by the IRS, (2) transac-
tions offered to you under conditions of confidentiality for• Credit for increasing research activities.
which you paid an advisor a minimum fee, (3) transactions
• Distilled spirits credit. for which you have, or a related party has, contractual
protection against disallowance of the tax benefits, (4)• Energy efficient appliance credit.
transactions that result in losses of at least $2 million in any
• Energy efficient home credit. single tax year ($50,000 if from certain foreign currency
transactions) or $4 million in any combination of tax years,• Investment credit.
(5) transactions resulting in book-tax differences of more
• Nonconventional source fuel credit. than $10 million on a gross basis, and (6) transactions with
asset holding periods of 45 days or less and that result in a• Qualified railroad track maintenance credit.
tax credit of more than $250,000. For more information,
• Renewable electricity, refined coal, and Indian coalsee the Instructions for Form 8886.
production credit.
Photographs of Missing
What’s New for 2006 Children
The following are some of the tax changes for 2006. ForThe Internal Revenue Service is a proud partner with theinformation on other changes, see Publication 553, High-National Center for Missing and Exploited Children. Photo-lights of 2005 Tax Changes. graphs of missing children selected by the Center may
appear in this publication on pages that would otherwiseSelf-employment tax.The maximum net self-employ-
be blank. You can help bring these children home byment earnings subject to the social security part of the
looking at the photographs and calling 1-800-THE-LOSTself-employment tax increases to $94,200 for 2006.
(1-800-843-5678) if you recognize a child.Standard mileage rate.The standard mileage rate for the
cost of operating your car, van, pickup, or panel truck in
2006 is 44.5 cents a mile for all business miles. For more
information, see Car and Truck Expenses in chapter 8.
Page 5

Page 6 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Individual taxpayer identification number (ITIN).The
IRS will issue an ITIN if you are a nonresident or resident
1. alien and you do not have and are not eligible to get an
SSN. In general, if you need to obtain an ITIN, you must
attach Form W-7, Application for IRS Individual Taxpayer
Filing and Paying Identification Number, with your signed, original, com-
pleted tax return and mail both to the Philadelphia Service
Business Taxes Center. The exceptions are covered in detail in the instruc-
tions for Form W-7 (Rev. January 2006). If you must
include another person’s SSN on your return and that
person does not have and cannot get an SSN, enter that
Introduction
person’s ITIN. The application is also available in Spanish.
This chapter explains the business taxes you may have toThe form is available from the IRS website at www.irs.gov
pay and the forms you may have to file. It also discussesor you can call 1-800-829-3676 to order the form.
taxpayer identification numbers.
An ITIN is for tax use only. It does not entitle theTable 1-1 lists the benefits of filing electronically. holder to social security benefits or change theTable 1-2 lists the federal taxes you may have to pay, holder’s employment or immigration status.CAUTION
!
their due dates, and the forms you use to report them.
Table 1-3 provides checklists that highlight the typicalEmployer identification number (EIN).You must also
have an EIN to use as a taxpayer identification number ifforms and schedules you may need to file if you ever go out
you do either of the following.of business.
• Pay wages to one or more employees.You may want to get Publication 509, Tax Calen-
dars for 2006. It has tax calendars that tell you• File pension or excise tax returns.when to file returns and make tax payments.
TIP
If you must have an EIN, include it along with your SSN
on your Schedule C or C-EZ.Useful Items
You can apply for an EIN:You may want to see:
• Online by clicking on the EIN link at www.irs.gov/Publication businesses/small. The EIN is issued immediately
once the application information is validated.❏ 505 Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax
• By telephone at 1-800-829-4933 from 8:00 a.m. toForm (and Instructions) 8:00 p.m. in your local time zone.
❏ 1040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Return • By mailing or faxing Form SS-4, Application for Em-
ployer Identification Number.❏ 1040-ES Estimated Tax for Individuals
❏ Sch C (Form 1040)Profit or Loss From Business New EIN. You may need to get a new EIN if either the
form or the ownership of your business changes. For more❏ Sch C-EZ (Form 1040)Net Profit From Business
information, see Publication 1635, Understanding Your❏ Sch SE (Form 1040)Self-Employment Tax EIN.
See chapter 12 for information about getting publica-When you need identification numbers of other per-tions and forms. sons. In operating your business, you will probably make
certain payments you must report on information returns.
These payments are discussed under Information Re-
turns, later in this chapter. You must give the recipient ofIdentification Numbers
these payments (the payee) a statement showing the total
amount paid during the year. You must include the payee’sThis section explains three types of taxpayer identification
identification number and your identification number on thenumbers, who needs them, when to use them, and how to
returns and statements.get them.
Employee. If you have employees, you must get anSocial security number (SSN).Generally, use your SSNSSN from each of them. Record the name and SSN of
as your taxpayer identification number. You must put thiseach employee exactly as they are shown on the
number on each of your individual income tax forms, suchemployee’s social security card. If the employee’s name is
as Form 1040 and its schedules. not correct as shown on the card, the employee should
To apply for an SSN, use Form SS-5, Application for arequest a new card from the SSA. This may occur if the
Social Security Card. This form is available at Social Se-employee’s name was changed due to marriage or di-
curity Administration (SSA) offices or by callingvorce.
1-800-772-1213. It is also available from the SSA websiteForm W-4 is completed by each employee so the cor-
at www.socialsecurity.gov. rect federal income tax can be withheld from their pay.
Page 6 Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes

Page 7 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If your employee does not have an SSN, he or she Using e-file does not affect your chances of an IRS
examination of your return.should file Form SS-5 with the SSA.
You can file most commonly used business forms usingOther payee.If you make payments to someone who isIRS e-file. For more information, visit the IRS website atnot your employee and you must report the payments onwww.irs.gov.an information return, get that person’s SSN. If you must
Electronic signatures.Paperless filing is easier than youreport payments to an organization, such as a corporation
think and it’s available to most taxpayers who file electroni-or partnership, you must get its EIN.
cally—including those first-time filers who were 16 or olderTo get the payee’s SSN or EIN, use Form W-9, Request
at the end of 2005. If you file electronically using taxfor Taxpayer Identification Number and Certification. 
preparation software or a tax professional, you may beA payee who does not provide you with an identificationable to participate in the Self-Select PIN (personal identifi-number may be subject to backup withholding. For infor-cation number) program. If you are married filing jointly,mation on backup withholding, see the Form W-9 instruc-you and your spouse will each need to create a PIN andtions and the General Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098,enter these PINs as your electronic signatures.5498, and W-2G.  To create a PIN, you must know your adjusted gross
income (AGI) from your originally filed 2004 income tax
return (not from an amended return, Form 1040X, or any
Income Tax math error notice from the IRS). You will also need to
provide your date of birth (DOB). Make sure your DOB is
This part explains whether you have to file an income taxaccurate and matches the information on record with the
return and when you file it. It also explains how you pay theSocial Security Administration before you e-file. To do this,
tax. check your annual Social Security Statement.
If you use a Self-Select PIN, there is nothing to sign and
nothing to mail—not even your Forms W-2. For more
Do I Have To File details on the Self-Select PIN program, visit the IRS web-an Income Tax Return? site at www.irs.gov.
You have to file an income tax return for 2005 if your netForms 8453 and 8453-OL. Your return is not complete
earnings from self-employment were $400 or more. If yourwithout your signature. If you are not eligible or choose not
net earnings from self-employment were less than $400, to sign your return electronically, you must complete, sign,
and file Form 8453, U.S. Individual Income Tax Declara-you still have to file an income tax return if you meet any
tion for an IRS e-file Return, or Form 8453-OL, U.S. Indi-other filing requirement listed in the Form 1040 instruc-
vidual Income Tax Declaration for an IRS e-file Onlinetions.
Return, whichever applies.
How Do I File? State returns.In most states, you can file an electronic
state return simultaneously with your federal return. For
File your income tax return on Form 1040  and attach more information, check with your local IRS office, state
Schedule C  or Schedule C-EZ.  Enter the net profit ortax agency, tax professional, or the IRS website at
loss from Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ on page 1 of Formwww.irs.gov.
1040. Use Schedule C to figure your net profit or loss from
Refunds. You can have your refund check mailed to you,your business. If you operated more than one business as
or you can have your refund deposited directly to youra sole proprietorship, you must attach a separate Schedulechecking or savings account.C for each business. You can use the simpler ScheduleWith e-file, your refund will be issued in half the time asC-EZ if you operated only one business as a sole proprie-when filing on paper. Most refunds are issued within 3torship, you did not have a net loss, and you meet the otherweeks. If you choose Direct Deposit, you can receive yourrequirements listed in Part I of the schedule. refund in as few as 10 days.
Offset against debts.As with a paper return, you mayIRS e-file (Electronic Filing)
not get all of your refund if you owe certain past-due
amounts, such as federal tax, state tax, a student loan, or
child support. You will be notified if the refund you claimed
has been offset against your debts.
Refund inquiries.You can check the status of your re-You may be able to file your tax returns electronicallyfund if it has been at least 3 weeks from the date you filedusing an IRS e-file option. Table 1-1 lists the benefits ofyour return. Be sure to have a copy of your tax returnIRS e-file. IRS e-file uses automation to replace most ofavailable because you will need to know the filing status,the manual steps needed to process paper returns. As athe first social security number shown on the return, andresult, the processing of e-file returns is faster and morethe exact whole-dollar amount of the refund. To check onaccurate than the processing of paper returns. As with ayour refund, do one of the following.paper return, you are responsible for making sure your
return contains accurate information and is filed on time.• Go to www.irs.gov, and click on Where’s My Refund.
Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes Page 7

Page 8 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Call 1-800-829-4477 for automated refund informa-Free Internet filing options.More taxpayers can now
tion, and follow the recorded instructions. prepare and e-file their individual income tax returns free
using commercial tax preparation software accessible• Call 1-800-829-1954 during the hours shown in yourthrough www.irs.gov or www.firstgov.gov. The IRS isform instructions. partnering with the tax software industry to offer free prep-
aration and filing services to a significant number of tax-
Balance due.If you owe tax, you must pay it by April 17,payers. Security and privacy certificate programs will
2006, to avoid late-payment penalties and interest. Youassure tax data is safe and secure. To see if you qualify for
can make your payment electronically by scheduling anthese services, visit the Free Internet Filing Homepage at
electronic funds withdrawal from your checking or savingswww.irs.gov.
account or by credit card. If you cannot use the free services, you can buy tax
preparation software at various electronics stores or com-
puter and office supply stores. You can also download
Using an Authorized IRS e-file Provider
software from the Internet or prepare and file your return
completely online by using a tax preparation softwareMany tax professionals can electronically file paperless
package available on the Internet.returns for their clients. You have two options.
1. You can prepare your return, take it to an authorizedThrough Employers and FinancialIRS e-file provider, and have the provider transmit itInstitutionselectronically to the IRS.
Some businesses offer free e-file to their employees,2. You can have an authorized IRS e-file provider pre-
members, or customers. Others offer it for a fee. Ask yourpare your return and transmit it for you electronically.
employer or financial institution if they offer IRS e-file as anYou will be asked to complete Form 8879 to authorizeemployee, member, or customer benefit.the provider to enter your self-selected PIN on your return.
Depending on the provider and the specific servicesFree Help With Your Returnrequested, a fee may be charged. To find an authorized
IRS e-file provider near you, go to www.irs.gov or look forFree help in preparing your return is available nationwidean “Authorized IRS e-file Provider” sign. from IRS-trained volunteers. The Volunteer Income Tax
Assistance (VITA) program is designed to help low-income
taxpayers and the Tax Counseling for the Elderly (TCE)
Using Your Personal Computer program is designed to assist taxpayers age 60 or older
with their tax returns. Some locations offer free electronicA computer with a modem or Internet access is all you
filing.need to file your tax return using IRS e-file. Best of all,
when you use your personal computer, you can e-file your
return from the comfort of your home any time of the day or
When Is My Tax Return Due?
night. Sign your return electronically using a self-selected
PIN to complete the process. There is no signature form to Form 1040 for calendar year 2005 is due by April 17, 2006.
submit or Forms W-2 to send in. If you use a fiscal year (explained in chapter 2), your return
Table 1-1. Benefits of IRS e-file
Accuracy • Your chance of getting an error notice from the IRS is significantly reduced.
Security • Your privacy and security are assured.
Electronic signatures • Create your own personal identification number (PIN) and file a completely
paperless return through your tax preparation software or tax professional. There is
nothing to mail!
Proof of acceptance
• You receive an electronic acknowledgement within 48 hours that the IRS has
accepted your return for processing.
Fast refunds • You get your refund in half the time, even faster with Direct Deposit—in as few as
10 days.
Free Internet filing options• Use the IRS website www.irs.gov to access commercial tax preparation and e-file
services available at no cost to eligible taxpayers.
Electronic payment • Convenient, safe and secure electronic payment options are available. E-file and
options pay your taxes in a single step. Schedule an electronic funds withdrawal from your
checking or savings account (up to and including April 17, 2006) or pay by credit
card.
Federal/State filing
• Prepare and file your federal and state tax returns together and double the benefits
you get from e-file.
Page 8 Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes

Page 9 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
is due by the 15th day of the 4th month after the end of your
fiscal year. If you file late, you may have to pay penaltiesSelf-Employment (SE) Tax
and interest. If you cannot file your return on time, use
Form 4868, Application for Automatic Extension of TimeSelf-employment tax (SE tax) is a social security and
To File U.S. Individual Income Tax Return, to request anMedicare tax primarily for individuals who work for them-
automatic 6-month extension. selves. It is similar to the social security and Medicare
taxes withheld from the pay of most wage earners.
How Do I Pay Income Tax? If you earned income as a statutory employee,
you do not pay SE tax on that income.Federal income tax is a pay-as-you-go tax. You must pay it
CAUTION
!
as you earn or receive income during the year. An em-
ployee usually has income tax withheld from his or her pay.Social security coverage.Social security benefits areIf you do not pay your tax through withholding, or do notavailable to self-employed persons just as they are topay enough tax that way, you might have to pay estimatedwage earners. Your payments of SE tax contribute to yourtax. You generally have to make estimated tax payments ifcoverage under the social security system. Social securityyou expect to owe taxes, including self-employment taxcoverage provides you with retirement benefits, disability(discussed later), of $1,000 or more when you file yourbenefits, survivor benefits, and hospital insurance (Medi-return. Use Form 1040-ES to figure and pay the tax. If youcare) benefits.do not have to make estimated tax payments, you can pay
By not reporting all of your self-employment in-any tax due when you file your return. For more information
come, you could cause your social security ben-on estimated tax, see Publication 505.
efits to be lower when you retire.CAUTION
!
What are my payment options?You can pay your esti-
How to become insured under social security.Youmated tax electronically using various options. If you pay
must be insured under the social security system beforeelectronically, there is no need to mail in Form 1040-ES
you begin receiving social security benefits. You are in-payment vouchers. These options include:
sured if you have the required number of credits (also
1. Paying electronically through the Electronic Federalcalled quarters of coverage), discussed next.
Tax Payment System (EFTPS). Earning credits in 2005 and 2006.For 2005, you re-
2. Paying by authorizing an electronic funds withdrawalceived one credit, up to a maximum of four credits, for each
when you file Form 1040 electronically. $920 ($970 for 2006) of income subject to social security
taxes. Therefore, for 2005, if you had income (self-employ-3. Paying by credit card over the phone or by Internet.ment and wages) of $3,680 that was subject to social
Other options include crediting an overpayment from yoursecurity taxes, you received four credits ($3,680 ÷ $920).
2005 return to your 2006 estimated tax, and mailing aFor an explanation of the number of credits you must
check or money order with a Form 1040-ES payment have to be insured and the benefits available to you and
voucher. your family under the social security program, consult your
nearest Social Security Administration (SSA) office.
EFTPS
Making false statements to get or to increase
1. To enroll in EFTPS, go to www.eftps.gov or call social security benefits may subject you to pen-
1-800-555-4477. alties.CAUTION
!
2. When you request a new EIN and you will have a taxThe Social Security Administration (SSA) time limit forobligation, you are automatically enrolled in EFTPS.posting self-employment income.Generally, the SSA
3. Benefits of EFTPS: will give you credit only for self-employment income re-
ported on a tax return filed within 3 years, 3 months, and 15
a. The chance of an error in making your paymentsdays after the tax year you earned the income. If you file
is reduced. your tax return or report a change in your self-employment
income after this time limit, the SSA may change its rec-b. You receive immediate confirmation of every
ords, but only to remove or reduce the amount. The SSAtransaction.
will not change its records to increase your self-employ-
ment income.
Penalty for underpayment of tax.If you did not pay
Who must pay self-employment tax.You must pay SEenough income tax and self-employment tax for 2005 by
tax and file Schedule SE (Form 1040) if either of thewithholding or by making estimated tax payments, you
following applies. may have to pay a penalty on the amount not paid. The IRS
will figure the penalty for you and send you a bill. Or you1. Your net earnings from self-employment (excludingcan use Form 2210, Underpayment of Estimated Tax by church employee income) were $400 or more.Individuals, Estates, and Trusts, to see if you have to pay a
penalty and to figure the penalty amount. For more infor- 2. You had church employee income of $108.28 or
mation, see Publication 505. more.
Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes Page 9

Page 10 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The SE tax rules apply no matter how old you
are and even if you are already receiving socialExcise Taxessecurity or Medicare benefits.CAUTION
!
This section identifies some of the excise taxes you may
have to pay and the forms you have to file if you do any ofSE tax rate.The SE tax rate on net earnings is 15.3%
the following.(12.4% social security tax plus 2.9% Medicare tax).
• Manufacture or sell certain products.
Maximum earnings subject to SE tax.Only the first
• Operate certain kinds of businesses.$90,000 of your combined wages, tips, and net earnings in
2005 is subject to any combination of the 12.4% social• Use various kinds of equipment, facilities, or prod-
security part of SE tax, social security tax, or railroaducts.
retirement (tier 1) tax. • Receive payment for certain services.
All your combined wages, tips, and net earnings in 2005For more information on excise taxes, see Publication 510,are subject to any combination of the 2.9% Medicare partExcise Taxes for 2006.of SE tax, social security tax, or railroad retirement (tier 1)
tax. Form 720. The federal excise taxes reported on Form
If your wages and tips are subject to either social secur-720, Quarterly Federal Excise Tax Return, consist of sev-
ity or railroad retirement (tier 1) tax, or both, and total ateral broad categories of taxes, including the following.
least $90,000, do not pay the 12.4% social security part of
• Environmental taxes on the sale or use of ozone-de-the SE tax on any of your net earnings. However, you must
pleting chemicals and imported products containingpay the 2.9% Medicare part of the SE tax on all your netor manufactured with these chemicals.earnings.
• Communications and air transportation taxes.Deduct one-half of your SE tax as an adjustment
to income on line 27 of Form 1040. • Fuel taxes.TIP
• Tax on the first retail sale of heavy trucks, trailers,
and tractors.
More information.For information on methods of calcu-
• Manufacturers taxes on the sale or use of a varietylating SE tax, see Chapter 10, Self-Employment Tax. of different articles.
Form 2290. There is a federal excise tax on the use of
Employment Taxes certain trucks, truck tractors, and buses on public high-
ways. The tax applies to vehicles having a taxable grossIf you have employees, you will need to file forms to reportweight of 55,000 pounds or more. Report the tax on Form
employment taxes. Employment taxes include the follow-2290, Heavy Highway Vehicle Use Tax Return. For more
ing items. information, see the instructions for Form 2290.
• Social security and Medicare taxes.
Depositing excise taxes.If you have to file a quarterly
• Federal income tax withholding. excise tax return on Form 720, you may have to deposit
your excise taxes before the return is due. For details on• Federal unemployment (FUTA) tax.
depositing excise taxes, see the instructions for Form 720.
For more information, see Publication 15 (Circular E),
Employer’s Tax Guide. That publication explains your tax
responsibilities as an employer.
Information ReturnsTo help you determine whether the people working for
you are your employees, see Publication 15-A, Employer’sIf you make or receive payments in your business, you
Supplemental Tax Guide. That publication has informationmay have to report them to the IRS on information returns.
to help you determine whether an individual is an indepen-The IRS compares the payments shown on the information
returns with each person’s income tax return to see if thedent contractor or an employee.
payments were included in income. You must give a copyIf you incorrectly classify an employee as anof each information return you are required to file to theindependent contractor, you may be held liablerecipient or payer. In addition to the forms described be-for employment taxes for that worker plus aCAUTION
!
low, you may have to use other returns to report certainpenalty. kinds of payments or transactions. For more details on
An independent contractor is someone who is self-em-information returns and when you have to file them, see
ployed. You do not generally have to withhold or pay anythe General Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098, 5498, and
taxes on payments to an independent contractor. W-2G.
Page 10 Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes

Page 11 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 1-2. Which Forms Must I File?
IF you are liable for: THEN use Form: DUE by: 1
Income tax 1040 and Schedule C or C-EZ 2 15th day of 4th month after end of
tax year.
Self-employment tax Schedule SE File with Form 1040.
Estimated tax 1040-ES 15th day of 4th, 6th, and 9th months
of tax year, and 15th day of 1st
month after the end of tax year.
Social security and Medicare taxes 941 April 30, July 31, October 31, and
and income tax withholding January 31
4.
8109 (to make deposits)3 See Publication 15.
Providing information on social W-2 (to employee) January 31 4.
security and Medicare taxes and
income tax withholding W-2 and W-3 (to the Social Security Last day of February (March 31 if
Administration) filing electronically)
4.
Federal unemployment (FUTA) tax 940 or 940-EZ January 31 4.
8109 (to make deposits)3 April 30, July 31, October 31, and
January 31, but only if the liability for
unpaid tax is more than $500.
Filing information returns for See  Information Returns Forms 1099–to the recipient by
payments to nonemployees and January 31 and to the IRS by
transactions with other persons February 28 (March 31 if filing
electronically).
Other forms—See the General
Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098,
5498, and W-2G.
Excise tax See Excise Taxes See the instructions to the forms.
1 If a due date falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the due date is the next business day. For more information, see
Publication 509, Tax Calendars for 2006.
2 File a separate schedule for each business.
3 Do not use if you deposit taxes electronically.
4 See the form instructions if you go out of business, change the form of your business, or stop paying wages.
Form 1099-MISC. Use Form 1099-MISC, Miscellaneous wages, tips, and other compensation, withheld income,
Income, to report certain payments you make in yoursocial security, and Medicare taxes, and advance earned
business. These payments include the following items.income credit payments. For more information on what to
report on Form W-2, see the Instructions for Forms W-2• Payments of $600 or more for services performed
and W-3.for your business by people not treated as your em-
ployees, such as fees to subcontractors, attorneys,
accountants, or directors. Penalties.The law provides for the following penalties if
you do not file Form 1099-MISC or Form W-2 or do not
• Rent payments of $600 or more, other than rents
correctly report the information. For more information, seepaid to real estate agents.
the General Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098, 5498, and• Prizes and awards of $600 or more that are not forW-2G.services, such as winnings on TV or radio shows.
• Royalty payments of $10 or more. • Failure to file information returns. This penalty ap-
plies if you do not file information returns by the due• Payments to certain crew members by operators of date, do not include all required information, or re-fishing boats.
port incorrect information. 
You also use Form 1099-MISC to report your sales of
• Failure to furnish correct payee statements. This$5,000 or more of consumer goods to a person for resale
penalty applies if you do not furnish a required state-anywhere other than in a permanent retail establishment.
ment to a payee by the required date, do not include
all required information, or report incorrect informa-Form W-2. You must file Form W-2, Wage and Tax State-
ment, to report payments to your employees, such as tion. 
Chapter 1 Filing and Paying Business Taxes Page 11

Page 12 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 1-3. Going Out of Business Checklists
(Note. The following checklists highlight the typical final forms and schedules you may need to file if you
ever go out of business. For more information, see the instructions for the listed forms.)
IF you are liable for: THEN you may need to:
Income tax ❏ File Schedule C or C-EZ with your Form 1040 for the year in which you go
out of business.
❏ File Form 4797 with your Form 1040 for each year in which you sell or
exchange property used in your business or in which the business use of
certain section 179 or listed property drops to 50% or less.
❏ File Form 8594 with your Form 1040 if you sold your business.
Self-employment tax ❏ File Schedule SE with your Form 1040 for the year in which you go out of
business.
Employment taxes ❏ File Form 941 for the calendar quarter in which you make final wage
payments. Note. Do not forget to check the box and enter the date final
wages were paid on line 16.
❏ File Form 940 or 940-EZ for the calendar year in which final wages were
paid. Note. Do not forget to check the box, If you will not have to file returns
in the future..., under Question D.
Information returns ❏ Provide Forms W-2 to your employees for the calendar year in which you
make final wage payments. Note. These forms are generally due by the due
date of your final Form 941.
❏ File Form W-3 to file Forms W-2. Note. These forms are generally due
within 1 month after the due date of your final Form 941.
❏ Provide Forms 1099-MISC to each person to whom you have paid at least
$600 for services (including parts and materials) during the calendar year in
which you go out of business.
❏  File Form 1096 to file Forms 1099-MISC.
Waiver of penalties.These penalties will not apply if
you can show that the failure was due to reasonable cause
2.and not willful neglect.
In addition, there is no penalty for failure to include all
required information, or for including incorrect information,Accounting Periods
on a de minimis (small) number of information returns if
you correct the errors by August 1 of the year the returnsand Methods
are due. (A de minimis number of returns is the greater of
10 or 1/2 of 1% of the total number of returns you are
required to file for the year.) Introduction
You must figure your taxable income and file an income taxForm 8300. You must file Form 8300, Report of Cashreturn for an annual accounting period called a tax year.Payments Over $10,000 Received in a Trade or Business,Also, you must consistently use an accounting method thatif you receive more than $10,000 in cash in one transac-clearly shows your income and expenses for the tax year.tion, or two or more related business transactions. Cash
includes U.S. and foreign coin and currency. It also in-Useful Itemscludes certain monetary instruments such as cashier’s andYou may want to see:traveler’s checks and money orders. Cash does not in-
clude a check drawn on an individual’s personal accountPublication(personal check). For more information, see Publication
1544, Reporting Cash Payments of Over $10,000 (Re- ❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methods
ceived in a Trade or Business). See chapter 12 for information about getting publica-
Penalties.There are civil and criminal penalties, includ-tions and forms.
ing up to 5 years in prison, for not filing Form 8300, filing (or
causing the filing of) a false or fraudulent Form 8300, or
structuring a transaction to evade reporting requirements.
Page 12 Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods

Page 13 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Accounting Periods Accounting Methods
When preparing a statement of income and expensesAn accounting method is a set of rules used to determine
(generally your income tax return), you must use yourwhen and how income and expenses are reported. Your
books and records for a specific interval of time called anaccounting method includes not only the overall method of
accounting period. The annual accounting period for youraccounting you use, but also the accounting treatment you
income tax return is called a tax year. You can use one ofuse for any material item.
the following tax years. You choose an accounting method for your business
when you file your first income tax return that includes a• A calendar tax year. Schedule C for the business. After that, if you want to
• A fiscal tax year. change your accounting method, you must generally get
IRS approval. See Change in Accounting Method, later.Unless you have a required tax year, you adopt a tax year
by filing your first income tax return using that tax year. AKinds of methods.Generally, you can use any of therequired tax year is a tax year required under the Internalfollowing accounting methods.Revenue Code or the Income Tax Regulations.
• Cash method.
Calendar tax year.A calendar tax year is 12 consecutive• An accrual method.months beginning January 1 and ending December 31.
You must adopt the calendar tax year if any of the• Special methods of accounting for certain items of
following apply. income and expenses.
• You keep no books. • Combination method using elements of two or more
of the above.• You have no annual accounting period.
• Your present tax year does not qualify as a fiscalYou must use the same accounting method to figure
year. your taxable income and to keep your books. Also, you
must use an accounting method that clearly shows your• Your use of the calendar tax year is required underincome.the Internal Revenue Code or the Income Tax Regu-
lations. Business and personal items.You can account for busi-
ness and personal items under different accounting meth-If you filed your first income tax return using the calendarods. For example, you can figure your business incometax year and you later begin business as a sole proprietor,under an accrual method, even if you use the cash methodyou must continue to use the calendar tax year unless youto figure personal items.get IRS approval to change it or are otherwise allowed to
change it without IRS approval. For more information, seeTwo or more businesses.If you have two or more sepa-
Change in tax year, later. rate and distinct businesses, you can use a different ac-
If you adopt the calendar tax year, you must maintaincounting method for each if the method clearly reflects the
your books and records and report your income and ex-income of each business. They are separate and distinct
penses for the period from January 1 through Decemberonly if you maintain complete and separate books and
31 of each year. records for each business.
Fiscal tax year.A fiscal tax year is 12 consecutiveCash Methodmonths ending on the last day of any month except De-
cember. A 52-53-week tax year is a fiscal tax year thatMost individuals and many sole proprietors with no inven-varies from 52 to 53 weeks but does not have to end on thetory use the cash method because they find it easier tolast day of a month. keep cash method records. However, if an inventory isIf you adopt a fiscal tax year, you must maintain yournecessary to account for your income, you must generallybooks and records and report your income and expensesuse an accrual method of accounting for sales andusing the same tax year. purchases. For more information, see Inventories, later.For more information on a fiscal tax year, including a
52-53-week tax year, see Publication 538.
Income
Change in tax year.Generally, you must file Form 1128,
Application To Adopt, Change, or Retain a Tax Year, toUnder the cash method, include in your gross income all
request IRS approval to change your tax year. See theitems of income you actually or constructively receive
instructions for Form 1128 for exceptions. If you qualify forduring your tax year. If you receive property or services,
an automatic approval request, a user fee is not required. Ifyou must include their fair market value in income.
you do not qualify for automatic approval, a ruling must be
requested. See the instructions for Form 1128 for informa- Example. On December 30, 2004, Mrs. Sycamore sent
tion about user fees if you are requesting a ruling. you a check for interior decorating services you provided to
Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods Page 13

Page 14 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
her. You received the check on January 2, 2005. You mustExpenses paid in advance.You can deduct an expense
you pay in advance only in the year to which it applies.include the amount of the check in income for 2005.
Example. You are a calendar year taxpayer and youConstructive receipt.You have constructive receipt of
pay $1,000 in 2005 for a business insurance policy effec-income when an amount is credited to your account or
tive for one year, beginning July 1. You can deduct $500 inmade available to you without restriction. You do not need
2005 and $500 in 2006.to have possession of it. If you authorize someone to be
your agent and receive income for you, you are treated as
having received it when your agent received it.
Accrual Method
Example. Interest is credited to your bank account inUnder an accrual method of accounting, you generally
December 2005. You do not withdraw it or enter it into yourreport income in the year earned and deduct or capitalize
passbook until 2006. You must include it in your grossexpenses in the year incurred. The purpose of an accrual
method of accounting is to match income and expenses inincome for 2005.
the correct year.Delaying receipt of income.You cannot hold checks
or postpone taking possession of similar property from one
tax year to another to avoid paying tax on the income. You
Income–General Rule
must report the income in the year the property is received
Under an accrual method, you generally include anor made available to you without restriction.
amount in your gross income for the tax year in which all
events that fix your right to receive the income have oc-Example. Frances Jones, a service contractor, was en-
curred and you can determine the amount with reasonabletitled to receive a $10,000 payment on a contract in De-
accuracy.cember 2005. She was told in December that her payment
was available. At her request, she was not paid until
Example. You are a calendar year, accrual methodJanuary 2006. She must include this payment in her 2005
taxpayer. You sold a computer on December 28, 2005.income because it was constructively received in 2005.
You billed the customer in the first week of January 2006,Checks. Receipt of a valid check by the end of the taxbut you did not receive payment until February 2006. You
year is constructive receipt of income in that year, even ifmust include the amount received for the computer in your
you cannot cash or deposit the check until the following2005 income.
year.
Income–Special RulesExample. Dr. Redd received a check for $500 on De-
cember 31, 2005, from a patient. She could not deposit the
The following are special rules that apply to advance pay-check in her business account until January 3, 2006. She
ments, estimating income, and changing a paymentmust include this fee in her income for 2005. schedule for services.
Debts paid by another person or canceled.If your
Estimated income.If you include a reasonably estimateddebts are paid by another person or are canceled by your
amount in gross income, and later determine the exactcreditors, you may have to report part or all of this debt
amount is different, take the difference into account in therelief as income. If you receive income in this way, you
tax year in which you make the determination.constructively receive the income when the debt is can-
celed or paid. For more information, see Canceled Debt Change in payment schedule for services.If you per-under Kinds of Income in chapter 5. form services for a basic rate specified in a contract, you
must accrue the income at the basic rate, even if you agreeRepayment of income. If you include an amount in in-to receive payments at a lower rate until you complete thecome and in a later year you have to repay all or part of it,services and then receive the difference.you can usually deduct the repayment in the year in which
you make it. If the amount you repay is over $3,000, aAdvance payments for services.Generally, you report
special rule applies. For details about the special rule, seean advance payment for services to be performed in a later
Publication 535, Business Expenses, chapter 13, Repay-tax year as income in the year you receive the payment.
ments. However, if you receive an advance payment for services
you agree to perform by the end of the next tax year, you
can elect to postpone including the advance payment in
Expenses income until the next tax year. However, you cannot post-
pone including any payment beyond that tax year.Under the cash method, you generally deduct expenses inFor more information, see Advance Payment for Serv-the tax year in which you actually pay them. This includesices under Accrual Method in Publication 538. That publi-business expenses for which you contest liability. How-cation also explains special rules for reporting the followingever, you may not be able to deduct an expense paid intypes of income.advance or you may be required to capitalize certain costs,
as explained later under Uniform Capitalization Rules.
• Advance payments for service agreements.
Page 14 Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods

Page 15 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Advance payments under guarantee or warranty Your office supplies may qualify as a recurring expense.
In that case, you can deduct them in 2005 even if thecontracts.
supplies are not delivered until 2006 (when economic• Prepaid interest. performance occurs).
• Prepaid rent. Keeping inventories.When the production, purchase, or
sale of merchandise is an income-producing factor in your
Advance payments for sales.Special rules apply to in-business, you must generally take inventories into account
cluding income from advance payments on agreements forat the beginning and the end of your tax year. If you must
future sales or other dispositions of goods you hold prima-account for an inventory, you must generally use an ac-
rily for sale to your customers in the ordinary course of yourcrual method of accounting for your purchases and sales.
business. If the advance payments are for contracts involv-For more information, see Inventories, later.
ing both the sale and service of goods, it may be necessarySpecial rule for related persons.You cannot deductto treat them as two agreements. An agreement includes abusiness expenses and interest owed to a related persongift certificate that can be redeemed for goods. Treatwho uses the cash method of accounting until you makeamounts that are due and payable as amounts you re-the payment and the corresponding amount is includible inceived. the related person’s gross income. Determine the relation-You generally include an advance payment in incomeship, for this rule, as of the end of the tax year for which thefor the tax year in which you receive it. However, you canexpense or interest would otherwise be deductible. If ause an alternative method. For information about the alter-deduction is not allowed under this rule, the rule will con-native method, see Publication 538. tinue to apply even if your relationship with the person
ends before the expense or interest is includible in the
gross income of that person.
Expenses Related persons include members of your immediate
family, including only brothers and sisters (either whole orUnder an accrual method of accounting, you generally
half), your spouse, ancestors, and lineal descendants. Fordeduct or capitalize a business expense when both the
a list of other related persons, see Related Persons underfollowing apply.
Accrual Method in Publication 538.
1. The all-events test has been met. The test has been
met when: Combination Method
a. All events have occurred that fix the fact of liabil-You can generally use any combination of cash, accrual,ity, and and special methods of accounting if the combination
clearly shows your income and expenses and you use itb. The liability can be determined with reasonable
consistently. However, the following restrictions apply.accuracy.
• If an inventory is necessary to account for your in-2. Economic performance has occurred. come, you must generally use an accrual method for
purchases and sales. (See, however, Inventories,
later.) You can use the cash method for all otherEconomic performance. You generally cannot deduct or
items of income and expenses.capitalize a business expense until economic performance
occurs. If your expense is for property or services provided• If you use the cash method for figuring your income,
to you, or for your use of property, economic performanceyou must use the cash method for reporting your
occurs as the property or services are provided or as theexpenses.
property is used. If your expense is for property or services• If you use an accrual method for reporting your ex-you provide to others, economic performance occurs aspenses, you must use an accrual method for figuringyou provide the property or services. An exception allowsyour income.certain recurring items to be treated as incurred during a
tax year even though economic performance has not oc-• If you use a combination method that includes the
curred. For more information on economic performance,cash method, treat that combination method as the
see Economic Performance under Accrual Method in Pub- cash method.
lication 538.
Example. You are a calendar year taxpayer and use anInventoriesaccrual method of accounting. You buy office supplies in
December 2005. You receive the supplies and the bill inGenerally, if you produce, purchase or sell merchandise in
December, but you pay the bill in January 2006. You canyour business, you must keep an inventory and use the
deduct the expense in 2005 because all events that fix theaccrual method for purchases and sales of merchandise.
fact of liability have occurred, the amount of the liabilityHowever, the following taxpayers can use the cash method
could be reasonably determined, and economic perform-of accounting even if they produce, purchase, or sell mer-
ance occurred in that year. chandise. These taxpayers can also account for inventori-
Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods Page 15

Page 16 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
able items as materials and supplies that are not incidentalMore information. For more information about the quali-
(discussed later). fying taxpayer exception, see Revenue Procedure
2001-10 in Internal Revenue Bulletin 2001-2. For more
1. A qualifying taxpayer under Revenue Procedureinformation about the qualifying small business taxpayer
2001-10 in Internal Revenue Bulletin 2001-2. exception, see Revenue Procedure 2002-28 in Internal
Revenue Bulletin 2002-18.2. A qualifying small business taxpayer under Revenue
Procedure 2002-28 in Internal Revenue BulletinItems included in inventory.If you are required to ac-2002-18. count for inventories, include the following items when
accounting for your inventory.
Qualifying taxpayer.You are a qualifying taxpayer if:• Merchandise or stock in trade.
• Your average annual gross receipts for each prior• Raw materials.tax year ending on or after December 17, 1998, is $1
million or less. (Your average annual gross receipts• Work in process.
for a tax year is figured by adding the gross receipts• Finished products.for that tax year and the 2 preceding tax years and
dividing by 3.) • Supplies that physically become a part of the item
intended for sale.
• Your business is not a tax shelter, as defined under
section 448(d)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code.
Valuing inventory.You must value your inventory at the
beginning and end of each tax year to determine your costQualifying small business taxpayer.You are a qualify-of goods sold (Schedule C, line 42). To determine theing small business taxpayer if: value of your inventory, you need a method for identifying
• Your average annual gross receipts for each priorthe items in your inventory and a method for valuing these
tax year ending on or after December 31, 2000, isitems.
more than $1 million but not more than $10 million.Inventory valuation rules cannot be the same for all
(Your average annual gross receipts for a tax year iskinds of businesses. The method you use to value your
figured by adding the gross receipts for that tax yearinventory must conform to generally accepted accounting
and the 2 preceding tax years and dividing the totalprinciples for similar businesses and must clearly reflect
by 3.) income. Your inventory practices must be consistent from
year to year.• You are not prohibited from using the cash method
under section 448 of the Internal Revenue Code.More information.For more information about invento-
ries, see Publication 538.
• Your principal business activity is an eligible busi-
ness (described in Publication 538 and Revenue
Procedure 2002-28).
Uniform Capitalization Rules
Under the uniform capitalization rules, you must capitalizeBusiness not owned or not in existence for 3 years.If the direct costs and part of the indirect costs for productionyou did not own your business for all of the 3-tax-yearor resale activities. Include these costs in the basis ofperiod used in figuring your average annual gross receipts,property you produce or acquire for resale, rather thaninclude the period of any predecessor. If your business hasclaiming them as a current deduction. You recover thenot been in existence for the 3-tax-year period, base yourcosts through depreciation, amortization, or cost of goodsaverage on the period it has existed including any short taxsold when you use, sell, or otherwise dispose of the prop-years, annualizing the short tax year’s gross receipts.erty.
Materials and supplies that are not incidental.If you Activities subject to the rules.You may be subject to
account for inventoriable items as materials and suppliesthe uniform capitalization rules if you do any of the follow-
that are not incidental, you will deduct the cost of the itemsing, unless the property is produced for your use other than
you would otherwise include in inventory in the year youin a business or an activity carried on for profit.
sell the items, or the year you pay for them, whichever is• Produce real or tangible personal property. For thislater. If you are a producer, you can use any reasonablepurpose, tangible personal property includes a film,method to estimate the raw material in your work in pro-sound recording, video tape, book, or similar prop-cess and finished goods on hand at the end of the year toerty.determine the raw material used to produce finished goods
that were sold during the year. • Acquire property for resale.
Changing methods. If you are a qualifying taxpayer orExceptions.These rules do not apply to the following
small business taxpayer and want to change to the cashproperty.
method or to account for inventoriable items as non-inci-
dental materials and supplies, you must file Form 3115, 1. Personal property you acquire for resale if your aver-
Application for Change in Accounting Method. age annual gross receipts are $10 million or less.
Page 16 Chapter 2 Accounting Periods and Methods

Page 17 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2. Property you produce if you meet either of the follow-
ing conditions.
3.
a. Your indirect costs of producing the property are
$200,000 or less.
Dispositions ofb. You use the cash method of accounting and do
not account for inventories. For more information,Business Property
see Inventories, earlier.
Introduction
Special Methods If you dispose of business property, you may have a gain
or loss that you report on Form 1040. However, in someThere are special methods of accounting for certain itemscases you may have a gain that is not taxable or a loss thatof income or expense. These include the following.is not deductible. This chapter discusses whether you have
a disposition, how to figure the gain or loss, and where to• Amortization, discussed in chapter 9 of Publication
report the gain or loss.535, Business Expenses.
• Bad debts, discussed in chapter 11 of PublicationUseful Items535. You may want to see:
• Depletion, discussed in chapter 10 of Publication
Publication535.
❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets• Depreciation, discussed in Publication 946, How To
Depreciate Property.
Form (and Instructions)• Installment sales, discussed in Publication 537, In-
❏ 4797 Sales of Business Propertystallment Sales.
❏ Sch D (Form 1040)Capital Gains and Losses
See chapter 12 for information about getting publica-Change in tions and forms.
Accounting Method
Once you have set up your accounting method, you must
What Is a Dispositiongenerally get IRS approval before you can change to
another method. A change in your accounting methodof Property?includes a change in:
A disposition of property includes the following transac-1. Your overall method, such as from cash to an ac-tions.
crual method, and
• You sell property for cash or other property.
2. Your treatment of any material item.
• You exchange property for other property.
To get approval, you must file Form 3115, Application for
• You receive money as a tenant for the cancellationChange in Accounting Method. You can get IRS approval
of a lease.to change an accounting method under either the auto-
matic change procedures or the advance consent request• You receive money for granting the exclusive use of
procedures. You may have to pay a user fee. For more a copyright throughout its life in a particular medium.
information, see the form instructions. • You transfer property to satisfy a debt.
• You abandon property.Automatic change procedures.Certain taxpayers can
presume to have IRS approval to change their method of• Your bank or other financial institution forecloses on
accounting. The approval is granted for the tax year foryour mortgage or repossesses your property.
which the taxpayer requests a change (year of change), if• Your property is damaged, destroyed, or stolen, andthe taxpayer complies with the provisions of the automaticyou receive property or money in payment.change procedures. No user fee is required for an applica-
• Your property is condemned, or disposed of undertion filed under an automatic change procedure generally
the threat of condemnation, and you receive prop-covered in Revenue Procedure 2002-9.
erty or money in payment.Generally, you must use Form 3115 to request an auto-
matic change. For more information, see the form instruc-For details about damaged, destroyed, or stolen property,
tions. see Publication 547, Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts. For
Chapter 3 Dispositions of Business PropertyPage 17

Page 18 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
details about other dispositions, see chapter 1 in Publica- Basis, adjusted basis, amount realized, fair market
value, and amount recognized are defined next. You needtion 544.
to know these definitions to figure your gain or loss.
Nontaxable exchanges.Certain exchanges of propertyBasis.The cost or purchase price of property is usually itsare not taxable. This means any gain from the exchange isbasis for figuring the gain or loss from its sale or othernot recognized and you cannot deduct any loss. Your gaindisposition. However, if you acquired the property by gift,or loss will not be recognized until you sell or otherwiseinheritance, or in some way other than buying it, you mustdispose of the property you receive. use a basis other than its cost. For more information about
basis, see Publication 551, Basis of Assets.Like-kind exchanges.A like-kind exchange is the ex-
change of property for the same kind of property. It is theAdjusted basis.The adjusted basis of property is yourmost common type of nontaxable exchange. To be a original cost or other basis plus certain additions, andlike-kind exchange, the property traded and the propertyminus certain deductions such as depreciation and casu-
received must be both of the following. alty losses. In determining gain or loss, the costs of trans-
ferring property to a new owner, such as selling expenses,• Business or investment property. are added to the adjusted basis of the property.
• Like property.
Amount realized.The amount you realize from a disposi-
tion is the total of all money you receive plus the fair marketReport the exchange of like-kind property on Form
value of all property or services you receive. The amount8824, Like-Kind Exchanges. For more information aboutyou realize also includes any of your liabilities that werelike-kind exchanges, see chapter 1 in Publication 544. assumed by the buyer and any liabilities to which the
property you transferred is subject, such as real estateInstallment sales.An installment sale is a sale of prop-taxes or a mortgage.erty where you receive at least one payment after the tax
year of the sale. If you finance the buyer’s purchase of yourFair market value.Fair market value is the price at which
property, instead of having the buyer get a loan or mort-the property would change hands between a buyer and a
gage from a third party, you probably have an installmentseller, neither having to buy or sell, and both having rea-
sonable knowledge of all necessary facts.sale.
For more information about installment sales, see Publi-Amount recognized. Your gain or loss realized from acation 537, Installment Sales. disposition of property is usually a recognized gain or loss
for tax purposes. Recognized gains must be included inSale of a business.The sale of a business usually is notgross income. Recognized losses are deductible froma sale of one asset. Instead, all the assets of the businessgross income. However, a gain or loss realized from cer-
are sold. Generally, when this occurs, each asset is treatedtain exchanges of property is not recognized. See Nontax-
as being sold separately for determining the treatment ofable exchanges, earlier. Also, you cannot deduct a loss
gain or loss. from the disposition of property held for personal use.
Both the buyer and seller involved in the sale of a
business must report to the IRS the allocation of the salesIs My Gain or Lossprice among the business assets. Use Form 8594, Asset
Ordinary or Capital?Acquisition Statement Under Section 1060, to provide this
information. The buyer and seller should each attach FormYou must classify your gains and losses as either ordinary8594 to their federal income tax return for the year in whichor capital gains or losses. You must do this to figure yourthe sale occurred. net capital gain or loss. Generally, you will have a capital
For more information about the sale of a business, seegain or loss if you dispose of a capital asset. For the most
chapter 2 of Publication 544. part, everything you own and use for personal purposes or
investment is a capital asset.
Certain property you use in your business is not a
capital asset. A gain or loss from a disposition of thisHow Do I Figure
property is an ordinary gain or loss. However, if you held
the property longer than 1 year, you may be able to treat
a Gain or Loss?
the gain or loss as a capital gain or loss. These gains and
losses are called section 1231 gains and losses.
For more information about ordinary and capital gains
Table 3-1. How To Figure a Gain or Loss
and losses, see chapters 2 and 3 in Publication 544.
IF your... THEN you have a...
Is My Capital Gain or LossAdjusted basis is more than the
amount realized Loss. Short Term or Long Term?
Amount realized is more than If you have a capital gain or loss, you must determinethe adjusted basis Gain. whether it is long term or short term. Whether a gain or loss
Page 18 Chapter 3 Dispositions of Business Property

Page 19 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
is long or short term depends on how long you own theUseful Items
property before you dispose of it. The time you own prop-You may want to see:
erty before disposing of it is called the holding period.
Publication
Table 3-2. Do I Have a Short-Term or ❏ 954 Tax Incentives for Distressed CommunitiesLong-Term Gain or Loss?
Form (and Instructions)IF you hold the
property... THEN you have a... ❏ 3800 General Business Credit
1 year or less Short-term capital gain or loss. ❏ 6251 Alternative Minimum Tax—Individuals
More than 1 year Long-term capital gain or loss. See chapter 12 for information about getting publica-
tions and forms.
For more information about short-term and long-term
capital gains and losses, see chapter 4 of Publication 544.
Business Credits
All of the following credits are part of the general businessWhere Do I Report
credit. The form you use to figure each credit is shown in
Gains and Losses? parentheses. Be sure you also read How To Claim the
Credit, later, because you may also have to fill out Form
Report gains and losses from the following dispositions on3800 in certain situations.
the forms indicated. The instructions for the forms explainAlternative fuel vehicle refueling property credit (Formhow to fill them out. 8911).This credit applies to the cost of any qualified fuel
vehicle refueling property placed in service after Decem-Dispositions of business property and depreciable
ber 31, 2005, for tax years ending after that date. For moreproperty.Use Form 4797. If you have taxable gain, you
information, see Form 8911.may also have to use Schedule D (Form 1040). 
Alternative motor vehicle credit (Form 8910).ThisLike-kind exchanges.Use Form 8824 , Like-Kind Ex- credit consists of the following four credits for new vehicleschanges. You may also have to use Form 4797 and placed in service after December 31, 2005, for tax yearsSchedule D (Form 1040). ending after that date. For more information, see Form
8910.Installment sales.Use Form 6252, Installment Sale In-
come. You may also have to use Form 4797 and Schedule• Qualified fuel cell motor vehicle credit.
D (Form 1040). • Advanced lean burn technology motor vehicle credit.
Casualties and thefts.Use Form 4684, Casualties and • Qualified hybrid motor vehicle credit. 
Thefts. You may also have to use Form 4797. 
• Qualified alternative fuel motor vehicle credit. 
Condemned property. Use Form 4797 . You may also
have to use Schedule D (Form 1040). Biodiesel and renewable diesel fuels credit (Form
8864) This credit applies to certain fuel sold or used in
your business. For more information, see Form 8864.
Credit for alcohol used as a fuel (Form 6478).This
credit applies to alcohol sold or used as a fuel. Alcohol, for4. purposes of this credit, includes ethanol and methanol. It
does not include alcohol produced from petroleum, natural
gas, coal, or peat. For more information, see Form 6478.
General Business
Credit for contributions to selected community devel-
Credits opment corporations (Form 8847).This credit applies to
certain contributions made to a selected community devel-
opment corporation before June 30, 1999. For more infor-
mation, see Form 8847.
Introduction
Your general business credit for the year consists of yourCredit for employee social security and Medicare
carryforward of business credits from prior years plus thetaxes paid on certain employee tips (Form 8846).The
total of your current year business credits. In addition, your credit is generally equal to your (employer’s) portion of
general business credit for the current year may be in- social security and Medicare taxes paid on tips received by
creased later by the carryback of business credits from employees of your food and beverage establishment
later years. You subtract this credit directly from your tax. where tipping is customary. The credit applies regardless
Chapter 4 General Business Credits Page 19

Page 20 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
of whether the food is consumed on or off your businessEnhanced oil recovery credit (Form 8830).This credit
premises. However, you cannot get credit for your part of applies to your qualified enhanced oil recovery costs. For
social security and Medicare taxes on those tips that are more information, see Form 8830.
used to meet the federal minimum wage rate that appliesHurricane Katrina employee retention credit (Formto the employee under the Fair Labor Standards Act. For5884-A).This credit provides certain employers with anmore information, see Form 8846. incentive to continue to pay certain wages after August 28,
Credit for employer-provided childcare facilities and2005, and before January 1, 2006. For more information,
services (Form 8882).This credit applies to the qualifiedsee Form 5884-A.
expenses you paid for employee childcare and qualifiedIndian employment credit (Form 8845).This credit ap-expenses you paid for childcare resource and referralplies to the part of the qualified wages and health insur-services. The credit is 25% of qualified expenses you paidance costs (up to $20,000 per employee) you paid orfor employee childcare and 10% of qualified expenses youincurred during a tax year that is more than the sum of thepaid for childcare resource and referral services. Thiscomparable costs you (or your predecessor) paid or in-credit is limited to $150,000 each year. For more informa-curred during calendar year 1993. The employee must betion, see Form 8882. an enrolled member, or the spouse of an enrolled member,
Credit for increasing research activities (Form 6765).of an Indian tribe. The employee must perform substan-
The research credit is designed to encourage businessestially all of his or her services within an Indian reservation
to increase the amounts they spend on research andwhile living on or near the reservation. For more informa-
experimental activities, including energy research. Thetion, see Form 8845 and Publication 954.
credit is generally 20% of the amount by which your re-Investment credit (Form 3468).The investment credit issearch expenses for the year are more than your basethe total of the following credits. For more information, seeamount. For more information, see Form 6765. Form 3468.
Credit for small employer pension startup costs (Form
• Rehabilitation credit.8881).This credit applies to pension plan startup costs. If
you begin a new qualified defined benefit or defined contri-• Energy credit for periods ending before January 1,
bution plan (including a 401(k) plan), SIMPLE plan, or2006.
simplified employee pension, you can receive a tax credit• Energy credit for periods ending after December 31,of 50% of the first $1,000 of qualified startup costs. For2005.more information, see Publication 560, Retirement Plans
for Small Business (SEP, Simple, and Qualified Plans).• Qualifying advanced coal project credit for periods
ending after August 8, 2005.Disabled access credit (Form 8826).The disabled ac-
• Qualifying gasification project credit for periods end-cess credit is a nonrefundable tax credit for an eligible
ing after August 8, 2005.small business that pays or incurs expenses to provide
access to persons who have disabilities. You must pay or
incur the expenses to enable your business to comply withLow sulfur diesel fuel production credit (Form 8896).the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990. For moreThis credit applies to expenses paid or incurred after De-information, see Form 8826. cember 31, 2002, in tax years ending after such date. For
more information, see Form 8896.Distilled spirits credit (Form 8906).This credit is avail-
able to distillers and importers of distilled spirits and eligi-Low-income housing credit (Form 8586).This creditble wholesalers of distilled spirits for tax years beginninggenerally applies to qualified low-income housing buildingsafter September 30, 2005. For more information, see Formplaced in service after 1986. For more information, see8906. Form 8586.
Empowerment zone and renewal community employ- New markets credit (Form 8874).This credit is for quali-ment credit (Form 8844).You may qualify for this credit iffied equity investments made in qualified community de-you have employees and are engaged in a business in anvelopment entities. For more information, see Form 8874.empowerment zone or renewal community for which the
Nonconventional source fuel credit (Form 8907).Forcredit is available. For more information, see Form 8844
tax years ending after December 31, 2005, this credit willand Publication 954.
be treated as a general business credit. For more informa-Energy efficient appliance credit (Form 8909).This tion, see Form 8907.credit is available for each type of qualified energy efficient
Orphan drug credit (Form 8820).The orphan drug creditappliance produced by the taxpayer after December 31,
applies to qualified expenses incurred in testing certain2005, in a tax year ending on or after December 31, 2006.
drugs, known as “orphan drugs for rare diseases andFor more information, see Form 8909.
conditions.” For more information, see Form 8820.Energy efficient home credit (Form 8908).This credit is
available for eligible contractors of certain homes sold forQualified railroad track maintenance credit (Form
use as a residence after December 31, 2005. For more8900).Certain regional and switching railroads may be
information, see Form 8908. able to claim a credit for expenses made to upgrade their
Page 20 Chapter 4 General Business Credits

Page 21 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
railroad tracks (including roadbed, bridges, and related
track structures). For more information, see Form 8900.
5.
Renewable electricity, refined coal, and Indian coal
production credit (Form 8835).For more information on
the renewable electricity, refined coal, and Indian coalBusiness Income
production credit, see Form 8835.
Welfare-to-work credit (Form 8861). The Introductionwelfare-to-work credit provides businesses with an incen-
tive to hire long-term family assistance recipients. ForThis chapter primarily explains business income and how
more information, see Form 8861 and Publication 954.to account for it on your tax return, what items are not
considered income, and gives guidelines for selected oc-Work opportunity credit (Form 5884).The work oppor- cupations.tunity credit provides businesses with an incentive to hireIf there is a connection between any income you receiveindividuals from targeted groups that have a particularlyand your business, the income is business income. Ahigh unemployment rate or other special employmentconnection exists if it is clear that the payment of incomeneeds. For more information, see Form 5884 and Publica-would not have been made if you did not have the busi-tion 954. ness.
You can have business income even if you are not
involved in the activity on a regular full-time basis. Income
How To Claim the Credit from work you do on the side in addition to your regular job
can be business income.To claim a general business credit, you will first have to getYou report most business income, such as income fromthe forms you need to claim your current year businessthe sale of your products or services, on Schedule C orcredits. C-EZ. But you report the income from the sale of businessIn addition to the credit form, you may also need to fileassets, such as land and office buildings, on other formsForm 3800. See the next discussion to decide whether youinstead of Schedule C or C-EZ. For information on sellingneed to file Form 3800. business assets, see chapter 3.
Who must file Form 3800? Nonemployee compensation.  Business in-
You must file Form 3800 if any of the following apply. come includes amounts you received in your
business that were properly shown on Forms
TIP
• You have more than one of the credits listed above1099-MISC. This includes amounts reported as nonem-(other than the credit for alcohol used as a fuelployee compensation in box 7 of the form. You can find(Form 6478), the empowerment zone and renewal more information in the instructions on the back of thecommunity employment credit (Form 8844), or theForm 1099-MISC you received. renewable electricity, refined coal, and Indian coal
production credit (Form 8835, Section B)).
• Any of these credits (other than the low-incomeKinds of Incomehousing credit) is from a passive activity. For infor-
mation about passive activity credits, see FormYou must report on your tax return all income you receive8582-CR. from your business unless it is excluded by law. In most
• You have a carryback or carryforward of any ofcases, your business income will be in the form of cash,
these credits. checks, and credit card charges. But business income can
be in other forms, such as property or services. These and
The general business credit includes the credits listedother types of income are explained next.
under General Business Credits, the empowerment zone If you are a U.S. citizen who has business in-and renewal community employment credit (Form 8844), come from sources outside the United Statesthe alcohol fuel credit (Form 6478), and the portion of the(foreign income), you must report that income onCAUTION
!
renewable electricity, refined coal, and Indian coal produc-your tax return unless it is exempt from tax under U.S. law.tion credit figured in Section B of Form 8835. If you live outside the United States, you may be able toForms 8844, 6478, and 8835 have special tax liabilityexclude part or all of your foreign-source business income.limits and are not reported on Form 3800. Any carryback,For details, see Publication 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizenscarryforward, and passive activity limitation of these cred-and Resident Aliens Abroad.its is computed separately on the forms on which they are
claimed.
Bartering for Property or Services
Alternative minimum tax (AMT).Although you may not
owe AMT, you must still figure your tentative minimum tax Bartering is an exchange of property or services. You must
on Form 6251 if you claim a general business credit. After include in your gross receipts, at the time received, the fair
you fill in Form 6251, attach it to your tax return. market value of property or services you receive in bar-
Chapter 5 Business Income Page 21

Page 22 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
tering. If you exchange services with another person and You must include the fair market value of any services
you receive from club members in your gross receiptsyou both have agreed ahead of time on the value of the
when you receive them even if you have not provided anyservices, that value will be accepted as the fair market
services to club members.value unless the value can be shown to be otherwise.
Information returns.If you are involved in a barteringExample 1. You are a self-employed lawyer. You per-transaction, you may have to file either of the followingform legal services for a client, a small corporation. Informs.payment for your services, you receive shares of stock in
• Form 1099-B, Proceeds From Broker and Barter Ex-the corporation. You must include the fair market value of
change Transactions. the shares in income.
• Form 1099-MISC, Miscellaneous Income. Example 2.You are an artist and create a work of art to
For information about these forms, see the General In-compensate your landlord for the rent-free use of your
structions for Forms 1099, 1098, 5498, and W-2G.apartment. You must include the fair rental value of the
apartment in your gross receipts. Your landlord must in-
clude the fair market value of the work of art in his or her
Real Estate Rentsrental income.
If you are a real estate dealer who receives income fromExample 3. You are a self-employed accountant. Bothrenting real property or an owner of a hotel, motel, etc.,you and a house painter are members of a barter club, anwho provides services (maid services, etc.) for guests,organization that each year gives its members a directoryreport the rental income and expenses on Schedule C orof members and the services each member provides.C-EZ. If you are not a real estate dealer or the kind ofMembers get in touch with other members directly andowner described in the preceding sentence, report thebargain for the value of the services to be performed.rental income and expenses on Schedule E.
In return for accounting services you provided for the
Real estate dealerYou are a real estate dealer if you arehouse painter’s business, the house painter painted your
engaged in the business of selling real estate to customershome. You must include in gross receipts the fair market
with the purpose of making a profit from those sales. Rentvalue of the services you received from the house painter.
you receive from real estate held for sale to customers isThe house painter must include the fair market value of
subject to SE tax. However, rent you receive from realyour accounting services in his or her gross receipts.
estate held for speculation or investment is not subject to
SE tax.Example 4. You are a member of a barter club that
uses credit units to credit or debit members’ accounts forTrailer park owner.Rental income from a trailer park isgoods or services provided or received. As soon as unitssubject to SE tax if you are a self-employed trailer park
are credited to your account, you can use them to buyowner who provides trailer lots and facilities and substan-
goods or services or sell or transfer the units to othertial services for the convenience of your tenants.
members.  You generally are considered to provide substantial
You must include the value of credit units you receivedservices for tenants if they are primarily for the tenants’
in your gross receipts for the tax year in which the units areconvenience and normally are not provided to maintain the
credited to your account. lots in a condition for occupancy. Services are substantial if
the compensation for the services makes up a materialThe dollar value of units received for services by an
part of the tenants’ rental payments.employee of the club, who can use the units in the same
Examples of services that are not normally provided formanner as other members, must be included in the
the tenants’ convenience include supervising and main-employee’s gross income for the tax year in which re-
taining a recreational hall provided by the park, distributingceived. It is wages subject to social security and Medicare
a monthly newsletter to tenants, operating a laundry facil-taxes (FICA), federal unemployment taxes (FUTA), and
ity, and helping tenants buy or sell their trailers.income tax withholding. See Publication 15 (Circular E),
Examples of services that are normally provided toEmployer’s Tax Guide.
maintain the lots in a condition for tenant occupancy in-
clude city sewerage, electrical connections, and roadways.Example 5. You operate a plumbing business and use
the cash method of accounting. You join a barter club andHotels, boarding houses, and apartments.Rental in-agree to provide plumbing services to any member for acome you receive for the use or occupancy of hotels,
specified number of hours. Each member has access to aboarding houses, or apartment houses is subject to SE tax
directory that lists the members of the club and the serv-if you provide services for the occupants.
ices available. Generally, you are considered to provide services for
Members contact each other directly and request serv-the occupants if the services are primarily for their conve-
ices to be performed. You are not required to providenience and are not services normally provided with the
services unless requested by another member, but yourental of rooms for occupancy only. An example of a
can use as many of the offered services as you wishservice that is not normally provided for the convenience of
without paying a fee. the occupants is maid service. However, providing heat
Page 22 Chapter 5 Business Income

Page 23 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
and light, cleaning stairways and lobbies, and collectingDividends.Generally, dividends are business income to
trash are services normally provided for the occupants’dealers in securities. For most sole proprietors and statu-
convenience. tory employees, however, dividends are nonbusiness in-
come. If you hold stock as a personal investmentPrepaid rent.Advance payments received under a leaseseparately from your business activity, the dividends fromthat does not put any restriction on their use or enjoymentthe stock are nonbusiness income.are income in the year you receive them. This is true no
If you receive dividends from business insurance premi-matter what accounting method or period you use.
ums you deducted in an earlier year, you must report all or
Lease bonus. A bonus you receive from a lessee forpart of the dividend as business income on your return. Togranting a lease is an addition to the rent. Include it in yourfind out how much you have to report, see Recovery ofgross receipts in the year received. items previously deducted under Other Income, later.
Lease cancellation payments.Report payments you re-
ceive from your lessee for canceling a lease in your grossCanceled Debt
receipts in the year received.
The following explains the general rule for including can-Payments to third parties.If your lessee makes pay-celed debt in income and the exceptions to the generalments to someone else under an agreement to pay yourrule.debts or obligations, include the payments in your gross
receipts when the lessee makes the payments. A common
example of this kind of income is a lessee’s payment of
General Rule
your property taxes on leased real property.
Generally, if your debt is canceled or forgiven, other thanSettlement payments.Payments you receive in settle-as a gift or bequest to you, you must include the canceledment of a lessee’s obligation to restore the leased propertyamount in your gross income for tax purposes. Report theto its original condition are income in the amount that thecanceled amount on line 6 of Schedule C if you incurredpayments exceed the adjusted basis of the leasehold im-the debt in your business. If the debt is a nonbusiness debt,provements destroyed, damaged, removed, or discon-report the canceled amount on line 21 of Form 1040.nected by the lessee.
ExceptionsPersonal Property Rents
The following discussion covers some exceptions to theIf you are in the business of renting personal property
general rule for canceled debt.(equipment, vehicles, formal wear, etc.), include the rental
amount you receive in your gross receipts on Schedule C
Price reduced after purchase.If you owe a debt to theor C-EZ. Prepaid rent and other payments described in the
seller for property you bought and the seller reduces thepreceding Real Estate Rents discussion can also be re-
ceived for renting personal property. If you receive any ofamount you owe, you generally do not have income from
those payments, include them in your gross receipts asthe reduction. Unless you are bankrupt or insolvent, treat
explained in that discussion. the amount of the reduction as a purchase price adjust-
ment and reduce your basis in the property.
Interest and Dividend Income
Deductible debt.You do not realize income from a can-
Interest and dividends may be considered business in-celed debt to the extent the payment of the debt would
come. have led to a deduction.
Interest.Interest received on notes receivable that youExample. You get accounting services for your busi-have accepted in the ordinary course of business is busi-ness on credit. Later, you have trouble paying your busi-ness income. Interest received on loans is business in-ness debts, but you are not bankrupt or insolvent. Yourcome if you are in the business of lending money.accountant forgives part of the amount you owe for the
Uncollectible loans.If a loan payable to you becomesaccounting services. How you treat the canceled debt
uncollectible during the tax year and you use an accrualdepends on your method of accounting.
method of accounting, you must include in gross income
• Cash method – You do not include the canceledinterest accrued up to the time the loan became uncollecti-
debt in income because payment of the debt wouldble. If the accrued interest later becomes uncollectible, you
have been deductible as a business expense.may be able to take a bad debt deduction. See Bad Debts
in chapter 8. • Accrual method – You include the canceled debt in
income because the expense was deductible whenUnstated interest.If little or no interest is charged on
you incurred the debt.an installment sale, you may have to treat a part of each
payment as unstated interest. See Unstated Interest and
For information on the cash and accrual methods ofOriginal Issue Discount in Publication 537, Installment
accounting, see chapter 2.Sales.
Chapter 5 Business Income Page 23

Page 24 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Exclusions 1. The excess (if any) of:
Do not include canceled debt in income in the followinga. The outstanding principal of qualified real propertysituations. However, you may be required to file Form 982, business debt (immediately before the cancella-Reduction of Tax Attributes Due to Discharge of Indebted-tion), overness. For more information, see Form 982.  
b. The fair market value (immediately before the1. The cancellation takes place in a bankruptcy case cancellation) of the business real property that isunder title 11 of the U.S. Code (relating to bank- security for the debt, reduced by the outstandingruptcy). See Publication 908, Bankruptcy Tax Guide. principal amount of any other qualified real prop-
erty business debt secured by this property imme-2. The cancellation takes place when you are insolvent.
diately before the cancellation.You can exclude the canceled debt to the extent you
are insolvent. See Publication 908.
2. The total adjusted bases of depreciable real property3. The canceled debt is a qualified farm debt owed to aheld by you immediately before the cancellation.qualified person. See chapter 3 in Publication 225,These adjusted bases are determined after any basisFarmer’s Tax Guide. reduction due to a cancellation in bankruptcy, insol-
vency, or of qualified farm debt. Do not take into4. The canceled debt is a qualified real property busi-
account depreciable real property acquired in con-ness debt. This situation is explained later.
templation of the cancellation.If a canceled debt is excluded from income because it
takes place in a bankruptcy case, the exclusions in situa-Choice. To make this choice, complete Form 982 andtions (2), (3), and (4) do not apply. If it takes place whenattach it to your income tax return for the tax year in whichyou are insolvent, the exclusions in situations (3) and (4)the cancellation occurs. You must file your return by thedo not apply to the extent you are insolvent. due date (including extensions). If you timely filed your
return for the year without making the choice, you can stillDebt. For purposes of this discussion, debt includes any
make the choice by filing an amended return within 6debt for which you are liable or which attaches to property
months of the due date of the return (excluding exten-you hold.
sions). For more information, see When to file in the form
Qualified real property business debt.You can choose instructions.
to exclude (up to certain limits) the cancellation of qualified
real property business debt. If you make the choice, youOther Incomemust reduce the basis of your depreciable real property by
the amount excluded. Make this reduction at the beginningThe following discussion explains how to treat other typesof your tax year following the tax year in which the cancel-of business income you may receive.lation occurs. However, if you dispose of the property
before that time, you must reduce its basis immediatelyRestricted property.Restricted property is property that
before the disposition. has certain restrictions that affect its value. If you receive
restricted stock or other property for services performed,Cancellation of qualified real property businessthe fair market value of the property in excess of your costdebt.Qualified real property business debt is debt (otheris included in your income on Schedule C or C-EZ whenthan qualified farm debt) that meets all the following condi-the restriction is lifted. However, you can choose to betions. taxed in the year you receive the property. For more
information on including restricted property in income, see1. It was incurred or assumed in connection with real
Publication 525, Taxable and Nontaxable Income.property used in a trade or business.
Gains and losses.Do not report on Schedule C or C-EZ2. It was secured by such real property.
a gain or loss from the disposition of property that is neither3. It was incurred or assumed at either of the followingstock in trade nor held primarily for sale to customers.times. Instead, you must report these gains and losses on other
forms. For more information, see chapter 3.a. Before January 1, 1993.
Promissory notes.Report promissory notes and otherb. After December 31, 1992, if incurred or assumed
evidences of debt issued to you in a sale or exchange ofto acquire, construct, or substantially improve the
property that is stock in trade or held primarily for sale toreal property.
customers on Schedule C or C-EZ. In general, you report
them at their stated principal amount (minus any unstated4. It is debt to which you choose to apply these rules.
interest) when you receive them.Qualified real property business debt includes refinanc-
ing of debt described in (3) above, but only to the extent itLost income payments.If you reduce or stop your busi-
does not exceed the debt being refinanced. ness activities, report on Schedule C or C-EZ any payment
You cannot exclude more than either of the following you receive for the lost income of your business from
amounts. insurance or other sources. Report it on Schedule C or
Page 24 Chapter 5 Business Income

Page 25 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
C-EZ even if your business is inactive when you receive Property, to figure the amount to include on Schedule C.
the payment. For more information, see What is the Business-Use Re-
quirement in chapter 5 of Publication 946, How To Depre-Damages. You must include in gross income compensa-ciate Property. That chapter explains how to determinetion you receive during the tax year as a result of any of thewhether property is used more than 50% in your business.following injuries connected with your business.
Section 179 property.If you take a section 179 deduc-• Patent infringement. tion (explained in chapter 8 under Depreciation) for an
asset and before the end of the asset’s recovery period the• Breach of contract or fiduciary duty.
percentage of business use drops to 50% or less, you must• Antitrust injury. recapture part of the section 179 deduction. You do this by
including in income on Schedule C part of the deductionEconomic injury.You may be entitled to a deductionyou took. Use Part IV of Form 4797 to figure the amount toagainst the income if it compensates you for actual eco-include on Schedule C. See chapter 2 in Publication 946 tonomic injury. Your deduction is the smaller of the followingfind out when you recapture the deduction.amounts.
Sale or exchange of depreciable property.If you sell• The amount you receive or accrue for damages inor exchange depreciable property at a gain, you may havethe tax year reduced by the amount you pay or incurto treat all or part of the gain due to depreciation asin the tax year to recover that amount. ordinary income. You figure the income due to deprecia-
tion recapture in Part III of Form 4797. For more informa-• Your loss from the injury that you have not yet de-
tion, see chapter 4 in Publication 544, Sales and Otherducted.
Dispositions of Assets.
Punitive damages. You must also include punitive
damages in income.
Items That Are Not IncomeKickbacks. If you receive any kickbacks, include them in
your income on Schedule C or C-EZ. However, do not
In some cases the property or money you receive is notinclude them if you properly treat them as a reduction of a
income.related expense item, a capital expenditure, or cost of
goods sold. Appreciation.Increases in value of your property are not
income until you realize the increases through a sale orRecovery of items previously deducted.If you recover
other taxable disposition.a bad debt or any other item deducted in a previous year,
include the recovery in income on Schedule C or C-EZ.
Consignments. Consignments of merchandise to othersHowever, if all or part of the deduction in earlier years did
to sell for you are not sales. The title of merchandisenot reduce your tax, you can exclude the part that did not
remains with you, the consignor, even after the consigneereduce your tax. If you exclude part of the recovery from
possesses the merchandise. Therefore, if you ship goodsincome, you must include with your return a computation
on consignment, you have no profit or loss until the con-showing how you figured the exclusion.
signee sells the merchandise. Merchandise you have
shipped out on consignment is included in your inventoryExample. Joe Smith, a sole proprietor, had gross in-
until it is sold.come of $8,000, a bad debt deduction of $300, and other
Do not include merchandise you receive on consign-allowable deductions of $7,700. He also had 2 personal
ment in your inventory. Include your profit or commissionexemptions for a total of $6,400. He would not pay income
on merchandise consigned to you in your income whentax even if he did not deduct the bad debt. Therefore, he
you sell the merchandise or when you receive your profit orwill not report as income any part of the $300 he may
commission, depending upon the method of accountingrecover in any future year.
you use.
Exception for depreciation.This rule does not apply
to depreciation. You recover depreciation using the rulesConstruction allowances.If you enter into a lease after
explained next. August 5, 1997, you can exclude from income the con-
struction allowance you receive (in cash or as a rentRecapture of depreciation.In the following situations,reduction) from your landlord if you receive it under bothyou have to recapture the depreciation deduction. Thisthe following conditions.means you include in income part or all of the depreciation
you deducted in previous years. • Under a short-term lease of retail space.
Listed property.If your business use of listed property• For the purpose of constructing or improving quali-
(explained in chapter 8 under Depreciation) falls to 50% or fied long-term real property for use in your business
less in a tax year after the tax year you placed the propertyat that retail space.
in service, you may have to recapture part of the deprecia-
tion deduction. You do this by including in income onAmount you can exclude.You can exclude the con-
Schedule C part of the depreciation you deducted in previ- struction allowance to the extent it does not exceed the
ous years. Use Part IV of Form 4797, Sales of Business amount you spent for construction or improvements.
Chapter 5 Business Income Page 25

Page 26 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Short-term lease.A short-term lease is a lease (or• Commissions, bonuses, or percentages you receive
other agreement for occupancy or use) of retail space for for sales and the sales of others who work under
15 years or less. The following rules apply in determining you.
whether the lease is for 15 years or less.
• Prizes, awards, and gifts you receive from your sell-
• Take into account options to renew when figuring ing business.
whether the lease is for 15 years or less. But do notYou must report this income regardless of whether it istake into account any option to renew at fair marketreported to you on an information return.value determined at the time of renewal.
You are a direct seller if you meet all the following
• Two or more successive leases that are part of theconditions.same transaction (or a series of related transactions)
for the same or substantially similar retail space are1. You are engaged in one of the following trades ortreated as one lease. businesses.
Retail space.Retail space is real property leased, oc-a. Selling or soliciting the sale of consumer products
cupied, or otherwise used by you as a tenant in your either in a home or other place that is not a per-
business of selling tangible personal property or servicesmanent retail establishment, or to any buyer on a
to the general public. buy-sell basis or a deposit-commission basis for
resale in a home or other place of business that isQualified long-term real property.Qualified long-term
not a permanent retail establishment.real property is nonresidential real property that is part of,
or otherwise present at, your retail space and that revertsb. Delivering or distributing newspapers or shopping
to the landlord when the lease ends. news (including any services directly related to
that trade or business).
Exchange of like-kind property.If you exchange your
business property or property you hold for investment2. Substantially all your pay (whether paid in cash or
solely for property of a like kind to be used in your businessnot) for services described above is directly related
or to be held for investment, no gain or loss is recognized.to sales or other output (including performance of
This means that the gain is not taxable and the loss is notservices) rather than to the number of hours worked.
deductible. A common type of nontaxable exchange is the3. Your services are performed under a written contracttrade-in of a business automobile for another businessbetween you and the person for whom you performautomobile. See Nontaxable exchanges in chapter 3. the services, and the contract provides that you will
not be treated as an employee for federal tax pur-Leasehold improvements.If a tenant erects buildings orposes.makes improvements to your property, the increase in the
value of the property due to the improvements is not
income to you. However, if the facts indicate that theExecutor or administrator.If you administer a deceasedimprovements are a payment of rent to you, then theperson’s estate, your fees are reported on Schedule C orincrease in value would be income. C-EZ if you are one of the following:
Loans. Money borrowed through a bona fide loan is not1. A professional fiduciary.
income.
2. A nonprofessional fiduciary (personal representative)
and both of the following apply.Sales tax.State and local sales taxes imposed on the
buyer, which you were required to collect and pay over toa. The estate includes an active trade or business instate or local governments, are not income. which you actively participate.
b. Your fees are related to the operation of that trade
or business.Guidelines for Selected
3. A nonprofessional fiduciary of a single estate thatOccupations. requires extensive managerial activities on your part
for a long period of time, provided these activities are This section provides information to determine whether
enough to be considered a trade or business.your earnings should be reported on Schedule C (Form
1040) or C-EZ (Form 1040).  If the fees do not meet the above requirements, report
them on line 21 of Form 1040.
Direct seller.You must report all income you receive as a
direct seller on Schedule C or C-EZ. This includes any ofFishing crew member. If you are a member of the crewthe following. that catches fish or other water life, your earnings are
• Income from sales—payments you receive from reported on Schedule C or C-EZ if you meet all the require-
customers for products they buy from you. ments shown in chapter 10 under Fishing crew member.
Page 26 Chapter 5 Business Income

Page 27 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Insurance agent, former.Termination payments you re- reported on Schedule C or C-EZ if all the following condi-
ceive as a former self-employed insurance agent from antions apply.
insurance company because of services you performed for• You sell newspapers or magazines to ultimate con-that company are not reported on Schedule C or C-EZ if allsumers.the following conditions are met.
• You sell them at a fixed price.• You received payments after your agreement to per-
• Your earnings are based on the difference betweenform services for the company ended.
the sales price and your cost of goods sold.• You did not perform any services for the company
after your service agreement ended and before theThis rule applies whether or not you are guaranteed aend of the year in which you received the payment.minimum amount of earnings. It also applies whether or
• You entered into a covenant not to compete against not you receive credit for unsold newspapers or magazines
the company for at least a 1-year period beginningyou return to your supplier.
on the date your service agreement ended.
Notary public.Fees you receive for services you perform• The amount of the payments depended primarily onas a notary public are reported on Schedule C or C-EZ.policies sold by you or credited to your account dur-
ing the last year of your service agreement or thePublic official.Public officials generally do not reportextent to which those policies remain in force forwhat they earn for serving in public office on Schedule C orsome period after your service agreement ended, orC-EZ. This rule applies to payments received by an electedboth. tax collector from state funds on the basis of a fixed
• The amount of the payment did not depend to anypercentage of the taxes collected. Public office includes
extent on length of service or overall earnings fromany elective or appointive office of the United States or its
services performed for the company (regardless ofpossessions, the District of Columbia, a state or its political
whether eligibility for the payments depended onsubdivisions, or a wholly owned instrumentality of any of
length of service). these.
Public officials of state or local governments report their
fees on Schedule C or C-EZ if they are paid solely on a feeInsurance agent, retired.Income paid by an insurance
basis and if their services are eligible for, but not coveredcompany to a retired self-employed insurance agent based
by, social security under a federal-state agreement.on a percentage of commissions received before retire-
ment is reported on Schedule C or C-EZ. Also, renewal
Real estate agent or direct seller.If you are a licensedcommissions and deferred commissions for sales made
real estate agent or a direct seller, your earnings arebefore retirement are generally reported on Schedule C or
reported on Schedule C or C-EZ if both the following apply.C-EZ.
However, renewal commissions paid to the survivor of• Substantially all your pay for services as a real es-
an insurance agent are not reported on Schedule C or tate agent or direct seller directly relates to your
C-EZ. sales or other output rather than to the number of
hours you work.Newspaper carrier or distributor.You are a direct seller
• You perform the services under a written contractand your earnings are reported on Schedule C or C-EZ if
that says you will not be treated as an employee forall the following conditions apply.
federal tax purposes.
• You are in the business of delivering or distributing
newspapers or shopping news (including directly re-
Securities dealer.If you are a dealer in options or com-lated services such as soliciting customers and col-
modities, your gains and losses from dealing or trading inlecting receipts).
section 1256 contracts (regulated futures contracts, for-
• Substantially all your pay for these services directlyeign currency contracts, nonequity options, dealer equity
relates to your sales or other output rather than tooptions, and dealer securities futures contracts) or prop-
the number of hours you work. erty related to those contracts (such as stock used to
hedge options) are reported on Schedule C or C-EZ. For• You perform the services under a written contract
more information, see sections 1256 and 1402(i).that says you will not be treated as an employee for
federal tax purposes.
Securities trader.You are a trader in securities if you are
engaged in the business of buying and selling securities forThis rule applies whether or not you hire others to help
your own account. As a trader in securities, your gain oryou make deliveries. It also applies whether you buy the
loss from the disposition of securities is not reported onpapers from the publisher or are paid based on the number
Schedule C or C-EZ. However, see Dealer in Securities,of papers you deliver.
earlier, for an exception that applies to section 1256 con-
tracts. For more information about traders in securities,Newspaper or magazine vendor.If you are 18 or older
see Publication 550, Investment Income and Expenses.and you sell newspapers or magazines, your earnings are
Chapter 5 Business Income Page 27

Page 28 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
lowances you make on sales are deductions from gross
sales in figuring net sales.Accounting for Your Income
Accounting for your income for income tax purposes differsAdvance payments. Special rules dealing with an ac-at times from accounting for financial purposes. This sec-crual method of accounting for payments received in ad-tion discusses some of the more common differences thatvance are discussed in chapter 2 under Accrual Method.may affect business transactions.
Figure your business income on the basis of a tax year
Insurance proceeds.If you receive insurance or anotherand according to your regular method of accounting (see
type of reimbursement for a casualty or theft loss, you mustchapter 2). If the sale of a product is an income-producing
factor in your business, you usually have to use inventoriessubtract it from the loss when you figure your deduction.
to clearly show your income. Dealers in real estate are notYou cannot deduct the reimbursed part of a casualty or
allowed to use inventories. For more information on inven-theft loss.
tories, see chapter 2. For information on casualty or theft losses, see Publica-
tion 547, Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts.Income paid to a third party.All income you earn is
taxable to you. You cannot avoid tax by having the income
paid to a third party.
Example. You rent out your property and the rental
agreement directs the lessee to pay the rent to your son.6.The amount paid to your son is gross income to you.
Cash discounts.These are amounts the seller permits
you to deduct from the invoice price for prompt payment.How To Figure
For income tax purposes, you can use either of the follow-
ing two methods to account for cash discounts.
Cost of Goods Sold
1. Deduct the cash discount from purchases (see Line
36, Purchases Less Cost of Items Withdrawn for
IntroductionPersonal Use in chapter 6).
If you make or buy goods to sell, you can deduct the cost of2. Credit the cash discount to a discount income ac-
count. goods sold from your gross receipts on Schedule C. How-
ever, to determine these costs, you must value your inven-You must use the chosen method every year for all yourtory at the beginning and end of each tax year.purchase discounts.
This chapter applies to you if you are a manufacturer,If you use the second method, the credit balance in the
wholesaler, or retailer or if you are engaged in any busi-account at the end of your tax year is business income.
Under this method, you do not reduce the cost of goodsness that makes, buys, or sells goods to produce income.
sold by the cash discounts you received. When valuingThis chapter does not apply to a personal service busi-
your closing inventory, you cannot reduce the invoice priceness, such as the business of a doctor, lawyer, carpenter,
of merchandise on hand at the close of the tax year by theor painter. However, if you work in a personal service
average or estimated discounts received on the merchan-business and also sell or charge for the materials and
dise. supplies normally used in your business, this chapter ap-
plies to you.Trade discounts.These are reductions from list or cata-
log prices and usually are not written into the invoice orIf you must account for an inventory in your
charged to the customer. Do not enter these discounts on business, you must generally use an accrual
your books of account. Instead, use only the net amount asmethod of accounting for your purchases andCAUTION
!
the cost of the merchandise purchased. For more informa-sales. For more information, see chapter 2.
tion, see Trade discounts in chapter 6.
Payment placed in escrow.If the buyer of your property
Figuring Cost of Goods Soldplaces part or all of the purchase price in escrow, you do
not include any part of it in gross sales until you actually or
on Schedule C Lines 35constructively receive it. However, upon completion of the
terms of the contract and the escrow agreement, you will
Through 42have taxable income, even if you do not accept the money
until the next year. Figure your cost of goods sold by filling out lines 35 through
42 of Schedule C. These lines are reproduced below andSales returns and allowances.Credits you allow cus-
are explained in the discussion that follows.tomers for returned merchandise and any other al-
Page 28 Chapter 6 How To Figure Cost of Goods Sold

Page 29 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
35 Inventory at beginning of year. If different from last income for 2005 must not include the $400. You remove
year’s closing inventory, attach explanation........ that amount from opening inventory for 2005.
36 Purchases less cost of items withdrawn for personal
u s e ................................... Example 2. If, in Example 1, you acquired the contrib-
37 Cost of labor. Do not include any amounts paid to uted property in 2005 at a cost of $400, you would includeyourself................................ the $400 cost of the property in figuring the cost of goods
38 Materials and supplies...................... sold for 2005 and deduct the $50 of administrative and
39 Other costs.............................. other expenses attributable to the property for that year.
You would not be allowed any charitable contribution de-40 Add lines 35 through 39.....................
duction for the contributed property.41 Inventory at end of year.....................
42 Cost of goods sold. Subtract line 41 from line 40.
Enter the result here and on page 1, line 4......... Line 36
Purchases Less Cost of Items
Line 35 Withdrawn for Personal Use
Inventory at Beginning of Year If you are a merchant, use the cost of all merchandise you
bought for sale. If you are a manufacturer or producer, thisIf you are a merchant, beginning inventory is the cost ofincludes the cost of all raw materials or parts purchased formerchandise on hand at the beginning of the year that youmanufacture into a finished product.will sell to customers. If you are a manufacturer or pro-
ducer, it includes the total cost of raw materials, work inTrade discounts.The differences between the statedprocess, finished goods, and materials and supplies usedprices of articles and the actual prices you pay for them arein manufacturing the goods (see Inventories in chapter 2).called trade discounts. You must use the prices you pay
Opening inventory usually will be identical to the closing(not the stated prices) in figuring your cost of purchases.
inventory of the year before. You must explain any differ-Do not show the discount amount separately as an item in
ence in a schedule attached to your return. gross income.
An automobile dealer must record the cost of a car in
Donation of inventory.If you contribute inventory (prop-inventory reduced by a manufacturer’s rebate that repre-
erty that you sell in the course of your business), thesents a trade discount.
amount you can claim as a contribution deduction is the
Cash discounts.Cash discounts are amounts your sup-smaller of its fair market value on the day you contributed it
pliers let you deduct from your purchase invoices foror its basis. The basis of donated inventory is any cost
prompt payments. There are two methods of accountingincurred for the inventory in an earlier year that you would
for cash discounts. You can either credit them to a sepa-otherwise include in your opening inventory for the year of
rate discount account or deduct them from total purchasesthe contribution. You must remove the amount of your
for the year. Whichever method you use, you must becontribution deduction from your opening inventory. It is
consistent. If you want to change your method of figuringnot part of the cost of goods sold.
inventory cost, you must file Form 3115, Application forIf the cost of donated inventory is not included in your
Change in Accounting Method. For more information, seeopening inventory, the inventory’s basis is zero and youChange in Accounting Method in chapter 2.cannot claim a charitable contribution deduction. Treat theIf you credit cash discounts to a separate account, youinventory’s cost as you would ordinarily treat it under yourmust include this credit balance in your business income atmethod of accounting. For example, include the purchasethe end of the tax year. If you use this method, do notprice of inventory bought and donated in the same year inreduce your cost of goods sold by the cash discounts.the cost of goods sold for that year.
Purchase returns and allowances.You must deduct allNote. See Publication 4492, Tax Information Relatedreturns and allowances from your total purchases duringTo Hurricane Katrina, for information on donations of foodthe year.inventory to Hurricane Katrina victims.
Merchandise withdrawn from sale.If you withdraw mer-
Example 1.You are a calendar year taxpayer who useschandise for your personal or family use, you must exclude
an accrual method of accounting. In 2005 you contributedthis cost from the total amount of merchandise you bought
property from inventory to a church. It had a fair marketfor sale. Do this by crediting the purchases or sales ac-
value of $600. The closing inventory at the end of 2004count with the cost of merchandise you withdraw for per-
properly included $400 of costs due to the acquisition ofsonal use. You should charge the amount to your drawing
the property, and in 2004, you properly deducted $50 ofaccount. 
administrative and other expenses attributable to the prop-A drawing account is a separate account you should
erty as business expenses. The charitable contributionkeep to record the business income you withdraw to pay
allowed for 2005 is $400 ($600 − $200). The $200 is thefor personal and family expenses. As stated above, you
amount that would be ordinary income if you had sold thealso use it to record withdrawals of merchandise for per-
contributed inventory at fair market value on the date of thesonal or family use. This account is also known as a
gift. The cost of goods sold you use in determining gross “withdrawals account” or “personal account.”
Chapter 6 How To Figure Cost of Goods Sold Page 29

Page 30 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
overhead expenses you have as direct and necessaryLine 37
expenses of the manufacturing operation are included inCost of Labor your cost of goods sold.
Labor costs are usually an element of cost of goods sold
Line 40only in a manufacturing or mining business. Small mer-
chandisers (wholesalers, retailers, etc.) usually do notAdd Lines 35 through 39have labor costs that can properly be charged to cost of
goods sold. In a manufacturing business, labor costs prop-The total of lines 35 through 39 equals the cost of the
erly allocable to the cost of goods sold include both thegoods available for sale during the year.
direct and indirect labor used in fabricating the raw material
into a finished, saleable product.
Line 41
Direct labor.Direct labor costs are the wages you pay toInventory at End of Year
those employees who spend all their time working directly
on the product being manufactured. They also include aSubtract the value of your closing inventory (including, as
part of the wages you pay to employees who work directlyappropriate, the allocable parts of the cost of raw materials
on the product part time if you can determine that part ofand supplies, direct labor, and overhead expenses) from
their wages. line 40. Inventory at the end of the year is also known as
closing or ending inventory. Your ending inventory willIndirect labor.Indirect labor costs are the wages you payusually become the beginning inventory of your next taxto employees who perform a general factory function thatyear.does not have any immediate or direct connection with
making the saleable product, but that is a necessary part of
Line 42the manufacturing process.
Cost of Goods SoldOther labor.Other labor costs not properly chargeable to
the cost of goods sold can be deducted as selling orWhen you subtract your closing inventory (inventory at theadministrative expenses. Generally, the only kinds of laborend of the year) from the cost of goods available for sale,costs properly chargeable to your cost of goods sold arethe remainder is your cost of goods sold during the taxthe direct or indirect labor costs and certain other costsyear.treated as overhead expenses properly charged to the
manufacturing process, as discussed later under Line 39
Other Costs.
Line 38 7.Materials and Supplies
Materials and supplies, such as hardware and chemicals,
Figuring Gross Profitused in manufacturing goods are charged to cost of goods
sold. Those that are not used in the manufacturing process
are treated as deferred charges. You deduct them as a
business expense when you use them. Business ex-
Introduction
penses are discussed in chapter 8. After you have figured the gross receipts from your busi-
ness (chapter 5) and the cost of goods sold (chapter 6),
Line 39 you are ready to figure your gross profit. You must deter-
mine gross profit before you can deduct any business
Other Costs
expenses. These expenses are discussed in chapter 8.
Examples of other costs incurred in a manufacturing orIf you are filing Schedule C-EZ, your gross profit is yourmining process that you charge to your cost of goods soldgross receipts plus certain other amounts, explained laterare as follows. under Additions to Gross Profit.
Containers.Containers and packages that are an integral
Businesses that sell products.If you are filing Schedulepart of the product manufactured are a part of your cost of
C, figure your gross profit by first figuring your net receipts.goods sold. If they are not an integral part of the manufac-
Figure net receipts on Schedule C by subtracting anytured product, their costs are shipping or selling expenses.
returns and allowances (line 2) from gross receipts (line 1).Freight-in.Freight-in, express-in, and cartage-in on rawReturns and allowances include cash or credit refunds youmaterials, supplies you use in production, and merchan-make to customers, rebates, and other allowances off thedise you purchase for sale are all part of cost of goods sold.actual sales price.
Next, subtract the cost of goods sold (line 4) from netOverhead expenses. Overhead expenses include ex-
receipts (line 3). The result is the gross profit from yourpenses such as rent, heat, light, power, insurance, depre-
business.ciation, taxes, maintenance, labor, and supervision. The
Page 30 Chapter 7 Figuring Gross Profit

Page 31 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Businesses that sell services.You do not have to figure adjust cost of goods sold, see Merchandise withdrawn
the cost of goods sold if the sale of merchandise is not anfrom sale in chapter 6.
income-producing factor for your business. Your grossInventory at end of year.Check to make sure your pro-profit is the same as your net receipts (gross receiptscedures for taking inventory are adequate. These proce-minus any refunds, rebates, or other allowances). Mostdures should ensure all items have been included inprofessions and businesses that sell services rather thaninventory and proper pricing techniques have been used.products can figure gross profit directly from net receipts inUse inventory forms and adding machine tapes as thethis way. only evidence for your inventory. Inventory forms are avail-
Illustration.This illustration of the gross profit section ofable at office supply stores. These forms have columns for
the income statement of a retail business shows how grossrecording the description, quantity, unit price, and value of
profit is figured. each inventory item. Each page has space to record who
made the physical count, who priced the items, who madeIncome Statement the extensions, and who proofread the calculations. TheseYear Ended December 31, 2005 forms will help satisfy you that the total inventory is accu-
rate. They will also provide you with a permanent record toGross receipts............................... $400,000
Minus: Returns and allowances................... 14,940 support its validity.
Net receipts................................ $385,060 Inventories are discussed in chapter 2.Minus: Cost of goods sold....................... 288,140
Gross profit................................ $96,920
The cost of goods sold for this business is figured asTesting Grossfollows:
Profit AccuracyInventory at beginning of year................... $37,845
Plus: Purchases.................... $285,900
Minus: Items withdrawn for personal use.... 2,650 283,250 If you are in a retail or wholesale business, you can checkGoods available for sale....................... $321,095 the accuracy of your gross profit figure. First, divide grossMinus: Inventory at end of year.................. 32,955
profit by net receipts. The resulting percentage measuresCost of goods sold.......................... $288,140
the average spread between the merchandise cost of
goods sold and the selling price.
Next, compare this percentage to your markup policy.
Items To Check Little or no difference between these two percentages
shows that your gross profit figure is accurate. A large
Consider the following items before figuring your grossdifference between these percentages may show that you
profit. did not accurately figure sales, purchases, inventory, or
other items of cost. You should determine the reason forGross receipts.At the end of each business day, makethe difference.sure your records balance with your actual cash and credit
receipts for the day. You may find it helpful to use cashExample. Joe Able operates a retail business. On the
registers to keep track of receipts. You should also use aaverage, he marks up his merchandise so that he will
proper invoicing system and keep a separate bank accountrealize a gross profit of 33
1/3% on its sales. The net receipts
for your business. (gross receipts minus returns and allowances) shown on
his income statement is $300,000. His cost of goods sold isSales tax collected.Check to make sure your records$200,000. This results in a gross profit of $100,000show the correct sales tax collected. ($300,000 − $200,000). To test the accuracy of this year’sIf you collect state and local sales taxes imposed on youresults, Joe divides gross profit ($100,000) by net receiptsas the seller of goods or services from the buyer, you must($300,000). The resulting 331/3% confirms his markup per-include the amount collected in gross receipts. centage of 331/3%.If you are required to collect state and local taxes im-
posed on the buyer and turn them over to state or local
governments, you generally do not include these amounts
in income.
Additions to Gross Profit
Inventory at beginning of year.Compare this figure withIf your business has income from a source other than itslast year’s ending inventory. The two amounts shouldregular business operations, enter the income on line 6 ofusually be the same. Schedule C and add it to gross profit. The result is gross
Purchases. If you take any inventory items for your per- business income. If you use Schedule C-EZ, include the
sonal use (use them yourself, provide them to your family, income on line 1 of the schedule. Some examples include
or give them as personal gifts, etc.) be sure to remove income from an interest-bearing checking account, income
them from the cost of goods sold. For details on how to from scrap sales, and amounts recovered from bad debts.
Chapter 7 Figuring Gross Profit Page 31

Page 32 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you are unable to collect any part of these accounts or
notes receivable, the uncollectible part is a business bad
8. debt.
You can take a bad debt deduction for these
accounts and notes receivable only if theBusiness Expenses
amount owed you was included in your grossCAUTION
!
income either for the year the deduction is claimed or for a
prior year.Introduction
Accrual method.If you use an accrual method of ac-You can deduct the costs of running your business. Thesecounting, you normally report income as you earn it. Youcosts are known as business expenses. These are costscan take a bad debt deduction for an uncollectible receiva-you do not have to capitalize or include in the cost of goodsble if you have included the uncollectible amount in in-sold. come.To be deductible, a business expense must be both
ordinary and necessary. An ordinary expense is one that isCash method. If you use the cash method of account-
common and accepted in your field of business. A neces-ing, you normally report income when you receive pay-
sary expense is one that is helpful and appropriate for yourment. You cannot take a bad debt deduction for amounts
business. An expense does not have to be indispensableowed to you that you have not received and cannot collect
to be considered necessary. if you never included those amounts in income.
For more information about the general rules for deduct-
More information.For more information about businessing business expenses, see chapter 1 in Publication 535,
bad debts, see chapter 11 in Publication 535.Business Expenses.
If you have an expense that is partly for businessNonbusiness bad debts. All other bad debts are non-
and partly personal, separate the personal partbusiness bad debts and are deductible as short-term capi-
from the business part.CAUTION
!
tal losses on Schedule D (Form 1040). For more
information on nonbusiness bad debts, see Publication
550, Investment Income and Expenses.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication Car and Truck Expenses
❏ 535 Business Expenses If you use your car or truck in your business, you may be
See chapter 12 for information about getting publica-able to deduct the costs of operating and maintaining your
tions and forms. vehicle. You also may be able to deduct other costs of local
transportation and traveling away from home overnight on
business.
Bad Debts You may be entitled to a tax credit for an electric
vehicle or a deduction from gross income for a
If someone owes you money you cannot collect, you have part of the cost of a clean-fuel vehicle you place
TIP
a bad debt. There are two kinds of bad debts, business badin service during the year. The vehicle must meet certain
debts and nonbusiness bad debts. requirements and you do not have to use it in your busi-
A business bad debt is generally one that comes fromness to qualify for the credit or the deduction. The deduc-
operating your trade or business. You may be able totion for clean-fuel vehicles expires on December 31, 2005.
deduct business bad debts as an expense on your busi-This deduction is being replaced by the alternative motor
ness tax return. vehicle credit for vehicles purchased after December 31,
2005. For more information, see chapter 12 in PublicationBusiness bad debt.A business bad debt is a loss from535 and Form 8910.    the worthlessness of a debt that was either of the following.
Local transportation expenses.Local transportation ex-1. Created or acquired in your business. penses include the ordinary and necessary costs of all the
following.2. Closely related to your business when it became
partly or totally worthless. • Getting from one workplace to another in the course
A debt is closely related to your business if your primaryof your business or profession when you are travel-
motive for incurring the debt is a business reason. ing within the city or general area that is your tax
home. Tax home is defined later.Business bad debts are mainly the result of credit sales
to customers. They can also be the result of loans to• Visiting clients or customers.suppliers, clients, employees, or distributors. Goods and
• Going to a business meeting away from your regularservices customers have not paid for are shown in your
workplace.books as either accounts receivable or notes receivable. If
Page 32 Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 33 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Getting from your home to a temporary workplaceChoosing the standard mileage rate.If you want to
when you have one or more regular places of work. use the standard mileage rate for a car or truck you own,
These temporary workplaces can be either within the you must choose to use it in the first year the car is
area of your tax home or outside that area. available for use in your business. In later years, you can
choose to use either the standard mileage rate or actualLocal business transportation does not include expensesexpenses.you have while traveling away from home overnight. ThoseIf you use the standard mileage rate for a car you lease,expenses are deductible as travel expenses and are dis-you must choose to use it for the entire lease periodcussed later under Travel, Meals, and Entertainment.(including renewals).However, if you use your car while traveling away from
home overnight, use the rules in this section to figure yourStandard mileage rate not allowed.You cannot use
car expense deduction. the standard mileage rate if you:
Generally, your tax home is your regular place of busi-1. Use the car for hire (such as a taxi),ness, regardless of where you maintain your family home.
It includes the entire city or general area in which your2. Operate five or more cars at the same time,
business or work is located. 3. Claimed a depreciation deduction using any method
other than straight line, for example, ACRS orExample. You operate a printing business out of rentedMACRS,office space. You use your van to deliver completed jobs to
your customers. You can deduct the cost of round-trip4. Claimed a section 179 deduction on the car,
transportation between your customers and your print5. Claimed the special depreciation allowance on theshop. car,
You cannot deduct the costs of driving your car6. Claimed actual car expenses for a car you leased, oror truck between your home and your main or
regular workplace. These costs are personal7. Are a rural mail carrier who received a qualified reim-
CAUTION
!
commuting expenses. bursement.
Office in the home.Your workplace can be your home Parking fees and tolls.In addition to using the stan-if you have an office in your home that qualifies as yourdard mileage rate, you can deduct any business-relatedprincipal place of business. For more information, seeparking fees and tolls. (Parking fees you pay to park yourBusiness Use of Your Home, later. car at your place of work are nondeductible commuting
expenses.)Example. You are a graphics designer. You operate
your business out of your home. Your home qualifies asActual expenses.If you do not choose to use the stan-your principal place of business. You occasionally have todard mileage rate, you may be able to deduct your actualdrive to your clients to deliver your completed work. Youcar or truck expenses.can deduct the cost of the round-trip transportation be-
If you qualify to use both methods, figure yourtween your home and your clients.
deduction both ways to see which gives you a
larger deduction.
TIP
Methods for Deducting
Actual car expenses include the costs of the followingCar and Truck Expenses items.
For local transportation or overnight travel by car or truck,Depreciation Lease payments Registration
you generally can use one of the following methods toGarage rent Licenses Repairs
Gas Oil Tiresfigure your expenses.
Insurance Parking fees Tolls
• Standard mileage rate. If you use your vehicle for both business and personal
• Actual expenses. purposes, you must divide your expenses between busi-
ness and personal use. You can divide your expenses
based on the miles driven for each purpose.Standard mileage rate.You may be able to use the
standard mileage rate to figure the deductible costs ofExample. You are the sole proprietor of a flower shop.operating your car, van, pickup, or panel truck for businessYou drove your van 20,000 miles during the year. 16,000purposes. For 2005, the standard mileage rate is 40.5miles were for delivering flowers to customers and 4,000cents a mile for all business miles driven before Septembermiles were for personal use. You can claim only 80%1, 2005. The rate is 48.5 cents a mile for business miles(16,000 ÷ 20,000) of the cost of operating your van as adriven after August 31, 2005, and before January 1, 2006.business expense.
If you choose to use the standard mileage rate
for a year, you cannot deduct your actual ex-More information.For more information about the rules
penses for that year except for business-relatedfor claiming car and truck expenses, see Publication 463,
CAUTION
!
parking fees and tolls. Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car Expenses.
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 33

Page 34 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Section 179 deduction.You can elect to deduct a limitedReimbursing Your Employees
amount of the cost of certain depreciable property in thefor Expenses year you place the property in service. This deduction is
known as the “section 179 deduction.” The maximumYou generally can deduct the amount you reimburse your
amount you can elect to deduct during 2005 is $105,000.employees for car and truck expenses. The reimburse-
This limit is reduced by the amount by which the cost of thement you deduct and the manner in which you deduct it
depend in part on whether you reimburse the expensesproperty placed in service during the tax year exceeds
under an accountable plan or a nonaccountable plan. For$420,000. The total amount of depreciation (including the
details, see chapter 13 in Publication 535. That chaptersection 179 deduction) you can take for a passenger auto-
explains accountable and nonaccountable plans and tellsmobile you use in your business and first place in service in
you whether to report the reimbursement on your 2005 is $2,960. Special rules apply to electric vehicles andemployee’s Form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement. trucks and vans. For more information, see Publication
946. It explains what property qualifies for the deduction,
what limits apply to the deduction, and when and how to
Depreciation recapture the deduction.
Your section 179 election for the cost of anyIf property you acquire to use in your business is expectedsport utility vehicle (SUV) and certain other vehi-to last more than one year, you generally cannot deduct cles is limited to $25,000. For more information,CAUTION
!
the entire cost as a business expense in the year yousee the Instructions for Form 4562 or Publication 946.acquire it. You must spread the cost over more than one
tax year and deduct part of it each year on Schedule C.
This method of deducting the cost of business property isLimited applicability of special depreciation
called depreciation. allowance. The additional special depreciation al-
The discussion here is brief. You will find more informa-lowances no longer apply to most property placed in serv-
tion about depreciation in Publication 946, How To Depre-ice after December 31, 2004. Generally, you can only
ciate Property. claim the special depreciation allowances for certain air-
craft and certain property with a long production period.
What property can be depreciated?You can depreciate For more information, see Publication 946.
property if it meets all the following requirements.
• It must be property you own. Listed property.Listed property is any of the following.
• It must be used in business or held to produce in-• Most passenger automobiles.come. You never can depreciate inventory (ex-
• Most other property used for transportation.plained in chapter 2) because it is not held for use in
your business. • Any property of a type generally used for entertain-
• It must have a useful life that extends substantiallyment, recreation, or amusement.
beyond the year it is placed in service. • Certain computers and related peripheral equipment.
• It must have a determinable useful life, which means• Any cellular telephone (or similar telecommunica-that it must be something that wears out, decays,tions equipment).gets used up, becomes obsolete, or loses its value
from natural causes. You never can depreciate the You must follow special rules and recordkeeping re-cost of land because land does not wear out, be-quirements when depreciating listed property. For morecome obsolete, or get used up.
information about listed property, see Publication 946.
• It must not be excepted property. This includes prop-
erty placed in service and disposed of in the same
Form 4562. Use Form 4562, Depreciation and Amortiza-year.
tion, if you are claiming any of the following.
Repairs. You cannot depreciate repairs and replace-• Depreciation on property placed in service during the
ments that do not increase the value of your property,current tax year.make it more useful, or lengthen its useful life. You can
• A section 179 deduction.deduct these amounts on line 21 of Schedule C or line 2 of
Schedule C-EZ. • Depreciation on any listed property (regardless of
when it was placed in service).
Depreciation method.The method for depreciating most
business and investment property placed in service after
If you have to use Form 4562, you must file1986 is called the Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery
Schedule C. You cannot use Schedule C-EZ.System (MACRS). MACRS is discussed in detail in Publi-
CAUTION
!
cation 946.
Page 34 Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 35 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Adoption assistance.
Employees’ Pay • Cafeteria plans.
• Dependent care assistance.You can generally deduct on Schedule C the pay you give
your employees for the services they perform for your• Educational assistance.
business. The pay may be in cash, property, or services.
• Group-term life insurance coverage.To be deductible, your employees’ pay must be an
ordinary and necessary expense and you must pay or • Welfare benefit funds.
incur it in the tax year. In addition, the pay must meet both
the following tests. You can generally deduct the cost of fringe benefits you
provide on your Schedule C in whatever category the cost• The pay must be reasonable. falls. For example, if you allow an employee to use a car or
• The pay must be for services performed. other property you lease, deduct the cost of the lease as a
rent or lease expense. If you own the property, includeChapter 2 in Publication 535 explains and defines these
your deduction for its cost or other basis as a section 179requirements.
deduction or a depreciation deduction.You cannot deduct your own salary or any personal
You may be able to exclude all or part of thewithdrawals you make from your business. As a sole pro-
fringe benefits you provide from your employees’prietor, you are not an employee of the business.
wages. For more information about fringe bene-
TIP
If you had employees during the year, you mustfits and the exclusion of benefits, see Publication 15-B,use Schedule C. You cannot use Schedule Employer’s Tax Guide to Fringe Benefits.C-EZ.CAUTION
!
Kinds of pay.Some of the ways you may provide pay to
Insuranceyour employees are listed below. For an explanation of
each of these items, see chapter 2 in Publication 535.
You can generally deduct premiums you pay for the follow-• Awards. ing kinds of insurance related to your business. 
• Bonuses.
1. Fire, theft, flood, or similar insurance.• Education expenses.
2. Credit insurance that covers losses from business• Fringe benefits (discussed later). bad debts.
• Loans or advances you do not expect the employee3. Group hospitalization and medical insurance for em-to repay if they are for personal services actuallyployees, including long-term care insurance.performed.
4. Liability insurance.• Property you transfer to an employee as payment for
5. Malpractice insurance that covers your personal lia-services.
bility for professional negligence resulting in injury or• Reimbursements for employee business expenses. damage to patients or clients.
• Sick pay. 6. Workers’ compensation insurance set by state law
• Vacation pay. that covers any claims for bodily injuries or job-re-
lated diseases suffered by employees in your busi-
Fringe benefits.A fringe benefit is a form of pay for theness, regardless of fault.
performance of services. The following are examples of7. Contributions to a state unemployment insurancefringe benefits.
fund are deductible as taxes if they are considered
• Benefits under qualified employee benefit programs.taxes under state law.
• Meals and lodging. 8. Overhead insurance that pays for business overhead
expenses you have during long periods of disability• The use of a car.
caused by your injury or sickness.
• Flights on airplanes.
9. Car and other vehicle insurance that covers vehicles
• Discounts on property or services. used in your business for liability, damages, and
other losses. If you operate a vehicle partly for per-• Memberships in country clubs or other social clubs.
sonal use, deduct only the part of the insurance pre-• Tickets to entertainment or sporting events. mium that applies to the business use of the vehicle.
If you use the standard mileage rate to figure yourEmployee benefit programs include the following. car expenses, you cannot deduct any car insurance
• Accident and health plans. premiums.
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 35

Page 36 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
10. Life insurance covering your employees if you are• You have more than one source of income subject tonot directly or indirectly the beneficiary under theself-employment tax.contract.
• You file Form 2555 or Form 2555-EZ (relating to11. Business interruption insurance that pays for lostforeign earned income).profits if your business is shut down due to a fire or
other cause. • You are using amounts paid for qualified long-term
care insurance to figure the deduction.
Nondeductible premiums.You cannot deduct premiums
on the following kinds of insurance. Prepayment. You cannot deduct expenses in advance,
even if you pay them in advance. This rule applies to any1. Self-insurance reserve funds. You cannot deductexpense paid far enough in advance to, in effect, create anamounts credited to a reserve set up for self-insur-asset with a useful life extending substantially beyond theance. This applies even if you cannot get businessend of the current tax year.insurance coverage for certain business risks. How-
ever, your actual losses may be deductible. For moreExample. In 2005, you signed a 3-year insurance con-information, see Publication 547, Casualties, Disas-tract. Even though you paid the premiums for 2005, 2006,ters, and Thefts. and 2007 when you signed the contract, you can only
2. Loss of earnings. You cannot deduct premiums for adeduct the premium for 2005 on your 2005 tax return. You
policy that pays for your lost earnings due to sick-can deduct in 2006 and 2007 the premium allocable to
ness or disability. However, see item (8) in the previ-those years.
ous list.
More information.For more information about deducting3. Certain life insurance and annuities. insurance, see chapter 7 in Publication 535.
a. For contracts issued before June 9, 1997, you
cannot deduct the premiums on a life insurance
policy covering you, an employee, or any personInterestwith a financial interest in your business if you are
directly or indirectly a beneficiary of the policy.You can generally deduct as a business expense all inter-You are included among possible beneficiaries ofest you pay or accrue during the tax year on debts relatedthe policy if the policy owner is obligated to repayto your business. Interest relates to your business if youa loan from you using the proceeds of the policy.use the proceeds of the loan for a business expense. ItA person has a financial interest in your businessdoes not matter what type of property secures the loan.if the person is an owner or part owner of theYou can deduct interest on a debt only if you meet all of thebusiness or has lent money to the business. following requirements.
b. For contracts issued after June 8, 1997, you gen-
• You are legally liable for that debt.erally cannot deduct the premiums on any life
insurance policy, endowment contract, or annuity• Both you and the lender intend that the debt be
contract if you are directly or indirectly a benefi-repaid.
ciary. The disallowance applies without regard to• You and the lender have a true debtor-creditor rela-whom the policy covers. tionship.
4. Insurance to secure a loan. If you take out a policyYou cannot deduct on Schedule C or C-EZ the intereston your life or on the life of another person with ayou paid on personal loans. If a loan is part business andfinancial interest in your business to get or protect apart personal, you must divide the interest between thebusiness loan, you cannot deduct the premiums as apersonal part and the business part.business expense. Nor can you deduct the premiums
as interest on business loans or as an expense ofExample. In 2005, you paid $600 interest on a car loan.financing loans. In the event of death, the proceedsDuring 2005, you used the car 60% for business and 40%of the policy are not taxed as income even if they arefor personal purposes. You are claiming actual expensesused to liquidate the debt. on the car. You can only deduct $360 (60% × $600) for
2005 on Schedule C or C-EZ. The remaining interest of
Self-employed health insurance deduction.You may $240 is a nondeductible personal expense.
be able to deduct the amount you paid for medical and
dental insurance and qualified long-term care insuranceMore information.For more information about deductingfor you and your family. interest, see chapter 5 in Publication 535. That chapter
explains the following items.How to figure the deduction.Generally, you can use
the worksheet in the Form 1040 instructions to figure your• Interest you can deduct.deduction. However, if any of the following apply, you must
• Interest you cannot deduct.use the worksheet in chapter 7 of Publication 535.
Page 36 Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 37 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• How to allocate interest between personal and busi- (including a 401(k) plan), SIMPLE plan, or simplified em-
ployee pension.ness use.
Under certain plans, employees can have you contrib-• When to deduct interest. ute limited amounts of their before-tax pay to a plan. These
amounts (and earnings on them) are generally tax free• The rules for a below-market interest rate loan. (This
until your employees receive distributions from the plan.is generally a loan on which no interest is charged or
For more information on retirement plans for small busi-on which interest is charged at a rate below the
ness, see Publication 560, Retirement Plans for Smallapplicable federal rate.)
Business (SEP, SIMPLE, and Qualified Plans).
Publication 590, Individual Retirement Arrange-
ments (IRAs), discusses other tax favored waysLegal and Professional Fees to save for retirement.
TIP
Legal and professional fees, such as fees charged by
accountants, that are ordinary and necessary expenses
Rent Expensedirectly related to operating your business are deductible
on Schedule C or C-EZ. However, you usually cannot
Rent is any amount you pay for the use of property you dodeduct legal fees you pay to acquire business assets. Add
not own. In general, you can deduct rent as a businessthem to the basis of the property.
expense only if the rent is for property you use in yourIf the fees include payments for work of a personalbusiness. If you have or will receive equity in or title to thenature (such as making a will), you can take a businessproperty, you cannot deduct the rent.deduction only for the part of the fee related to your
business. The personal part of legal fees for producing orUnreasonable rent.You cannot take a rental deduction
collecting taxable income, doing or keeping your job, or forfor unreasonable rents. Ordinarily, the issue of reasona-
tax advice may be deductible on Schedule A (Form 1040) ifbleness arises only if you and the lessor are related. Rent
you itemize deductions. For more information, see Publi-paid to a related person is reasonable if it is the same
cation 529, Miscellaneous Deductions. amount you would pay to a stranger for use of the same
property. Rent is not unreasonable just because it is fig-Tax preparation fees.You can deduct on Schedule Cured as a percentage of gross receipts.or C-EZ the cost of preparing that part of your tax returnRelated persons include members of your immediaterelating to your business as a sole proprietor or statutoryfamily, including only brothers and sisters (either whole oremployee. You can deduct the remaining cost on Schedulehalf), your spouse, ancestors, and lineal descendants. ForA (Form 1040) if you itemize your deductions. a list of the other related persons, see Publication 538,You can also deduct on Schedule C or C-EZ the amountAccounting Periods and Methods.you pay or incur in resolving asserted tax deficiencies for
your business as a sole proprietor or statutory employee.Rent on your home.If you rent your home and use part of
it as your place of business, you may be able to deduct the
rent you pay for that part. You must meet the requirements
for business use of your home. For more information, see
Pension Plans Business Use of Your Home, later.
You can set up and maintain the following small businessRent paid in advance.Generally, rent paid in your busi-
retirement plans for yourself and your employees.ness is deductible in the year paid or accrued. If you pay
rent in advance, you can deduct only the amount that• SEP (Simplified Employee Pension) plans. applies to your use of the rented property during the tax
• SIMPLE (Savings Incentive Match Plan for Employ-year. You can deduct the rest of your payment only over
ees) plans. the period to which it applies.
• Qualified plans (including Keogh or H.R. 10 plans).More information.For more information about rent, see
chapter 4 in Publication 535.SEP, SIMPLE, and qualified plans offer you and your
employees a tax favored way to save for retirement. You
can deduct contributions you make to the plan for yourTaxesemployees on line 19 of Schedule C. If you are a sole
proprietor, you can deduct contributions you make to theYou can deduct on Schedule C or C-EZ various federal,plan for yourself on line 28 of Form 1040. You can alsostate, local, and foreign taxes directly attributable to yourdeduct trustees’ fees if contributions to the plan do notbusiness.cover them. Earnings on the contributions are generally tax
free until you or your employees receive distributions fromIncome taxes.You can deduct on Schedule C or C-EZ a
the plan. You may also be able to claim a tax credit of 50%state tax on gross income (as distinguished from net in-
of the first $1,000 of qualified startup costs if you begin acome) directly attributable to your business. You can de-
new qualified defined benefit or defined contribution plan duct other state and local income taxes on Schedule A
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 37

Page 38 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
(Form 1040) if you itemize your deductions. Do not deductDo not deduct state and local sales taxes im-
posed on the buyer that you must collect and payfederal income tax.
over to the state or local government. Do notCAUTION
!
include these taxes in gross receipts or sales.Employment taxes. You can deduct the social security,
Medicare, and federal unemployment (FUTA) taxes you
Excise taxes.You can deduct on Schedule C or C-EZ allpaid out of your own funds as an employer. Employment
excise taxes that are ordinary and necessary expenses oftaxes are discussed briefly in chapter 1. You can alsocarrying on your business. Excise taxes are discusseddeduct payments you made as an employer to a statebriefly in chapter 1.unemployment compensation fund or to a state disability
benefit fund. Deduct these payments as taxes. Fuel taxes.Taxes on gasoline, diesel fuel, and other
motor fuels you use in your business are usually includedSelf-employment tax.You can deduct one-half of youras part of the cost of the fuel. Do not deduct these taxes asself-employment tax on line 27 of Form 1040. Self-employ-a separate item.ment tax is explained in chapters 1 and 10. You may be entitled to a credit or refund for federal
excise tax you paid on fuels used for certain purposes. ForPersonal property tax.You can deduct on Schedule C ormore information, see Publication 378, Fuel Tax CreditsC-EZ any tax imposed by a state or local government onand Refunds.
personal property used in your business.
You can also deduct registration fees for the right to use
property within a state or local area. Travel, Meals,
Example. May and Julius Winter drove their car 7,000and Entertainment
business miles out of a total of 10,000 miles. They had to
pay $25 for their annual state license tags and $20 for theirThis section briefly explains the kinds of travel and enter-
city registration sticker. They also paid $235 in city per-tainment expenses you can deduct on Schedule C or
sonal property tax on the car, for a total of $280. They areC-EZ.
claiming their actual car expenses. Because they used the
car 70% for business, they can deduct 70% of the $280, orTravel expenses.These are the ordinary and necessary
$196, as a business expense. expenses of traveling away from home for your business.
You are traveling away from home if both the following
Real estate taxes.You can deduct on Schedule C or conditions are met.
C-EZ the real estate taxes you pay on your business
1. Your duties require you to be away from the generalproperty. Deductible real estate taxes are any state, local,
area of your tax home (defined later) substantiallyor foreign taxes on real estate levied for the general public
longer than an ordinary day’s work.welfare. The taxing authority must base the taxes on the
assessed value of the real estate and charge them uni-2. You need to get sleep or rest to meet the demands
formly against all property under its jurisdiction. of your work while away from home.
For more information about real estate taxes, see chap-Generally, your tax home is your regular place of busi-ter 6 in Publication 535. That chapter explains special rulesness, regardless of where you maintain your family home.for deducting the following items. It includes the entire city or general area in which your
business is located. See Publication 463 for more• Taxes for local benefits, such as those for sidewalks,
information.streets, water mains, and sewer lines.
The following is a brief summary of the expenses you• Real estate taxes when you buy or sell propertycan deduct.during the year.
Transportation.You can deduct the cost of travel by• Real estate taxes if you use an accrual method ofairplane, train, bus, or car between your home and your
accounting and choose to accrue real estate taxbusiness destination.
related to a definite period ratably over that period.
Taxi, commuter bus, and limousine.You can deduct
fares for these and other types of transportation between
Sales tax.Treat any sales tax you pay on a service or onthe airport or station and your hotel, or between the hotel
the purchase or use of property as part of the cost of theand your work location away from home.
service or property. If the service or the cost or use of the
Baggage and shipping. You can deduct the cost ofproperty is a deductible business expense, you can deductsending baggage and sample or display material betweenthe tax as part of that service or cost. If the property isyour regular and temporary work locations.merchandise bought for resale, the sales tax is part of the
cost of the merchandise. If the property is depreciable, addCar or truck.You can deduct the costs of operating and
the sales tax to the basis for depreciation. For informationmaintaining your vehicle when traveling away from home
on the basis of property, see Publication 551, Basis ofon business. You can deduct actual expenses or the stan-
Assets. dard mileage rate (discussed earlier under Car and Truck
Page 38 Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 39 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 8-1. When Are Entertainment Expenses Deductible?
(Note. The following is a summary of the rules for deducting entertainment expenses. For more details
about these rules, see Publication 463.) 
General rule You can deduct ordinary and necessary expenses to entertain a client, customer, or
employee if the expenses meet the directly-related test or the associated test.
Definitions • Entertainment includes any activity generally considered to provide entertainment,
amusement, or recreation, and includes meals provided to a customer or client.
• An ordinary expense is one that is common and accepted in your field of business,
trade, or profession.
• A necessary expense is one that is helpful and appropriate, although not necessarily
required, for your business.
Tests to be met Directly-related test
• Entertainment took place in a clear business setting, or
• Main purpose of entertainment was the active conduct of business, and
You did engage in business with the person during the entertainment period, and
You had more than a general expectation of getting income or some other specific
business benefit
Associated test
• Entertainment is associated with your trade or business, and
• Entertainment directly precedes or follows a substantial business discussion.
Other rules • You cannot deduct the cost of your meal as an entertainment expense if you are claiming
the meal as a travel expense.
• You cannot deduct expenses that are lavish or extravagant under the circumstances.
• You generally can deduct only 50% of your unreimbursed entertainment expenses.
Expenses), as well as business-related tolls and parking. If• Providing meals, a hotel suite, or a car to business
you rent a car while away from home on business, you cancustomers or their families.
deduct only the business-use portion of the expenses.To be deductible, the expenses must meet the rules listed
Meals and lodging.You can deduct the cost of mealsin Table 8-1. For details about these rules, see Publication
and lodging if your business trip is overnight or long463.
enough that you need to stop for sleep or rest to properly
perform your duties. In most cases, you can deduct onlyReimbursing your employees for expenses.You gen-
50% of your meal expenses. erally can deduct the amount you reimburse your employ-
ees for travel and entertainment expenses. TheCleaning.You can deduct the costs of dry cleaning and
reimbursement you deduct and the manner in which youlaundry while on your business trip.
deduct it depend in part on whether you reimburse theTelephone. You can deduct the cost of business callsexpenses under an accountable plan or a nonaccountablewhile on your business trip, including business communi-plan. For details, see chapter 13 in Publication 535. Thatcation by fax machine or other communication devices.chapter explains accountable and nonaccountable plans
Tips.You can deduct the tips you pay for any expenseand tells you whether to report the reimbursement on your
in this list. employee’s Form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement.
More information.For more information about travel
expenses, see Publication 463, Travel, Entertainment,
Gift, and Car Expenses. Business Use
Entertainment expenses.You may be able to deduct of Your Homebusiness-related entertainment expenses for entertaining
a client, customer, or employee. In most cases, you canTo deduct expenses related to the part of your home useddeduct only 50% of these expenses. for business, you must meet specific requirements. Even
The following are examples of entertainment expenses.then, your deduction may be limited.
To qualify to claim expenses for business use of your• Entertaining guests at nightclubs, athletic clubs, the-
home, you must meet the following tests.aters, or sporting events.
Chapter 8 Business Expenses Page 39

Page 40 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Your home office will qualify as your principal place of
1. Your use of the business part of your home must be:business for deducting expenses for its use if you meet the
following requirements.a. Exclusive (however, see Exceptions to exclusive
use, later), • You use it exclusively and regularly for administra-
tive or management activities of your business.b. Regular,
• You have no other fixed location where you conductc. For your business, and
substantial administrative or management activities
of your business.2. The business part of your home must be one of the
following:
Alternatively, if you use your home exclusively and regu-
a. Your principal place of business (defined later),larly for your business, but your home office does not
qualify as your principal place of business based on theb. A place where you meet or deal with patients,
previous rules, you determine your principal place of busi-clients, or customers in the normal course of your
ness based on the following factors.business, or
c. A separate structure (not attached to your home)• The relative importance of the activities performed at
you use in connection with your business. each location.
• If the relative importance factor does not determine
your principal place of business, you can also con-Exclusive use.To qualify under the exclusive use test,sider the time spent at each location.you must use a specific area of your home only for your
trade or business. The area used for business can be aIf, after considering your business locations, your home
room or other separately identifiable space. The spacecannot be identified as your principal place of business,
does not need to be marked off by a permanent partition.you cannot deduct home office expenses. However, for
other ways to qualify to deduct home office expenses, seeYou do not meet the requirements of the exclusive use
Publication 587.test if you use the area in question both for business and
for personal purposes.
Deduction limit.If your gross income from the business
Example. You are an attorney and use a den in youruse of your home equals or exceeds your total business
home to write legal briefs and prepare clients’ tax returns.expenses (including depreciation), you can deduct all your
Your family also uses the den for recreation. The den is notbusiness expenses related to the use of your home. If your
used exclusively in your profession, so you cannot claim agross income from the business use is less than your total
business deduction for its use. business expenses, your deduction for certain expenses
for the business use of your home is limited.Exceptions to exclusive use.You do not have to meet
the exclusive use test if you use part of your home in eitherYour deduction of otherwise nondeductible expenses,
of the following ways. such as insurance, utilities, and depreciation (with depreci-
ation taken last), allocable to the business is limited to the
gross income from the business use of your home minus1. For the storage of inventory or product samples.
the sum of the following.
2. As a daycare facility.
1. The business part of expenses you could deductFor an explanation of these exceptions, see Publication
even if you did not use your home for business (such587, Business Use of Your Home (Including Use by Day-
as mortgage interest, real estate taxes, and casualtycare Providers).
and theft losses that are allowable as itemized de-
ductions on Schedule A (Form 1040)).Regular use.To qualify under the regular use test, you
must use a specific area of your home for business on a2. The business expenses that relate to the business
continuing basis. You do not meet the test if your businessactivity in the home (for example, business phone,
use of the area is only occasional or incidental, even if yousupplies, and depreciation on equipment), but not to
do not use that area for any other purpose. the use of the home itself.
Do not include in (2) above your deduction for one-half of
Principal place of business.You can have more than your self-employment tax.
one business location, including your home, for a singleUse Form 8829, Expenses for Business Use of Yourtrade or business. To qualify to deduct the expenses forHome, to figure your deduction. the business use of your home under the principal place of
business test, your home must be your principal place of
business for that business. To determine your principalMore information.For more information on deducting
place of business, you must consider all the facts and expenses for the business use of your home, see Publica-
circumstances. tion 587.
Page 40 Chapter 8 Business Expenses

Page 41 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Other Expenses 9.
You Can Deduct
Figuring Net ProfitYou may also be able to deduct the following expenses.
See Publication 535 to find out whether you can deductor Lossthem.
• Advertising.
Introduction• Clean-fuel vehicles and refueling property placed in
service before 2006. After figuring your business income and expenses, you are
ready to figure the net profit or net loss from your business.
• Donations to business organizations. You do this by subtracting business expenses from busi-
• Education expenses. ness income. If your expenses are less than your income,
the difference is net profit and becomes part of your in-• Energy efficient commercial buildings deduction ex-come on page 1 of Form 1040. If your expenses are morepenses. than your income, the difference is a net loss. You usually
• Environmental cleanup costs. can deduct it from gross income on page 1 of Form 1040.
But in some situations your loss is limited. This chapter• Impairment-related expenses. briefly explains two of those situations. Other situations
• Interview expense allowances. that may limit your loss are explained in the instructions for
line G and line 32 of Schedule C.• Licenses and regulatory fees.
If you have more than one business, you must• Moving machinery. figure your net profit or loss for each business on
• Outplacement services. a separate Schedule C.CAUTION
!
• Penalties and fines you pay for late performance or
nonperformance of a contract.
Net Operating Losses (NOLs)• Repairs that keep your property in a normal efficient
operating condition. If your deductions for the year are more than your income
• Repayments of income. for the year (line 41 of your Form 1040 is a negative
number), you may have a net operating loss (NOL). You• Subscriptions to trade or professional publications.can use an NOL by deducting it from your income in
• Supplies and materials. another year or years.
Examples of typical losses that may produce an NOL• Utilities.
include, but are not limited to, losses incurred from the
following.
• Your trade or business.
Expenses You Cannot Deduct • Your work as an employee (unreimbursed employee
business expenses).You usually cannot deduct the following as business ex-
penses. For more information, see Publication 535.
• A casualty or theft.
• Bribes and kickbacks. • Moving expenses.
• Charitable contributions. • Rental property.
• Demolition expenses or losses. A loss from operating a business is the most common
• Dues to business, social, athletic, luncheon, sport-reason for an NOL.
ing, airline, and hotel clubs. For details about NOLs, see Publication 536, Net Oper-
ating Losses (NOLs) for Individuals, Estates, and Trusts. It• Lobbying expenses. explains how to figure an NOL, when to use it, how to claim
• Penalties and fines you pay to a governmental an NOL deduction, and how to figure an NOL carryover.
agency or instrumentality because you broke the
law.
• Political contributions. Not-for-Profit Activities
• Repairs that add to the value of your property orIf you do not carry on your business to make a profit, theresignificantly increase its life. is a limit on the deductions you can take. You cannot use a
Chapter 9 Figuring Net Profit or LossPage 41

Page 42 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
loss from the activity to offset other income. Activities you subject to SE tax. Residents of the Virgin Islands, Puerto
do as a hobby, or mainly for sport or recreation, come Rico, Guam, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana
under this limit. Islands, or American Samoa, however, are subject to the
For details about not-for-profit activities, see chapter 1 tax. For SE tax purposes, they are not nonresident aliens.
in Publication 535, Business Expenses. That chapter ex- For more information on aliens, see Publication 519, U.S.
plains how to determine whether your activity is carried on Tax Guide for Aliens.
to make a profit and how to figure the amount of loss youChurch employee.  If you work for a church or a qualifiedcan deduct. church-controlled organization (other than as a minister or
member of a religious order) that elected an exemption
from social security and Medicare taxes, you are subject to
SE tax if you receive $108.28 or more in wages from the
church or organization. For more information, see Publica-
10. tion 517, Social Security and Other Information for Mem-
bers of the Clergy and Religious Workers.
Self-Employment (SE) Fishing crew member.If you are a member of the crew
on a boat that catches fish or other water life, your earnings
Tax are subject to SE tax if all the following conditions apply.
1. You do not get any pay for the work except yourThe self-employment tax rules apply no mattershare of the catch or a share of the proceeds fromhow old you are and even if you are already the sale of the catch, unless the pay meets all thereceiving social security and Medicare benefits.CAUTION
!
following conditions.
a. The pay is not more than $100 per trip.Who Must Pay
b. The pay is received only if there is a minimumSelf-Employment Tax? catch.
c. The pay is solely for additional duties (such as Generally, you must pay self-employment (SE) tax and file
mate, engineer, or cook) for which additional cashSchedule SE (Form 1040) if your net earnings from
pay is traditional in the fishing industry.self-employment were $400 or more. Use Schedule SE to
figure net earnings from self-employment.
2. You get a share of the catch or a share of the pro-
Sole proprietor or independent contractor.If you are ceeds from the sale of the catch.
self-employed as a sole proprietor or independent contrac-3. Your share depends on the amount of the catch.tor, use Schedule C or C-EZ (Form 1040) to figure your
earnings subject to SE tax. 4. The boat’s operating crew normally numbers fewer
than 10 individuals. (An operating crew is consideredSelf-employment (SE) tax rate. The SE tax rate on net as normally made up of fewer than 10 if the averageearnings is 15.3% (12.4% social security tax plus 2.9%size of the crew on trips made during the last fourMedicate tax.) calendar quarters is fewer than 10.)
Maximum earnings subject to self-employment tax. You are not subject to SE tax if you are under age 18
Only the first $90,000 of your combined wages, tips, andand you are working for your father or mother.
net earnings in 2005 is subject to any combination of the
Notary public.Fees you receive for services you perform12.4% social security part of SE tax, social security tax, or
as a notary public are reported on Schedule C or C-EZ butrailroad retirement (tier 1) tax.
are not subject to self-employment tax (see the Instruc-All of your combined wages, tips, and net earnings in
tions for Schedule SE (Form 1040)).2005 are subject to any combination of the 2.9% Medicare
part of SE tax, social security tax, or railroad retirementState or local government employee.You are subject to(tier 1) tax. SE tax if you are an employee of a state or local govern-If your wages and tips are subject to either social secur-ment, are paid solely on a fee basis, and your services areity or railroad retirement (tier 1) tax, or both, and total atnot covered under a federal-state social security agree-least $90,000, do not pay the 12.4% social security part ofment.the SE tax on any of your net earnings. However, you must
Foreign government or international organizationpay the 2.9% Medicare part of the SE tax on all your net
employee. You are subject to SE tax if both the followingearnings.
conditions are true.
Special Rules and Exceptions 1. You are a U.S. citizen employed in the United States,
Puerto Rico, Guam, American Samoa, the Common-
Aliens.Resident aliens are generally subject to the same wealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, or the Virgin
rules that apply to U.S. citizens. Nonresident aliens are not Islands by:
Page 42 Chapter 10 Self-Employment (SE) Tax

Page 43 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
a. A foreign government, Figuring Earnings Subject to
b. A wholly-owned instrumentality of a foreign gov-Self-Employment (SE) Tax
ernment, or
c. An international organization. Methods for Figuring Net Earnings
There are three ways to figure your net earnings from2. Your employer is not required to withhold social se-
self-employment.curity and Medicare taxes from your wages.
1. The regular method.
U.S. citizen or resident alien residing abroad. If you 2. The nonfarm optional method.
are a self-employed U.S. citizen or resident alien living3. The farm optional method.outside the United States, in most cases you must pay SE
tax. Do not reduce your foreign earnings from self-employ-You must use the regular method unless you are eligible
ment by your foreign earned income exclusion. to use one or both of the optional methods.
Exception. The United States has social securityWhy use an optional method? You may want to use theagreements with many countries to eliminate double taxa-optional methods (discussed later) when you have a losstion under two social security systems. Under these agree-or a small net profit and any one of the following applies.
ments, you generally must only pay social security and
• You want to receive credit for social security benefitMedicare taxes to the country you live in. The country to
coverage.which you must pay the tax will issue a certificate which
serves as proof of exemption from social security tax in the• You incurred child or dependent care expenses for
other country. which you could claim a credit. (An optional method
may increase your earned income, which could in-See the Instructions for Schedule SE (Form 1040) for
crease your credit.)more information.
• You are entitled to the earned income credit. (An
optional method may increase your earned income,More Than One Business which could increase your credit.)
If you have earnings subject to SE tax from more than one• You are entitled to the additional child tax credit. (Antrade, business, or profession, you must combine the netoptional method may increase your earned income,profit (or loss) from each to determine your total earningswhich could increase your credit.)subject to SE tax. A loss from one business reduces your
profit from another business.
Effects of using an optional method.Using an optional
method could increase your SE tax. Paying more SE tax
Community Property Income could result in your getting higher benefits when you retire.
If you use either or both optional methods, you mustIf any of the income from a trade or business, other than afigure and pay the SE tax due under these methods even ifpartnership, is community property income under stateyou would have had a smaller tax or no tax using the
law, it is included in the earnings subject to SE tax of theregular method.
spouse carrying on the trade or business. The optional methods may be used only to figure your
SE tax. To figure your income tax, include your actual
earnings in gross income, regardless of which method you
Gain or Loss use to determine SE tax.
Do not include in earnings subject to SE tax a gain or loss
from the disposition of property that is neither stock in tradeRegular Methodnor held primarily for sale to customers. It does not matter
whether the disposition is a sale, exchange, or an involun-Multiply your total earnings subject to SE tax by 92.35%
tary conversion. (.9235) to get your net earnings under the regular method.
See Short Schedule SE, line 4, or Long Schedule SE, line
4a.
Lost Income Payments Net earnings figured using the regular method are also
called actual net earnings.If you are self-employed and reduce or stop your business
activities, any payment you receive from insurance or other
sources for the lost business income is included in earn-
Nonfarm Optional Methodings subject to SE tax. If you are not working when you
receive the payment, it still relates to your business and isUse the nonfarm optional method only for earnings that do
included in earnings subject to SE tax, even though yournot come from farming. You may use this method if you
business is temporarily inactive. meet all the following tests.
Chapter 10 Self-Employment (SE) Tax Page 43

Page 44 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
equivalent to net earnings figured using the regular
1. You are self-employed on a regular basis. Thismethod.
means that your actual net earnings from self-em-
ployment were $400 or more in at least 2 of the 3 taxOptional net earnings less than actual net earnings.
years before the one for which you use this method.You cannot use this method to report an amount less than
The net earnings can be from either farm or nonfarm your actual net earnings from self-employment.
earnings or both.
Gross nonfarm income of $2,400 or less.The following
2. You have used this method less than 5 years. (Thereexamples illustrate how to figure net earnings when gross
is a 5-year lifetime limit.) The years do not have to benonfarm income is $2,400 or less.
one after another.
Example 1. Net nonfarm profit less than $1,733 and3. Your net nonfarm profits were:
less than 72.189% of gross nonfarm income. Ann
a. Less than $1,733, and Green runs a craft business. Her actual net earnings from
self-employment were $800 in 2003 and $900 in 2004. Sheb. Less than 72.189% of your gross nonfarm in-meets the test for being self-employed on a regular basis.come. She has used the nonfarm optional method less than 5
years. Her gross income and net profit in 2005 are as
follows:Net nonfarm profits.Net nonfarm profit generally is the
total of the amounts from: Gross nonfarm income................... $2,100
Net nonfarm profit....................... $1,200
• Line 31, Schedule C (Form 1040),
Ann’s actual net earnings for 2005 are $1,108 ($1,200 ×• Line 3, Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040),
.9235). Because her net profit is less than $1,733 and less
• Box 14, code A, Schedule K-1 (Form 1065), (fromthan 72.189% of her gross income, she can use the non-
nonfarm partnerships), and farm optional method to figure net earnings of $1,400 (2/3 ×
$2,100). Because these net earnings are higher than her• Box 9, code K1, Schedule K-1 (Form 1065-B).
actual net earnings, she can report net earnings of $1,400
for 2005.However, you may need to adjust the amount reported
on Schedule K-1 if you are a general partner or if it is a loss.
Example 2. Net nonfarm profit less than $1,733 but
not less than 72.189% of gross nonfarm income.As-Gross nonfarm income. Your gross nonfarm income
sume that in Example 1 Ann’s gross income is $1,000 andgenerally is the total of the amounts from:
her net profit is $800. She must use the regular method to
• Line 7, Schedule C (Form 1040), figure her net earnings. She cannot use the nonfarm op-
tional method because her net profit is not less than• Line 1, Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040), 72.189% of her gross income.
• Box 14, code C, Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) (from
nonfarm partnerships), and Example 3. Net loss from a nonfarm business.As-
sume that in Example 1 Ann has a net loss of $700. She• Box 9, code K2, Schedule K-2 (Form 1065-B). can use the nonfarm optional method and report $1,400 (2/3
× $2,100) as her net earnings.
Figuring Nonfarm Net Earnings
Example 4. Nonfarm net earnings less than $400.
If you meet the three tests explained earlier, use theAssume that in Example 1 Ann has gross income of $525
following table to figure your net earnings from self-em-and a net profit of $175. In this situation, she would not pay
ployment under the nonfarm optional method. any SE tax under either the regular method or the nonfarm
optional method because her net earnings under both
Table 10-1. Figuring Nonfarm Net Earnings methods are less than $400.
Gross nonfarm income of more than $2,400.The fol-IF your gross nonfarm THEN your net earnings
lowing examples illustrate how to figure net earnings whenincome is ... are equal to ...
gross nonfarm income is more than $2,400.$2,400 or less Two-thirds of your gross
nonfarm income. Example 1. Net nonfarm profit less than $1,733 and
More than $2,400 $1,600 less than 72.189% of gross nonfarm income.John
White runs an appliance repair shop. His actual net earn-
ings from self-employment were $10,500 in 2003 and
Actual net earnings.Your actual net earnings are $9,500 in 2004. He meets the test for being self-employed
92.35% of your total earnings subject to SE tax (that is,on a regular basis. He has used the nonfarm optional
multiply total earnings subject to SE tax by 92.35% (.9235)method less than 5 years. His gross income and net profit
to get actual net earnings). Actual net earnings arein 2005 are as follows:
Page 44 Chapter 10 Self-Employment (SE) Tax

Page 45 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Gross nonfarm income................... $12,000 Table 10-2. Example—Farm and Nonfarm
Net nonfarm profit....................... $1,200 Earnings
John’s actual net earnings for 2005 are $1,108 ($1,200
Income and× .9235). Because his net profit is less than $1,733 and
Earnings Farm Nonfarmless than 72.189% of his gross income, he can use the
nonfarm optional method to figure net earnings of $1,600.Gross income $1,200 $1,500
Because these net earnings are higher than his actual netActual net earnings $900 $500earnings, he can report net earnings of $1,600 for 2005.
Optional net
Example 2. Net nonfarm profit not less than $1,733.earnings (2/3 of gross
Assume that in Example 1 John’s net profit is $1,800. Heincome) $800 $1,000
must use the regular method. He cannot use the nonfarm
optional method because his net nonfarm profit is not lessTable 10-3 shows four methods or combinations of
than $1,733. methods you can use to figure net earnings from self-em-
ployment using the farm and nonfarm gross income and
Example 3. Net loss from a nonfarm business.As- actual net earnings shown in Table 5.
sume that in Example 1 John has a net loss of $700. He• Method 1. Using the regular method for both farmcan use the nonfarm optional method and report $1,600 asand nonfarm income.his net earnings from self-employment.
• Method 2. Using the optional method for farm in-
come and the regular method for nonfarm income.Farm Optional Method
• Method 3. Using the regular method for farm incomeUse the farm optional method only for earnings from aand the optional method for nonfarm income.farming business. See Publication 225 for information
• Method 4. Using the optional method for both farmabout this method.
and nonfarm income.
Using Both Optional Methods Note. Actual net earnings is the same as net earnings
figured using the regular method.
If you have both farm and nonfarm earnings, you may be
able to use both optional methods to determine your netTable 10-3. Example—Net Earningsearnings from self-employment.
 To figure your net earnings using both optional meth-
Netods, you must: Earnings 1 2 3 4
• Figure your farm and nonfarm net earnings sepa-
rately under each method. Do not combine farm Actual
earnings with nonfarm earnings to figure your netfarm $ 900 $ 900
earnings under either method.
Optional• Add the net earnings figured under each method tofarm $ 800 $ 800arrive at your total net earnings from self-employ-
ment. Actual
nonfarm $ 500 $ 500You can report less than your total actual farm and non-
farm net earnings but not less than actual nonfarm net
Optionalearnings. If you use both optional methods, you can report
nonfarm $1,000 $1,000no more than $1,600 as your combined net earnings from
self-employment.
Amount
you canExample. You are a self-employed farmer. You also
report: $1,400 $1,300 $1,900 $1,600*operate a retail grocery store. Your gross income, actual
net earnings from self-employment, and optional farm and*Limited to $1,600 because you used both optional methods.optional nonfarm net earnings from self-employment are
shown in Table 10-2.
Fiscal Year Filer
If you use a tax year other than the calendar year, you must
use the tax rate and maximum earnings limit in effect at the
beginning of your tax year. Even if the tax rate or maximum
earnings limit changes during your tax year, continue to
use the same rate and limit throughout your tax year.
Chapter 10 Self-Employment (SE) Tax Page 45

Page 46 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Reporting Self-Employment Declaration of
Tax Taxpayer Rights
Use Schedule SE (Form 1040) to figure and report your SEProtection of your rights.IRS employees will explaintax. Then enter the SE tax on line 58 of Form 1040 andand protect your rights as a taxpayer throughout yourattach Schedule SE to Form 1040. contact with us.Most taxpayers can use Section A-Short Schedule SE
to figure their SE tax. However, certain taxpayers must usePrivacy and confidentiality.The IRS will not disclose toSection B-Long Schedule SE. anyone the information you give us, except as authorized
If you have to pay SE tax, you must file Formby law. You have the right to know why we are asking you
1040 (with Schedule SE attached) even if you dofor information, how we will use it, and what happens if you
not otherwise have to file a federal income taxdo not provide requested information.CAUTION
!
return.
Professional and courteous service.If you believe thatJoint return.If you file a joint return, you cannot file a jointan IRS employee has not treated you in a professional,Schedule SE. This is true whether one spouse or bothfair, and courteous manner, you should tell thatspouses have earnings subject to SE tax. If both of youemployee’s supervisor. If the supervisor’s response is nothave earnings subject to SE tax, each of you must com-satisfactory, you should write to the IRS director for yourplete a separate Schedule SE. However, if one spousearea or the center where you file your return.uses the Short Schedule SE and the other spouse has to
use the Long Schedule SE, both can use the same form.Representation.You can either represent yourself or,
Attach both schedules to the joint return. with proper written authorization, have someone else rep-
resent you in your place. Your representative must be aMore than one business.If you have more than one
person allowed to practice before the IRS, such as antrade or business, you must combine the net profit (or loss)
attorney, certified public accountant, or enrolled agent. Iffrom each business to figure your SE tax. A loss from one
you are in an interview and ask to consult such a person,business will reduce your profit from another business. File
then we must stop and reschedule the interview in mostone Schedule SE showing the earnings from self-employ-
cases.ment, but file a separate Schedule C, C-EZ, or F for each
You can have someone accompany you at an interview.business.
You can make sound recordings of any meetings with our
examination, appeal, or collection personnel, provided youExample. You are the sole proprietor of two separate
tell us in writing 10 days before the meeting.businesses. You operate a restaurant that made a net
profit of $25,000. You also have a cabinetmaking business
Payment of only the correct amount of tax.You arethat had a net loss of $500. You must file a Schedule C for
responsible for paying only the correct amount of tax duethe restaurant showing your net profit of $25,000 and
under the law—no more, no less. If you cannot pay all ofanother Schedule C for the cabinetmaking business show-
your tax when it is due, you may be able to make monthlying your net loss of $500. You file Schedule SE showing
installment payments.total earnings subject to SE tax of $24,500.
Help with unresolved tax problems.The Taxpayer Ad-
vocate Service can help you if you have tried unsuccess-
fully to resolve a problem with the IRS. Your local Taxpayer
Advocate can offer you special help if you have a signifi-
11. cant hardship as a result of a tax problem. For more
information, call toll free 1-877-777-4778 (1-800-829-4059
for TTY/TDD) or write to the Taxpayer Advocate at the IRS
Your Rights office that last contacted you.
as a Taxpayer Appeals and judicial review.If you disagree with us
about the amount of your tax liability or certain collection
The first part of this chapter explains some of your mostactions, you have the right to ask the Appeals Office to
important rights as a taxpayer. The second part explainsreview your case. You can also ask a court to review your
the examination, appeal, collection, and refund processes.case.
Relief from certain penalties and interest.The IRS will
waive penalties when allowed by law if you can show you
acted reasonably and in good faith or relied on the incor-
rect advice of an IRS employee. We will waive interest that
is the result of certain errors or delays caused by an IRS
employee.
Page 46 Chapter 11 Your Rights as a Taxpayer

Page 47 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Rights and How To Prepare a Protest If You Don’t Agree,
and Publication 556, Examination of Returns, AppealExaminations, Appeals,
Rights, and Claims for Refund.
Collections, and Refunds If you do not wish to use the Appeals Office or disagree
with its findings, you may be able to take your case to the
U.S. Tax Court, U.S. Court of Federal Claims, or the U.S.Examinations (audits).We accept most taxpayers’ re-District Court where you live. If you take your case to court,turns as filed. If we inquire about your return or select it forthe IRS will have the burden of proving certain facts if youexamination, it does not suggest that you are dishonest.kept adequate records to show your tax liability, cooper-The inquiry or examination may or may not result in moreated with the IRS, and meet certain other conditions. If thetax. We may close your case without change; or, you maycourt agrees with you on most issues in your case andreceive a refund. finds that our position was largely unjustified, you may beThe process of selecting a return for examination usu-able to recover some of your administrative and litigationally begins in one of two ways. First, we use computercosts. You will not be eligible to recover these costs unlessprograms to identify returns that may have incorrectyou tried to resolve your case administratively, includingamounts. These programs may be based on informationgoing through the appeals system, and you gave us thereturns, such as Forms 1099 and W-2, on studies of pastinformation necessary to resolve the case.examinations, or on certain issues identified by compli-
ance projects. Second, we use information from outsideCollections.Publication 594, The IRS Collection Pro-sources that indicates that a return may have incorrectcess, explains your rights and responsibilities regardingamounts. These sources may include newspapers, publicpayment of federal taxes. It describes:records, and individuals. If we determine that the informa-
• What to do when you owe taxes. It describes what totion is accurate and reliable, we may use it to select a
do if you get a tax bill and what to do if you thinkreturn for examination.
your bill is wrong. It also covers making installmentPublication 556, Examination of Returns, Appeal
payments, delaying collection action, and submittingRights, and Claims for Refund, explains the rules and
an offer in compromise.procedures that we follow in examinations. The following
sections give an overview of how we conduct examina-• IRS collection actions. It covers liens, releasing ations. lien, levies, releasing a levy, seizures and sales, and
release of property.By mail.We handle many examinations and inquiries
by mail. We will send you a letter with either a request for
Your collection appeal rights are explained in detail inmore information or a reason why we believe a change to
Publication 1660, Collection Appeal Rights.your return may be needed. You can respond by mail or
you can request a personal interview with an examiner. IfInnocent spouse relief.Generally, both you and youryou mail us the requested information or provide an expla-spouse are responsible, jointly and individually, for payingnation, we may or may not agree with you, and we willthe full amount of any tax, interest, or penalties due on yourexplain the reasons for any changes. Please do not hesi-joint return. To seek relief from any liability related to yourtate to write to us about anything you do not understand.spouse (or former spouse), you must file a claim on Form
By interview.If we notify you that we will conduct your8857, Request for Innocent Spouse Relief. Form 8857
examination through a personal interview, or you requestmust be filed within 2 years from the IRS’s first attempt to
such an interview, you have the right to ask that thecollect the tax from you after July 22, 1998, such as by
examination take place at a reasonable time and place thatapplying your refund from one year to the joint liability. For
is convenient for both you and the IRS. If our examinermore information, see Publication 971, Innocent Spouse
proposes any changes to your return, he or she will explainRelief, and Form 8857. 
the reasons for the changes. If you do not agree with these
Refunds. You can file a claim for refund if you think youchanges, you can meet with the examiner’s supervisor.
paid too much tax. You must generally file the claim withinRepeat examinations.If we examined your return for3 years from the date you filed your original return or 2the same items in either of the 2 previous years andyears from the date you paid the tax, whichever is later.proposed no change to your tax liability, please contact usThe law generally provides for interest on your refund if it isas soon as possible so we can see if we should discontinuenot paid within 45 days of the date you filed your return orthe examination. claim for refund. Publication 556, Examination of Returns,
Appeals. If you do not agree with the examiner’s pro- Appeal Rights, and Claims for Refund, has more informa-
posed changes, you can appeal them to the Appeals Office tion on refunds.
of IRS. Most differences can be settled without expensive If you were due a refund but you did not file a return, you
and time-consuming court trials. Your appeal rights are must file within 3 years from the date the return was due
explained in detail in both Publication 5, Your Appeal (including extensions) to get that refund.
Chapter 11 Your Rights as a Taxpayer Page 47

Page 48 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
For more information about this program, call the IRS
Monday through Friday during regular business hours.
12. Check your telephone book for the local number of the IRS
office closest to you or you can call 1-800-829-1040.
How To Get More Free tax services.To find out what services are avail-
able, get Publication 910, IRS Guide to Free Tax Services.Information It contains a list of free tax publications and an index of tax
topics. It also describes other free tax information services,
This section describes the help the IRS and other federalincluding tax education and assistance programs and a list
agencies offer to taxpayers who operate their own busi-of TeleTax topics.
nesses.
Internet. You can access the IRS website 24
hours a day, 7 days a week, at www.irs.gov to:
Internal Revenue Service • E-file your return. Find out about commercial tax
preparation and e-file services available free to eli-You can get help with unresolved tax issues, order free
gible taxpayers.publications and forms, ask tax questions, and get informa-
tion from the IRS in several ways. By selecting the method• Check the status of your 2005 refund. Click on
that is best for you, you will have quick and easy access toWhere’s My Refund. Be sure to wait at least 6
tax help. weeks from the date you filed your return (3 weeks
if you filed electronically). Have your 2005 tax re-Contacting your Taxpayer Advocate.If you have at- turn available because you will need to know yourtempted to deal with an IRS problem unsuccessfully, youfiling status and the exact whole dollar amount ofshould contact your Taxpayer Advocate. your refund.The Taxpayer Advocate independently represents your
• Download forms, instructions, and publications.interests and concerns within the IRS by protecting your
• Order IRS products online.rights and resolving problems that have not been fixed
through normal channels. While Taxpayer Advocates can-• Research your tax questions online.
not change the tax law or make a technical tax decision,• Search publications online by topic or keyword.they can clear up problems that resulted from previous• View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs) published incontacts and ensure that your case is given a completethe last few years.and impartial review.
• Figure your withholding allowances using our FormTo contact your Taxpayer Advocate:
W-4 calculator.
• Call the Taxpayer Advocate toll free at • Sign up to receive local and national tax news by1-877-777-4778. email.
• Call, write, or fax the Taxpayer Advocate office in• Get information on starting and operating a small
your area. business.
.• Call 1-800-829-4059 if you are a TTY/TDD user.
Phone. Many services are available by phone.• Visit www.irs.gov/advocate.
For more information, see Publication 1546, How to Get
Help With Unresolved Tax Problems (now available in• Ordering forms, instructions, and publications. Call
Chinese, Korean, Russian, and Vietnamese, in addition to1-800-829-3676 to order current-year forms, in-
English and Spanish). structions, and publications and prior-year forms
and instructions. You should receive your orderSmall Business Tax Education Program.Small busi- within 10 days.ness owners and other self-employed individuals can learn
• Asking tax questions. Call the IRS with your taxabout business taxes through a unique partnership be-
questions at 1-800-829-1040.tween the IRS and local organizations. Through work-
shops or in-depth tax courses, instructors provide training• Solving problems. You can get face-to-face help
on starting a business, recordkeeping, preparing business solving tax problems every business day in IRS
tax returns, self-employment tax issues, and employment Taxpayer Assistance Centers. An employee can
taxes. explain IRS letters, request adjustment to your ac-
Some courses are offered free as a community service. count, or help you set up a payment plan. Call your
Courses given by an educational facility may include costs local Taxpayer Assistance Center for an appoint-
for materials and tuition. Other courses may have a nomi- ment. To find the number, go to www.irs.gov/local-
nal fee to offset administrative costs of sponsoring organi-contacts or look in the phone book under United
zations. States Government, Internal Revenue Service.
Page 48 Chapter 12 How To Get More Information

Page 49 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• TTY/TDD equipment. If you have access to TTY/ to www.irs.gov/localcontacts or look in the phone
TDD equipment, call 1-800-829-4059 to ask tax or book under United States Government, Internal
account questions or to order forms and publica- Revenue Service.
tions. Mail. You can send your order for forms, instruc-
• TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 and press 2 to tions, and publications to the address below and
listen to pre-recorded messages covering various receive a response within 10 business days after
tax topics. your request is received.
• Refund information. If you would like to check the National Distribution Center
status of your 2005 refund, call 1-800-829-4477 P.O. Box 8903
and press 1 for automated refund information or Bloomington, IL 61702–8903
call 1-800-829-1954. Be sure to wait at least 6 CD-ROM for tax products. You can order Pub-weeks from the date you filed your return (3 weeks lication 1796, IRS Federal Tax Productsif you filed electronically). Have your 2005 tax re- CD-ROM, and obtain:turn available because you will need to know your
filing status and the exact whole dollar amount of
• A CD that is released twice so you have the latestyour refund.
products. The first release ships in late December
and the final release ships in late February.Evaluating the quality of our telephone services. To
ensure that IRS representatives give accurate, courteous,• Current-year tax forms, instructions, and publica-
and professional answers, we use several methods to tions.
evaluate the quality of our telephone services. One method
• Prior-year forms, instructions, and publications.
is for a second IRS representative to sometimes listen in• Tax Map: an electronic research tool and findingon or record telephone calls. Another is to ask some callersaid.to complete a short survey at the end of the call. • Tax law frequently asked questions (FAQs).
Walk-in. Many products and services are avail-• Tax Topics from the IRS telephone response sys-able on a walk-in basis. tem.
• Fill-in, print, and save features for most tax forms.
• Products. You can walk in to many post offices, • Internal Revenue Bulletins.libraries, and IRS offices to pick up certain forms,• Toll-free and email technical support.instructions, and publications. Some IRS offices,Buy the CD-ROM from National Technical Informationlibraries, grocery stores, copy centers, city andService (NTIS) at www.irs.gov/cdorders for $25 (no han-county governments, credit unions, and office sup-dling fee) or call 1-877-233-6767 toll free to buy theply stores have a collection of products available toCD-ROM for $25 (plus a $5 handling fee).print from a CD-ROM or photocopy from reproduci-
ble proofs. Also, some IRS offices and libraries CD-ROM for small businesses. Publication
have the Internal Revenue Code, regulations, Inter- 3207, The Small Business Resource Guide
nal Revenue Bulletins, and Cumulative Bulletins CD-ROM for 2005, has a new look and en-
available for research purposes. hanced navigation features. This year’s CD includes:
• Services. You can walk in to your local Taxpayer• Helpful information, such as how to prepare a busi-
Assistance Center every business day for personal, ness plan, find financing for your business, and
face-to-face tax help. An employee can explain IRS much more.
letters, request adjustments to your tax account, or
• All the business tax forms, instructions, and publi-
help you set up a payment plan. If you need to cations needed to successfully manage a business.
resolve a tax problem, have questions about how• Tax law changes for 2005.the tax law applies to your individual tax return, or• IRS Tax Map to help you find forms, instructions,you’re more comfortable talking with someone in and publications by searching on a keyword orperson, visit your local Taxpayer Assistance Centertopic.where you can spread out your records and talk
• Web links to various government agencies, busi-with an IRS representative face-to-face. No ap-
ness associations, and IRS organizations.pointment is necessary, but if you prefer, you can
call your local Center and leave a message re- • “Rate the Product” survey—your opportunity to
questing an appointment to resolve a tax account suggest changes for future editions.
issue. A representative will call you back within 2 An updated version of this CD is available each year in
business days to schedule an in-person appoint-early April. You can get a free copy by calling
ment at your convenience. To find the number, go 1-800-829-3676 or by visiting www.irs.gov/smallbiz.
Chapter 12 How To Get More Information Page 49

Page 50 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Walk-in. You can walk in to a Small Business
Development Center or Business InformationSmall Business Administration
Center to request assistance with your small
business. To find the location nearest you, access the SBAThe Small Business Administration (SBA) offers training
on the Internet or call the SBA Answer Desk.and educational programs, counseling services, financial
programs, and contract assistance for small business own-
ers. The SBA also has publications and videos on a variety
of business topics. The following briefly describes assis-
Other Federal Agencies
tance provided by the SBA.
Other federal agencies also publish publications and pam-Small Business Development Centers (SBDCs).
phlets to assist small businesses. Most of these are avail-SBDCs provide counseling, training, and technical serv-
able from the Superintendent of Documents at theices to current and prospective small business owners who
Government Printing Office. You can get information andcannot afford the services of a private consultant. Help is
order these publications and pamphlets in several ways.available when beginning, improving, or expanding a small
business. Internet. You can access the GPO website at
www.access.gpo.gov.Business Information Centers (BICs).BICs offer a
small business reference library, management video
tapes, and computer technology to help plan a business. Mail. Write to the GPO at the following address.BICs also offer one-on-one assistance. Individuals who
are in business or are interested in starting a business can
use BICs as often as they wish at no charge.
Superintendent of DocumentsService Corps of Retired Executives (SCORE).
U.S. Government Printing OfficeSCORE provides small business counseling and training
P.O. Box 371954to current and prospective small business owners. SCORE
Pittsburgh, PA 15250-7954is made up of current and former business people who
offer their expertise and knowledge to help people start,Phone.  Call the GPO toll-free atmanage, and expand a small business. SCORE also offers 1-866-512-1800 or at 202-512-1800 from thea variety of small business workshops. Washington, DC area.
Internet. You can access the SBA website at
www.sba.gov. While visiting the SBA website,
you can find a variety of information of interest to
small business owners.
Phone.  Call the SBA Answer Desk at
1-800-UASK-SBA (1-800-827-5722) for general
information about programs available to assist
small business owners.
Page 50 Chapter 12 How To Get More Information

Page 51 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.
Index
 See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Construction allowances........ 2 5 Canceled ....................... 2 3A
Qualified real propertyContributions to selectedAccounting method:
business..................... 2 4community developmentAccrual.....................14, 32
corporations, credit for....... 1 9 Refund offset against............ 7Cash ........................13, 32
Cost of goods sold.............. 2 8Definitions:Change in...................... 1 7
Combination.................... 1 5 Accounting methods............ 1 3Credit:
Special......................... 1 7Advanced lean burn technology Accounting periods............. 1 3
motor vehicle credit.......... 1 9Accounting periods............. 1 3 Bartering........................ 2 1
Alternative fuel vehicleAccrual method of Basis ........................... 1 8
refueling...................... 1 9accounting..................... 1 4 Business bad debt.............. 3 2
Alternative motor vehicle....... 1 9Expenses ....................... 1 5 Cash discount..............28, 29
Biodiesel fuels.................. 1 9Income — general rule......... 1 4 Dispositions of property......... 1 7
Clean-fuel vehicle.............. 3 2Income — special rules........ 1 4 Drawing account................ 2 9
Contributions to selectedRelated persons, special Entertainment expenses........ 3 9
community developmentrule........................... 1 5 Fair market value............... 1 8corporations.................. 1 9Adjusted basis of property...... 1 8 Fringe benefit................... 3 5Diesel fuels, renewable......... 1 9Administrator.................... 2 6 Local transportationDisabled access................ 2 0Alternative fuel vehicle refueling expenses..................... 3 2Distilled spirits.................. 2 0credit........................... 1 9 Necessary expense............. 3 2Electric vehicle................. 3 2Alternative minimum tax........ 2 1 Net operating loss.............. 4 1Empowerment zoneAlternative motor vehicle Nonbusiness bad debt.......... 3 2employment .................. 2 0credit........................... 1 9 Ordinary expense............... 3 2Enhanced oil recovery.......... 2 0Appeal rights.................... 4 7 Principal place of business..... 4 0How to claim.................... 2 1Audits ............................ 4 7 Qualified long-term realIndian coal...................... 2 1property...................... 2 6Indian employment............. 2 0Qualified real property businessB Investment...................... 2 0debt.......................... 2 4Bad debt ......................... 3 2Low sulfur diesel fuel Rent ............................ 3 7production.................... 2 0Barter income.................... 2 1 Restricted property............. 2 4Low-income housing............ 2 0Basis of property................ 1 8 Retail space.................... 2 6New markets ................... 2 0Biodiesel and renewable diesel Self-employment (SE) tax....... 9Nonconventional sourcefuels credit..................... 1 9 Sole proprietor................... 3fuel........................... 2 0Business credits................. 1 9 Tax home ....................... 3 3Orphan drug.................... 2 0Business expenses.............. 3 2 Tax year........................ 1 3Qualified alternative fuel motorBusiness income ................ 2 1 Trade discount..............28, 29vehicle credit................. 1 9
Travel expenses................ 3 8Qualified fuel cell motor vehicle
C Depreciation:credit......................... 1 9
Calendar tax year defined....... 1 3 Deduction....................... 3 4Qualified hybrid motor vehicle
Canceled debt...............23, 24 credit......................... 1 9Listed property.................. 3 4
Capital gain or loss.............. 1 8Qualified railroad track Special allowance.............. 3 4
maintenance................. 2 0Car expenses ................32, 33 Depreciation recapture.......... 2 5
Refined coal.................... 2 1Cash discount...............28, 29 Listed property .................. 2 5
Renewable electricity........... 2 1Section 179 property........... 2 5Cash method of accounting..... 1 3
Research ....................... 2 0Expenses ....................... 1 4 Direct seller..................26, 27
Taxes paid on certain employeeIncome ......................... 1 3 Disabled access credit.......... 2 0tips........................... 1 9Change, accounting method.... 1 7 Disposition of property:Welfare-to-work................. 2 1Changing methods .............. 1 6 Business property.............. 1 7Work opportunity............... 2 1Claim for refund................. 4 7 Installment sale.............18, 19Credits:Clean-fuel vehicle credit........ 3 2 Like-kind exchange.....18, 19, 26Business........................ 1 9Nontaxable exchange.......... 1 8Collection of tax................. 4 7
Sale of a business.............. 1 8Combination method of
accounting..................... 1 5 Distilled spirits credit............ 2 0D
Comments on publication........ 4 Dividend income................. 2 3Damages as income ............. 2 5
Condemned property ............ 1 9 Donation of inventory........... 2 9Debt .............................. 2 4
Consignments ................... 2 5 B a d ............................. 3 2Drawing account................. 2 9
Page 51

Page 52 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
8586 ............................ 2 0Income tax:E
8594 ............................ 1 8About ............................ 7e-file............................... 7
8820 ............................ 2 0Deduction for................... 3 7Economic injury................. 2 58824 ........................18, 19 How to pay ...................... 9EFTPS ............................. 98826 ............................ 2 0Underpayment penalty........... 9Electric vehicle credit........... 3 28829 ............................ 4 0Income tax return, who mustElectronic filing................... 78830 ............................ 2 0file............................... 7Employee benefit programs..... 3 5 8835 ............................ 2 1Independent contractor.....10, 42Employees’ pay.................. 3 58844 ............................ 2 0Indian employment credit....... 2 0Employer identification number 8845 ............................ 2 0Individual taxpayer identification(EIN)............................. 68846 ............................ 1 9number (ITIN)................... 6Employment taxes: 8847 ............................ 1 9Information returns.............. 1 0About ........................... 1 08857 ............................ 4 7Innocent spouse relief........... 4 7Deduction for................... 3 88861 ............................ 2 1Installment sales................. 1 88864 ............................ 1 9Empowerment zone employment Insurance:8874 ............................ 2 0credit........................... 2 0 Expense ........................ 3 58896 ............................ 2 0Energy efficient appliance Proceeds ....................... 2 88900 ............................ 2 0credit........................... 2 0 Insurance agent:8906 ............................ 2 0Energy efficient home credit.... 2 0 Former.......................... 2 78907 ............................ 2 0Enhanced oil recovery Retired.......................... 2 78910 ............................ 1 9credit........................... 2 0 Interest expense................. 3 69 8 2 ............................. 2 4Entertainment expenses........ 3 9 Interest income.................. 2 3Schedule C...................... 7Escrow, payments placed in.... 2 8 Schedule C-EZ.................. 7International organizationEstimated tax..................... 9SS-4 ............................. 6employee ...................... 4 2Examinations (audits)........... 4 7SS-5 ............................. 6Inventories....................... 1 5Excise taxes: W - 2............................. 1 1Investment credit................ 2 0About ........................... 1 0W - 7.............................. 6IRS mission....................... 4Deduction for................... 3 8W - 9.............................. 7
Executor ......................... 2 6Fringe benefits................... 3 5KExpenses ........................ 3 2Fuel taxes........................ 3 8Kickbacks ....................25, 41
GF LGeneral business credits........ 1 9Fair market value................ 1 8 Lease bonus ..................... 2 3Gross profit:Figuring earnings subject to SE Lease cancellationAccuracy ....................... 3 1tax.............................. 4 3 payments ...................... 2 3Additions to..................... 3 1Filing business taxes............. 6 Legal fees........................ 3 7Guidelines for selectedFiscal tax year defined.......... 1 3 Like-kind exchanges........18, 26occupations ................... 2 6Fishing crew member .......26, 42 Limited liability company........ 3Form: Local transportation1040 ............................. 7H expenses ...................... 3 21040-ES ......................... 9Health insurance, deduction for Lodging .......................... 3 91040-V........................... 8self-employed................. 3 6Long-term capital gain or1099-B.......................... 2 2Help (See Tax help) loss ............................ 1 81099-MISC .................11, 22 Help from Small Business Lost income payments.......... 2 41128 ............................ 1 3Administration................. 5 0Low sulfur diesel fuel production2210 ............................. 9Home, business use of.......... 3 9credit........................... 2 02290 ............................ 1 0Hotels, boarding houses, and Low-income housing credit..... 2 03115 ............................ 1 7apartments .................... 2 23468 ............................ 2 0Husband and wife business...... 33800 ............................ 2 1 M
4562 ............................ 3 4 Meals ............................. 3 9I4684 ............................ 1 9 Methods for figuring netIdentification numbers........... 64797 ........................19, 25 earnings ....................... 4 34868 ............................. 9Income: Mileage rate for vehicles........ 3 35884 ............................ 2 1Accounting for your............. 2 8Motor vehicle, alternative6251 ............................ 2 1Barter........................... 2 1credit........................... 1 96252 ............................ 1 9Other ........................... 2 4
6765 ............................ 2 0Paid to a third party............. 2 8
N7 2 0 ............................. 1 0Personal property rent.......... 2 3
8300 ............................ 1 2Rental......................22, 23 Net operating losses............ 4 1
Page 52

Page 53 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Net profit or loss................. 4 1 Special rules andR
exceptions.................... 4 2New markets credit.............. 2 0Real estate agent................ 2 7
State government employee.... 4 2Newspaper carrier or Real estate dealer................ 2 2Tax rate........................ 1 0distributor..................... 2 7Real estate rents................. 2 2Time limit for posting income.... 9Newspaper or magazine Real estate taxes................ 3 8Who must pay.................. 4 2vendor ......................... 2 7Recovery of deductions......... 2 5 Why use an optionalNonbusiness bad debt.......... 3 2Refund, offset against debts..... 7 method ....................... 4 3Nonconventional source fuel Related persons: Section 179 deduction........... 3 4credit........................... 2 0Special rule..................... 1 5Securities:Nondeductible insurance Unreasonable rent.............. 3 7Dealer.......................... 2 7premiums ...................... 3 6Renewable electricity, refined coal,Trader.......................... 2 7Nonemployee and Indian coal production Self-employed health insurancecompensation ................. 2 1credit........................... 2 1deduction...................... 3 6Nontaxable exchanges.......... 1 8Rent expense .................... 3 7Self-employment tax (See SE tax)Not-for-profit activities.......... 4 1Rental income................... 2 2Settlement payments............ 2 3Notary public.................... 2 7Repayment of income ........... 1 4Short-term capital gain orReporting self-employment loss ............................ 1 8tax.............................. 4 6Small BusinessO Research credit.................. 2 0Administration................. 5 0Optional methods, using Restricted property.............. 2 4Social security coverage......... 9both ............................ 4 5Retirement plans................ 3 7Social security number (SSN).... 6Ordinary gain or loss............ 1 8
Sole proprietor................ 3 ,  4 2Orphan drug credit.............. 2 0
Sport utility vehicle.............. 3 4Other deductible expenses...... 4 1S
Standard mileage rate........... 3 3Other nondeductible Salaries.......................... 3 5
Statutory employee............... 3expenses ...................... 4 1Sale of a business............... 1 8
Suggestions for publication..... 4Sales of assets.................. 1 7
SUV ............................... 3 4Sales tax......................... 3 8P Schedule C........................ 7Parking fees..................... 3 3Schedule C-EZ.................... 7TPartners, husband and wife...... 3 Schedule SE, filing Tax help.......................... 4 8Pay, different kinds of........... 3 5requirement.................... 4 6Tax home ....................33, 38Paying: SE tax: Tax preparation fees............. 3 7Business taxes.................. 6About ............................ 9Tax refund:Income tax....................... 9Aliens........................... 4 2Claim for........................ 4 7Payments to third parties....... 2 3 Church employee............... 4 2Offset against debts............. 7Penalty: Community property income.... 4 3Tax return:Deduction for................... 3 8Failure to file information How to file....................... 7returns....................... 1 1Effects of using an optional Who must file.................... 7method ....................... 4 3Failure to furnish correct payee Tax year.......................... 1 3Farm optional method.......... 4 5statements................... 1 1 Taxes:Fiscal year filer................. 4 5Underpayment of tax............ 9 Deduction for................... 3 7Fishing crew member........... 4 2Pension plans.................... 3 7 Employment ................10, 38Foreign governmentPersonal property tax........... 3 8 Excise......................10, 38employee..................... 4 2Prepaid expense: Fuel............................. 3 8Gain or loss..................... 4 3Income ...................... 7 ,  3 7Extends useful life.............. 3 6Joint return..................... 4 6Paid on certain employeeRent ............................ 3 7Local government employee.... 4 2 tips........................... 1 9Prepaid rent...................... 2 3Lost income payments.......... 4 3Personal property............... 3 8Professional fees................ 3 7Maximum earnings............. 4 2Real estate..................... 3 8Promissory notes................ 2 4Methods for figuring net Sales ........................... 3 8Public official.................... 2 7earnings...................... 4 3Self-employment............. 9 ,  3 8More than one business....43, 46Punitive damages................ 2 5 Taxpayer Advocate.............. 4 8Nonfarm optional method....... 4 3Taxpayer rights.................. 4 6Optional methods: Third parties, Payments to...... 2 3Q Farm ......................... 4 5
Tolls.............................. 3 3Qualified railroad track Nonfarm ...................... 4 3
Trade discount...............28, 29maintenance credit............ 2 0Rate ............................ 4 2
Trade or business................ 3Qualified real property business Regular method................ 4 3
debt ............................ 2 4Residing abroad................ 4 3Trailer park owner............... 2 2
Page 53

Page 54 of 54 of Publication 334 14:07 - 22-FEB-2006
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Transportation expenses........ 3 2Uniform capitalization rules..... 1 6Work opportunity credit......... 2 1
Travel expenses................. 3 8 ■Truck expenses..............32, 33 W
Wages ............................ 3 5
U Welfare-to-work credit........... 2 1
Underpayment of tax penalty.... 9
Page 54