Userid: ________ DTD TIP04 Leadpct: 0% Pt. size: 7 ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: D:\USERS\8fllb\documents\epicfiles\2007Pub525.sgm (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 40 of Publication 525 8:27 -  2-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 525 ContentsCat. No. 15047d
What’s New for 2007............... 1
Department
What’s New for 2008............... 2of the
Taxable andTreasury Reminders ...................... 2
Internal Introduction ..................... 2Revenue Nontaxable
Service Employee Compensation ........... 3
Miscellaneous Compensation ....... 3
Fringe Benefits ................ 4Income
Retirement Plan Contributions ...... 8
Stock Options ................. 10
Restricted Property .............. 12
For use in preparing Special Rules for Certain
Employees ................... 13
Clergy ...................... 132007 Returns Members of Religious Orders ....... 13
Foreign Employer ............... 14
Military ...................... 14
Volunteers ................... 14
Business and Investment Income ..... 15
Rents From Personal Property ...... 15
Royalties .................... 15
Partnership Income ............. 15
S Corporation Income ............ 16
Sickness and Injury Benefits ......... 16
Disability Pensions .............. 16
Long-Term Care Insurance
Contracts ................. 17
Workers’ Compensation .......... 17
Other Sickness and Injury
Benefits .................. 17
Miscellaneous Income ............. 18
Bartering .................... 18
Canceled Debts ................ 18
Host or Hostess ................ 19
Life Insurance Proceeds .......... 19
Recoveries ................... 20
Survivor Benefits ............... 26
Unemployment Benefits .......... 27
Welfare and Other Public
Assistance Benefits .......... 27
Other Income ................. 28
Repayments .................... 33
How To Get Tax Help .............. 34
Index .......................... 36
What’s New for 2007
Health Savings Accounts (HSA).  You can
fund your HSA with a one-time direct transfer
from your individual retirement plan, health reim-
bursement account, or health flexible spending
account and exclude the amount of the transfer
from income. However, you must include the
amount transferred in your income, as well as
pay a 10% additional tax, if you do not remain an
eligible individual for at least 12 months after the
month of the transfer.
Get forms and other information
Qualified joint venture.  A qualified joint ven-faster and easier by: ture conducted by you and your spouse may not
be treated as a partnership if you file a joint
Internet • www.irs.gov return for the tax year. See Partnership Income,
later.

Page 2 of 40 of Publication 525 8:27 -  2-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Expiration of relief granted for Hurricane Ka- See Nonqualified deferred compensation plans, receive for services to be performed before the
trina. The following tax benefits for taxpayers under Employee Compensation. end of the next tax year. In this case, you include
affected by Hurricane Katrina have expired and the payment in your income as you earn it by
Photographs of missing children. The Inter-do not apply for 2007. performing the services.
nal Revenue Service is a proud partner with the
• Exclusion from income for discharge of National Center for Missing and Exploited Chil- Comments and suggestions. We welcomenonbusiness debt. dren. Photographs of missing children selected your comments about this publication and your
by the Center may appear in this publication on suggestions for future editions.• Exclusion from income of certain in-kind
pages that otherwise would be blank. You can You can write to us at the following address:lodging.
help bring these children home by looking at the
• Exclusion from income of increased mile- photographs and calling 1-800-THE-LOST
Internal Revenue Serviceage reimbursement. (1-800-843-5678) if you recognize a child.
Individual Forms and Publications Branch
SE:W:CAR:MP:T:I
1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6526
Washington, DC 20224
IntroductionWhat’s New for 2008
You can receive income in the form of money, We respond to many letters by telephone.Retirement plans. Beginning in 2008, your property, or services. This publication discusses Therefore, it would be helpful if you would in-employer, under a qualified automatic contribu- many kinds of income and explains whether clude your daytime phone number, including thetion arrangement, can treat you as having they are taxable or nontaxable. It includes dis- area code, in your correspondence.elected to have part of your compensation con- cussions on employee wages and fringe bene- You can email us at *taxforms@irs.gov. (Thetributed (elective deferral) to a section 401(k) fits, and income from bartering, partnerships, S asterisk must be included in the address.)plan, unless you elect out of that arrangement. corporations, and royalties. It also includes infor- Please put “Publications Comment” on the sub-mation on disability pensions, life insurance pro- ject line. Although we cannot respond individu-ceeds, and welfare and other public assistance ally to each email, we do appreciate yourbenefits. Check the index for the location of a feedback and will consider your comments asspecific subject.Reminders we revise our tax products.Generally, an amount included in your in-
come is taxable unless it is specifically ex- Ordering forms and publications. VisitTerrorist attacks. You can exclude from in-
empted by law. Income that is taxable must be www.irs.gov/formspubs to download forms andcome certain disaster assistance, disability, and
reported on your return and is subject to tax. publications, call 1-800-829-3676, or write to thedeath payments received as a result of a terror-
Income that is nontaxable may have to be address below and receive a response within 10ist or military action. For more information, see
shown on your tax return but is not taxable. days after your request is received.Publication 3920, Tax Relief for Victims of Ter-
rorist Attacks. Constructively received income. You are National Distribution Centergenerally taxed on income that is available toAstronauts. You also can exclude death pay- P.O. Box 8903you, regardless of whether it is actually in yourments for astronauts dying in the line of duty Bloomington, IL 61702-8903possession.after 2002.
A valid check that you received or that was
Foreign income. If you are a U.S. citizen or made available to you before the end of the tax Tax questions. If you have a tax question,
resident alien, you must report income from year is considered income constructively re- check the information available on www.irs.gov
sources outside the United States (foreign in- ceived in that year, even if you do not cash the or call 1-800-829-1040. We cannot answer tax
come) on your tax return unless it is exempt by check or deposit it to your account until the next questions sent to either of the above addresses.
U.S. law. This is true whether you reside inside year. For example, if the postal service tries to
or outside the United States and whether or not deliver a check to you on the last day of the tax Useful Itemsyou receive a Form W-2, Wage and Tax State- year but you are not at home to receive it, you You may want to see:ment, or Form 1099 from the foreign payer. This must include the amount in your income for that
applies to earned income (such as wages and tax year. If the check was mailed so that it could Publicationtips) as well as unearned income (such as inter- not possibly reach you until after the end of the
❏ 523 Selling Your Homeest, dividends, capital gains, pensions, rents, tax year, and you otherwise could not get the
and royalties). funds before the end of the year, you include the ❏ 527 Residential Rental Property If you reside outside the United States, you amount in your income for the next tax year. (Including Rental of Vacationmay be able to exclude part or all of your foreign Homes)Assignment of income. Income receivedsource earned income. For details, see Publica- by an agent for you is income you constructively ❏ 550 Investment Income and Expensestion 54, Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and Resi- received in the year the agent received it. If you (Including Capital Gains anddent Aliens Abroad. agree by contract that a third party is to receive Losses)
income for you, you must include the amount inDisaster mitigation payments. You can ex- ❏ 559 Survivors, Executors, andyour income when the third party receives it.clude from income grants you use to mitigate Administrators(reduce the severity of) potential damage from
Example. You and your employer agreefuture natural disasters that are paid to you ❏ 564 Mutual Fund Distributions
that part of your salary is to be paid directly tothrough state and local governments. For more ❏ 575 Pension and Annuity Incomeyour former spouse. You must include thatinformation, see Disaster mitigation payments
amount in your income when your formerunder Welfare and Other Public Assistance ❏ 915 Social Security and Equivalent
spouse receives it.Benefits. Railroad Retirement Benefits
❏ 970 Tax Benefits for EducationNonqualified deferred compensation plans. Prepaid income. Prepaid income, such as
See How To Get Tax Help, near the end ofGenerally, all amounts deferred under a non- compensation for future services, generally is
this publication, for information about gettingqualified deferred compensation plan for all tax included in your income in the year you receive
these publications.years are included in gross income for the cur- it. However, if you use an accrual method of
rent year, unless certain requirements are met. accounting, you can defer prepaid income you
Page 2 Publication 525 (2007)

Page 3 of 40 of Publication 525 8:27 -  2-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
received safety achievement awards dur-Miscellaneous
ing the year.Employee Compensation
This section discusses many types of employeeCompensation Example. Ben Green received three em-
compensation. The subjects are arranged in al- ployee achievement awards during the year: a
Generally, you must include in gross income phabetical order. nonqualified plan award of a watch valued at
everything you receive in payment for personal $250, and two qualified plan awards of a stereoAdvance commissions and other earnings.services. In addition to wages, salaries, commis- valued at $1,000 and a set of golf clubs valued atIf you receive advance commissions or othersions, fees, and tips, this includes other forms of $500. Assuming that the requirements for quali-amounts for services to be performed in thecompensation such as fringe benefits and stock fied plan awards are otherwise satisfied, eachfuture and you are a cash-method taxpayer, you award by itself would be excluded from income.options. must include these amounts in your income in However, because the $1,750 total value of the   You should receive a Form W-2, Wage and the year you receive them. awards is more than $1,600, Ben must includeTax Statement, from your employer showing the If you repay unearned commissions or other $150 ($1,750 − $1,600) in his income.pay you received for your services. Include your amounts in the same year you receive them,
pay on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A or on reduce the amount included in your income by Government cost-of-living allowances.
line 1 of Form 1040EZ, even if you do not re- the repayment. If you repay them in a later tax Cost-of-living allowances generally are included
ceive a Form W-2. year, you can deduct the repayment as an item- in your income. However, they are not included
ized deduction on your Schedule A (Form 1040),If you performed services, other than as an in your income if you are a federal civilian em-
or you may be able to take a credit for that year.independent contractor, and your employer did ployee or a federal court employee who is sta-
See Repayments, later.not withhold social security and Medicare taxes tioned in Alaska, Hawaii, or outside the United
from your pay, you must file Form 8919, Uncol- States.Allowances and reimbursements.   If youlected Social Security and Medicare Tax on Allowances and differentials that increasereceive travel, transportation, or other business your basic pay as an incentive for taking a lessWages, with your Form 1040. These wages expense allowances or reimbursements from desirable post of duty are part of your compen-must be included on line 7 of Form 1040. See your employer, see Publication 463, Travel, En- sation and must be included in income. ForForm 8919 for more information. tertainment, Gift, and Car Expenses. If you are example, your compensation includes Foreignreimbursed for moving expenses, see Publica- Post, Foreign Service, and Overseas TropicalChildcare providers. If you provide childcare, tion 521, Moving Expenses. differentials. For more information, see Publica-either in the child’s home or in your home or
Back pay awards. Include in income amounts tion 516, U.S. Government Civilian Employeesother place of business, the pay you receive
you are awarded in a settlement or judgment for Stationed Abroad.must be included in your income. If you are not
back pay. These include payments made to youan employee, you are probably self-employed Nonqualified deferred compensation plans.for damages, unpaid life insurance premiums,and must include payments for your services on Your employer will report to you the total amountand unpaid health insurance premiums. TheySchedule C (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From of deferrals for the year under a nonqualifiedshould be reported to you by your employer onBusiness, or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040), Net deferred compensation plan. This amount isForm W-2.Profit From Business. You generally are not an shown on Form W-2, box 12, using code Y. This
employee unless you are subject to the will and Bonuses and awards. Bonuses or awards amount is not included in your income.
control of the person who employs you as to you receive for outstanding work are included in However, if at any time during the tax year,
what you are to do and how you are to do it. your income and should be shown on your Form the plan fails to meet certain requirements, or is
W-2. These include prizes such as vacation trips not operated under those requirements, allBabysitting. If you babysit for relatives or for meeting sales goals. If the prize or award you amounts deferred under the plan for the tax yearneighborhood children, whether on a regular receive is goods or services, you must include and all preceding tax years are included in yourbasis or only periodically, the rules for childcare the fair market value of the goods or services in income for the current year. This amount is in-providers apply to you. your income. However, if your employer merely cluded in your wages shown on Form W-2, box
promises to pay you a bonus or award at some 1. It also is shown on Form W-2, box 12, usingBankruptcy. If, after October 16, 2005, you future time, it is not taxable until you receive it or code Z.filed for bankruptcy under Chapter 11 of the it is made available to you. For information on the requirements and theBankruptcy Code, you must allocate your wages amount to include in income, see Internal Reve-Employee achievement award. If you re-and withheld income tax. Your W-2 will show nue Code section 409A and Notice 2005-1. Theceive tangible personal property (other thanyour total wages and withheld income tax for the notice is on page 274 of Internal Revenue Bulle-cash, a gift certificate, or an equivalent item) asyear. On your tax return, you report the wages tin 2005-2 at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb05-02.an award for length-of-service or safety achieve-and withheld income tax for the period before pdf.ment, you generally can exclude its value fromyou filed for bankruptcy. Your bankruptcy estate
your income. However, the amount you can ex- For tax years beginning after 2007,reports the wages and withheld income tax for
clude is limited to your employer’s cost and portions of Notice 2005-1 are obsoletethe period after you filed for bankruptcy. If you
cannot be more than $1,600 ($400 for awards and replaced by final regulations is-receive other information returns (such as Form
CAUTION
!
that are not qualified plan awards) for all such sued under section 409A. For information on the1099-DIV or 1099-INT) that report gross income
awards you receive during the year. Your em- applicability of the regulations, see the preambleto you, rather than to the bankruptcy estate, you
ployer can tell you whether your award is a to Treasury Decision 9321 on page 1123 ofmust allocate that income.
qualified plan award. Your employer must make Internal Revenue Bulletin 2007-19 at www.irs.The only exception is for purposes of figuring the award as part of a meaningful presentation, gov/pub/irs-irb/irb07-19.pdf.your self-employment tax, if you are under conditions and circumstances that do notself-employed. For that purpose, you must take Note received for services. If your employercreate a significant likelihood of it being dis-into account all your self-employment income for gives you a secured note as payment for yourguised pay.the year from services performed both before services, you must include the fair market valueHowever, the exclusion does not apply to theand after the beginning of the case. (usually the discount value) of the note in yourfollowing awards.
You must file a statement with your income income for the year you receive it. When you• A length-of-service award if you received ittax return stating that you filed a Chapter 11 later receive payments on the note, a propor-for less than 5 years of service or if youbankruptcy case. The statement must show the tionate part of each payment is the recovery ofreceived another length-of-service awardallocation and describe the method used to the fair market value that you previously in-during the year or the previous 4 years.make the allocation. For a sample of this state- cluded in your income. Do not include that part
ment and other information, see Notice 2006-83 • A safety achievement award if you are a again in your income. Include the rest of the
on page 596 of Internal Revenue Bulletin manager, administrator, clerical employee, payment in your income in the year of payment.
2006-40 at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb06-40. or other professional employee or if more If your employer gives you a nonnegotiable
pdf. than 10% of eligible employees previously unsecured note as payment for your services,
Publication 525 (2007) Page 3

Page 4 of 40 of Publication 525 8:27 -  2-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
payments on the note that are credited toward a cash payment equal to the fair market value of you may receive a separate Form W- 2 showing
the principal amount of the note are compensa- the corporation’s stock on the date of use, minus just the value of your fringe be nefits in box 1 with
tion income when you receive them. the fair market value on the date the right was a notation in box 14.
granted. You include the cash payment in in-Severance pay. You must include in income come in the year you use the right.amounts you receive as severance pay and any Accident or Health Planpayment for the cancellation of your employ-
Fringe Benefitsment contract. Generally, the value of accident or health plan
coverage provided to you by your employer isAccrued leave payment. If you are a fed- Fringe benefits received in connection with the not included in your income. Benefits you re-eral employee and receive a lump-sum payment performance of your services are included in ceive from the plan may be taxable, as ex-for accrued annual leave when you retire or your income as compensation unless you pay plained, later, under Sickness and Injuryresign, this amount will be included as wages on fair market value for them or they are specifically Benefits.your Form W-2. excluded by law. Abstaining from the perform- For information on the items covered in thisIf you resign from one agency and are reem- ance of services (for example, under a covenant section, other than Long-term care coverage,ployed by another agency, you may have to not to compete) is treated as the performance of see Publication 969, Health Savings Accountsrepay part of your lump-sum annual leave pay- services for purposes of these rules. and Other Tax-Favored Health Plans.ment to the second agency. You can reduce See Valuation of Fringe Benefits, later in this
gross wages by the amount you repaid in the discussion, for information on how to determine Long-term care coverage. Contributions bysame tax year in which you received it. Attach to the amount to include in income. your employer to provide coverage for long-termyour tax return a copy of the receipt or statement care services generally are not included in yourRecipient of fringe benefit. You are the re-given to you by the agency you repaid to explain income. However, contributions made through acipient of a fringe benefit if you perform thethe difference between the wages on your return flexible spending or similar arrangement (suchservices for which the fringe benefit is provided.and the wages on your Forms W-2. as a cafeteria plan) must be included in yourYou are considered to be the recipient even if it
income. This amount will be reported as wagesOutplacement services. If you choose to is given to another person, such as a member of
in box 1 of your Form W-2.accept a reduced amount of severance pay so your family. An example is a car your employer
that you can receive outplacement services gives to your spouse for services you perform. Archer MSA contributions. Contributions by(such as training in r´esum´e writing and interview The car is considered to have been provided to your employer to your Archer MSA generally aretechniques), you must include the unreduced you and not to your spouse. not included in your income. Their total will beamount of the severance pay in income. You do not have to be an employee of the reported in box 12 of Form W-2, with code R.However, you can deduct the value of these provider to be a recipient of a fringe benefit. If You must report this amount on Form 8853,outplacement services (up to the difference be- you are a partner, director, or independent con- Archer MSAs and Long-Term Care Insurancetween the severance pay included in income tractor, you also can be the recipient of a fringe Contracts. File the form with your return.and the amount actually received) as a miscella- benefit.
neous deduction (subject to the 2% of adjusted Health flexible spending arrangementProvider of benefit. Your employer or an-gross income (AGI) limit) on Schedule A (Form (health FSA). If your employer provides aother person for whom you perform services is1040). health FSA that qualifies as an accident orthe provider of a fringe benefit regardless of health plan, the amount of your salary reduction,whether that person actually provides the fringeSick pay. Pay you receive from your employer and reimbursements of your medical care ex-benefit to you. The provider can be a client orwhile you are sick or injured is part of your salary penses and those of your spouse and depen-customer of an independent contractor.or wages. In addition, you must include in your dents, generally are not included in your income.income sick pay benefits received from any of Accounting period. You must use the samethe following payers. Qualified HSA distribution. A health FSAaccounting period your employer uses to report can make a qualified HSA distribution. This dis-your taxable noncash fringe benefits. Your em-• A welfare fund. tribution is a direct transfer to your HSA trusteeployer has the option to report taxable noncash• A state sickness or disability fund. by your employer. Generally, the distribution isfringe benefits by using either of the following not included in your income and is not deducti-rules.• An association of employers or employ- ble. See Publication 969 for the requirements forees. • The general rule: benefits are reported for these qualified HSA distributions.
a full calendar year (January 1–December• An insurance company, if your employer
Health reimbursement arrangement (HRA).31).paid for the plan.
If your employer provides an HRA that qualifies
• The special accounting period rule: bene-However, if you paid the premiums on an acci- as an accident or health plan, coverage and
fits provided during the last 2 months ofdent or health insurance policy, the benefits you reimbursements of your medical care expenses
the calendar year (or any shorter period)receive under the policy are not taxable. For and those of your spouse and dependents gen-
are treated as paid during the followingmore information, see Other Sickness and Injury erally are not included in your income.
calendar year. For example, each yearBenefits under Sickness and Injury Benefits,
Qualified HSA distribution. An HRA canyour employer reports the value of bene-later.
make a qualified HSA distribution. This distribu-fits provided during the last 2 months of
tion is a direct transfer to your HSA trustee bySocial security and Medicare taxes paid by the prior year and the first 10 months of
your employer. Generally, the distribution is notemployer. If you and your employer have an the current year.
included in your income and is not deductible.agreement that your employer pays your social Your employer does not have to use the same See Publication 969 for the requirements forsecurity and Medicare taxes without deducting accounting period for each fringe benefit, but these qualified HSA distributions.them from your gross wages, you must report must use the same period for all employees whothe amount of tax paid for you as taxable wages Health savings accounts (HSA). If you arereceive a particular benefit.on your tax return. The payment is also treated an eligible individual, you and any other person,as wages for figuring your social security and You must use the same accounting period including your employer or a family member,Medicare taxes and your social security and that you use to report the benefit to claim an can make contributions to your HSA. Contribu-Medicare benefits. However, these payments employee business deduction (for use of a car, tions, other than employer contributions, are de-are not treated as social security and Medicare for example). ductible on your return whether or not youwages if you are a household worker or a farm Form W-2. Your employer reports your tax- itemize deductions. Contributions made by yourworker. able fringe benefits in box 1 (Wages, tips, other employer are not included in your income. Distri-
Stock appreciation rights. Do not include a compensation) of Form W-2. The total value of butions from your HSA that are used to pay
stock appreciation right granted by your em- your fringe benefits also may be noted in box 14. qualified medical expenses are not  included in
ployer in income until you exercise (use) the The value of your fringe benefits may be added your income. Distributions not used for qualified
right. When you use the right, you are entitled to to your other compensation on one Form W-2, or medical expenses are included i n your income.
Page 4 Publication 525 (2007)

Page 5 of 40 of Publication 525 8:27 -  2-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Contributions by a partnership to a bona fide De Minimis (Minimal) Benefits Employee Discounts
partner’s HSA are not contributions by an em-
If your employer provides you with a product or If your employer sells you property or services atployer. The contributions are treated as a distri-
a discount, you may be able to exclude theservice and the cost of it is so small that it wouldbution of money and are not included in the amount of the discount from your income. Thebe unreasonable for the employer to account forpartner’s gross income. Contributions by a part- exclusion applies to discounts on property orit, the value is not included in your income.nership to a partner’s HSA for services rendered services offered to customers in the ordinaryGenerally, the value of benefits such as dis-are treated as guaranteed payments that are course of the line of business in which you work.counts at company cafeterias, cab fares homeincludible in the partner’s gross income. In both However, it does not apply to discounts on realwhen working overtime, and company picnicssituations, the partner can deduct the contribu- property or property commonly held for invest-are not included in your income. Also see Em-tion made to the partner’s HSA. ment (such as stocks or bonds).ployee Discounts, later.Contributions by an S corporation to a 2% The exclusion is limited to the price charged
shareholder-employee’s HSA for services ren- nonemployee customers multiplied by the fol-Holiday gifts. If your employer gives you adered are treated as guaranteed payments and lowing percentage.turkey, ham, or other item of nominal value atare includible in the shareholder-employee’s Christmas or other holidays, do not include the • For a discount on property, your em-gross income. The shareholder-employee can value of the gift in your income. However, if your ployer’s gross profit percentage (grossdeduct the contribution made to the share- profit divided by gross sales) on all prop-employer gives you cash, a gift certificate, or aholder-employee’s HSA. erty sold during the employer’s previoussimilar item that you easily can exchange for
tax year. (Ask your employer for this per-Qualified HSA funding distribution. You cash, you include the value of that gift as extra
centage.)can make a one-time distribution from your indi- salary or wages regardless of the amount in-
vidual retirement account (IRA) to an HSA and volved. • For a discount on services, 20%.
you generally will not include any of the distribu-
tion in your income. See Publication 590, Indi-
Financial Counseling FeesDependent Care Benefitsvidual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs), for the
requirements for these qualified HSA funding Financial counseling fees paid for you by yourIf your employer provides dependent care bene-distributions. employer are included in your income and mustfits under a qualified plan, you may be able to
be reported as part of wages. If the fees are forFailure to maintain eligibility. If your HSA exclude these benefits from your income. De-
tax or investment counseling, they can be de-received qualified HSA distributions from a pendent care benefits include:
ducted on Schedule A (Form 1040) as a miscel-health FSA or HRA (discussed earlier) or a qual- • Amounts your employer pays directly to laneous deduction (subject to the 2% of AGIified HSA funding distribution, you must be an either you or your care provider for the limit).eligible individual for HSA purposes for the pe- care of your qualifying person while you    Qualified retirement planning services paidriod beginning with the month in which the quali- work, and for you by your employer may be excluded fromfied distribution was made and ending on the
your income. For more information, see Retire-• The fair market value of care in a daycarelast day of the 12th month following that month. ment Planning Services, later.facility provided or sponsored by your em-If you fail to be an eligible individual during this
ployer.period, other than because of death or disability,
you must include the distribution in your income Group-Term Life InsuranceThe amount you can exclude is limited to thefor the tax year in which you become ineligible.
lesser of:This income is also subject to an additional 10% Generally, the cost of up to $50,000 of
tax. group-term life insurance coverage provided to• The total amount of dependent care bene-
you by your employer (or former employer) is notfits you received during the year,
included in your income. However, you must• The total amount of qualified expensesAdoption Assistance include in income the cost of employer-provided
you incurred during the year, insurance that is more than the cost of $50,000You may be able to exclude from your income of coverage reduced by any amount you pay• Your earned income,amounts paid or expenses incurred by your em- toward the purchase of the insurance.
• Your spouse’s earned income, orployer for qualified adoption expenses in con- For exceptions to this rule, see Entire costnection with your adoption of an eligible child. excluded, and Entire cost taxed, later.• $5,000 ($2,500 if married filing sepa-See Instructions for Form 8839 (Qualified Adop- rately). If your employer provided more than $50,000tion Expenses), for more information. of coverage, the amount included in your in-
Adoption benefits are reported by your em- Your employer must show the total amount of come is reported as part of your wages in box 1
ployer in box 12 of Form W-2 with code T. They dependent care benefits provided to you during of your Form W-2. It is also shown separately in
also are included as social security and Medi- the year under a qualified plan in box 10 of your box 12 with code C.
care wages in boxes 3 and 5. However, they are Form W-2. Your employer also will include any
not included as wages in box 1. To determine dependent care benefits over $5,000 in your Group-term life insurance. This insurance isthe taxable and nontaxable amounts, you must wages shown in box 1 of your Form W-2. term life insurance protection (insurance for acomplete Part III of Form 8839, Qualified Adop-  To claim the exclusion, you must complete fixed period of time) that:tion Expenses. File the form with your return. either Part III of Form 2441, Child and Depen-
• Provides a general death benefit,dent Care Expenses, or Part III of Schedule 2
(Form 1040A), Child and Dependent Care Ex- • Is provided to a group of employees,Athletic Facilities penses for Form 1040A Filers. (You cannot use • Is provided under a policy carried by theForm 1040EZ.)If your employer provides you with the free or employer, andSee the instructions for Form 2441 or Sched-low-cost use of an employer-operated gym or • Provides an amount of insurance to eachule 2 (Form 1040A) for more information.other athletic club on your employer’s premises, employee based on a formula that pre-the value is not included in your compensation. vents individual selection.The gym must be used primarily by employees, Educational Assistancetheir spouses, and their dependent children. Permanent benefits. If your group-term life
If your employer pays for a fitness program You can exclude from your income up to $5,250 insurance policy includes permanent benefits,
provided to you at an off-site resort hotel or of qualified employer-provided educational as- such as a paid-up or cash surrender value, you
athletic club, the value of the program is in- sistance. For more information, see Publication must include in your income, as wages, the cost
cluded in your compensation. 970. of the permanent benefits minus the amount you
Publication 525 (2007) Page 5

Page 6 of 40 of Publication 525 8:27 -  2-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
pay for them. Your employer should be able to Example. You are 51 years old and work forWorksheet 1. Figuring the Cost of
tell you the amount to include in your income. employers A and B. Both employers provideGroup-Term Life Insurance To
group-term life insurance coverage for you forInclude in IncomeAccidental death benefits. Insurance that the entire year. Your coverage is $35,000 withprovides accidental or other death benefits but employer A and $45,000 with employer B. Youdoes not provide general death benefits (travel 1. Enter the total amount of pay premiums of $4.15 a month under the em-insurance, for example) is not group-term life your insurance coverage ployer B group plan. You figure the amount toinsurance. from your employer(s) .... 1. include in your income as follows.
Former employer. If your former employer 2. Limit on exclusion forprovided more than $50,000 of group-term life employer-provided Worksheet 1. Figuring the Cost ofinsurance coverage during the year, the amount group-term life insurance Group-Term Life Insurance Toincluded in your income is reported as wages in coverage ............. 2. 50,000 Include in Income—Illustratedbox 1 of Form W-2. Also, it is shown separately
in box 12 with code C. Box 12 also will show the 3. Subtract line 2 from line 1 . . 3.amount of uncollected social security and Medi- 1. Enter the total amount of yourcare taxes on the excess coverage, with codes 4. Divide line 3 by $1,000. insurance coverage from yourM and N. You must pay these taxes with your Figure to the nearest tenth 4. employer(s) ........... 1. 80,000income tax return. Include them in your total tax 2. Limit on exclusion foron line 63, Form 1040, and enter “UT” and the 5. Go to Table 1. Using your employer-providedamount of the taxes on the dotted line next to age on the last day of the group-term life insuranceline 63. tax year, find your age coverage ............. 2. 50,000
group in the left column, 3. Subtract line 2 from line 1 . . 3. 30,000Two or more employers. Your exclusion for and enter the cost from the 4. Divide line 3 by $1,000.employer-provided group-term life insurance column on the right for your Figure to the nearest tenth 4. 30.0coverage cannot exceed the cost of $50,000 of age group ............ 5. 5. Go to Table 1. Using yourcoverage, whether the insurance is provided by
age on the last day of the taxa single employer or multiple employers. If two 6. Multiply line 4 by line 5 . . . 6. year, find your age group inor more employers provide insurance coverage
the left column, and enter thethat totals more than $50,000, the amounts re- 7. Enter the number of full cost from the column on theported as wages on your Forms W-2 will not be months of coverage at this right for your age group . . . 5. .23correct. You must figure how much to include in cost ................ 7. 6. Multiply line 4 by line 5 .... 6. 6.90your income. Reduce the amount you figure by 7. Enter the number of fullany amount reported with code C in box 12 of 8. Multiply line 6 by line 7 . . . 8. months of coverage at thisyour Forms W-2, add the result to the wages cost. ................ 7. 12reported in box 1, and report the total on your 9. Enter the 8. Multiply line 6 by line 7 .... 8. 82.80return. premiums you 9. Enter the premiumspaid per month 9.Figuring the taxable cost.  Use the following you paid per month 9. 4.15
worksheet to figure the amount to include in your 10. Enter the number of10. Enter the numberincome. months you paidof months youIf you pay any part of the cost of the insur- the premiums .... 10. 12paid theance, your entire payment reduces, dollar for 11. Multiply line 9 by line 10. . . . 11. 49.80premiums .... 10.dollar, the amount you would otherwise include 12. Subtract line 11 from line 8.
in your income. However, you cannot reduce the Include this amount in your11. Multiply line 9 by line 10. . . 11. income as wages ....... 12. 33.00amount to include in your income by:
• Payments for coverage in a different tax 12. Subtract line 11 from line 8.
The total amount to include in income for theyear, Include this amount in
cost of excess group-term life insurance is $33.your income as wages ... 12.• Payments for coverage through a cafeteria Neither employer provided over $50,000 insur-
plan, unless the payments are after-tax ance coverage, so the wages shown on your
contributions, or Forms W-2 do not include any part of that $33.
You must add it to the wages shown on your• Payments for coverage not taxed to you Table 1. Cost of $1,000 of Forms W-2 and include the total on your return.because of the exceptions discussed later Group-Term Life Insurance for Oneunder Entire cost excluded. Month Entire cost excluded. You are not taxed on
the cost of group-term life insurance if any of theAge Cost following circumstances apply.Under 25 ............. $  . 0 5
25 through 29 .........  . 0 6 1. You are permanently and totally disabled
and have ended your employment.
30 through 34 ......... . 0 8 2. Your employer is the beneficiary of the pol-35 through 39 ......... . 0 9 icy for the entire period the insurance is in
force during the tax year.40 through 44 ......... . 1 0
45 through 49 ......... . 1 5 3. A charitable organization to which contri-
butions are deductible is the only benefi-
50 through 54 ......... . 2 3 ciary of the policy for the entire period the
55 through 59 ......... . 4 3 insurance is in force during the tax year.
(You are not entitled to a deduction for a
60 through 64 ......... . 6 6 charitable contribution for naming a chari-
65 through 69 ......... 1.27 table organization as the beneficiary of
your policy.)
70 and older .......... 2.06 4. The plan existed on January 1, 1984, and:
Page 6 Publication 525 (2007)

Page 7 of 40 of Publication 525 8:27 -  2-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
a. You retired before January 2, 1984, and behalf of, the institution or center for use as a included in your income because you d o not
were covered by the plan when you re- home. The lodging must be located on or near a work in the hotel business.
tired, or campus of the educational institution or aca-
demic health center.b. You reached age 55 before January 2,
Retirement Planning Services1984, and were employed by the em- Adequate rent. The amount of rent you pay
ployer or its predecessor in 1983. for the year for qualified campus lodging is con- If your employer has a qualified retirement plan,
sidered adequate if it is at least equal to the qualified retirement planning services provided
lesser of: to you (and your spouse) by your employer areEntire cost taxed. You are taxed on the entire not included in your income. Qualified services• 5% of the appraised value of the lodging,cost of group-term life insurance if either of the include retirement planning advice, informationorfollowing circumstances apply. about your employer’s retirement plan, and in-
• The average of rentals paid by individuals• The insurance is provided by your em- formation about how the plan may fit into your
(other than employees or students) forployer through a qualified employees’ overall individual retirement income plan. You
comparable lodging held for rent by thetrust, such as a pension trust or a qualified cannot exclude the value of any tax preparation,
educational institution.annuity plan. accounting, legal, or brokerage services pro-
vided by your employer. Also, see FinancialIf the amount you pay is less than the lesser of• You are a key employee and your em- Counseling Fees, earlier.these amounts, you must include the differenceployer’s plan discriminates in favor of key
in your income.employees.
The lodging must be appraised by an inde- Transportation
pendent appraiser and the appraisal must beMeals and Lodging
If your employer provides you with a qualifiedreviewed on an annual basis.
transportation fringe benefit, it can be excludedYou do not include in your income the value of
from your income, up to certain limits. A qualifiedExample. Carl Johnson, a sociology profes-meals and lodging provided to you and your
transportation fringe benefit is:sor for State University, rents a home from thefamily by your employer at no charge if the
university that is qualified campus lodging. Thefollowing conditions are met. • Transportation in a commuter highway ve-house is appraised at $100,000. The average hicle (such as a van) between your home1. The meals are: rent paid for comparable university lodging by and work place,persons other than employees or students isa. Furnished on the business premises of • A transit pass, or$7,000 a year. Carl pays an annual rent ofyour employer, and $5,500. Carl does not include in his income any • Qualified parking.b. Furnished for the convenience of your rental value because the rent he pays equals at
Cash reimbursement by your employer for theseemployer. least 5% of the appraised value of the house
expenses under a bona fide reimbursement ar-(5% × $100,000 = $5,000). If Carl paid annual
rangement is also excludable. However, cash2. The lodging is: rent of only $4,000, he would have to include
reimbursement for a transit pass is excludable$1,000 in his income ($5,000 − $4,000).
a. Furnished on the business premises of only if a voucher or similar item that can be
your employer, exchanged only for a transit pass is not readily
Moving Expense Reimbursements available for direct distribution to you.b. Furnished for the convenience of your
employer, and Generally, if your employer pays for your moving Exclusion limit. The exclusion for commuter
expenses (either directly or indirectly) and thec. A condition of your employment. (You highway vehicle transportation and transit pass
expenses would have been deductible if youmust accept it in order to be able to fringe benefits cannot be more than a total of
paid them yourself, the value is not included inproperly perform your duties.) $110 a month.
your income. See Publication 521 for more infor- The exclusion for the qualified parking fringe
 You also do not include in your income the mation. benefit cannot be more than $215 a month.
value of meals or meal money that qualifies as a If the benefits have a value that is more than
de minimis fringe benefit. See De Minimis (Mini- these limits, the excess must be included in your
No-Additional-Cost Servicesmal) Benefits, earlier. income.
Faculty lodging. If you are an employee of an The value of services you receive from your Commuter highway vehicle. This is a high-
educational institution or an academic health employer for free, at cost, or for a reduced price way vehicle that seats at least six adults (not
center and you are provided with lodging that is not included in your income if your employer: including the driver). At least 80% of the vehi-
does not meet the three conditions above, you cle’s mileage must reasonably be expected to• Offers the same service for sale to cus-still may not have to include the value of the be:tomers in the ordinary course of the line oflodging in income. However, the lodging must business in which you work, and • For transporting employees between theirbe qualified campus lodging, and you must pay homes and work place, andan adequate rent. • Does not have a substantial additional
cost (including any sales income given up) • On trips during which employees occupyAcademic health center. This is an organi- to provide you with the service (regardless at least half of the vehicle’s adult seatingzation that meets the following conditions. of what you paid for the service). capacity (not including the driver).
• Its principal purpose or function is to pro-
vide medical or hospital care or medical Generally, no-additional-cost services are ex- Transit pass. This is any pass, token, fare-education or research. cess capacity services, such as airline, bus, or card, voucher, or similar item entitling a persontrain tickets, hotel rooms, and telephone serv- to ride mass transit (whether public or private)• It receives payments for graduate medical ices. free or at a reduced rate or to ride in a commutereducation under the Social Security Act.
highway vehicle operated by a person in theExample. You are employed as a flight at-• One of its principal purposes or functions business of transporting persons for compensa-tendant for a company that owns both an airlineis to provide and teach basic and clinical tion.and a hotel chain. Your employer allows you tomedical science and research using its
take personal flights (if there is an unoccupied Qualified parking. This is parking provided toown faculty.
seat) and stay in any one of their hotels (if there an employee at or near the employer’s place of
Qualified campus lodging. Qualified cam- is an unoccupied room) at no cost to you. The business. It also includes parking provided on or
pus lodging is lodging furnished to you, your value of the personal flight is not included in your near a location from which the  employee com-
spouse, or one of your dependents by, or on income. However, the value of the hotel room is mutes to work by mass transit, in a c ommuter
Publication 525 (2007) Page 7

Page 8 of 40 of Publication 525 8:27 -  2-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
highway vehicle, or by carpool. It does not in- Employer-provided vehicles. If your em- See Group-Term Life Insurance,  earlier, under
ployer provides a car (or other highway motor Fringe Benefits.clude parking at or near the employee’s home.
vehicle) to you, your personal use of the car is If your employer pays into a nonqualified
usually a taxable noncash fringe benefit. plan for you, you generally must include the
Tuition Reduction contributions in your income as wages for theUnder the general valuation rules, the value
tax year in which the contributions are made.of an employer-provided vehicle is the amount
You can exclude a qualified tuition reduction However, if your interest in the plan is not trans-you would have to pay a third party to lease the
from your income. This is the amount of a reduc- ferable or is subject to a substantial risk of forfei-same or a similar vehicle on the same or compa-
tion in tuition: ture (you have a good chance of losing it) at therable terms in the same geographic area where
time of the contribution, you do not have toyou use the vehicle. An example of a compara-• For education (below graduate level) fur- include the value of your interest in your incomeble lease term is the amount of time the vehiclenished by an educational institution to an until it is transferable or is no longer subject to ais available for your use, such as a 1-year pe-employee, former employee who retired or substantial risk of forfeiture.riod. The value cannot be determined by multi-became disabled, or his or her spouse and plying a cents-per-mile rate times the number ofdependent children. For information on distributions frommiles driven unless you prove the vehicle could retirement plans, see Publication 575• For education furnished to a graduate stu- have been leased on a cents-per-mile basis. (or Publication 721, Tax Guide to U.S.
TIP
dent at an educational institution if the Flights on employer-provided aircraft. Civil Service Retirement Benefits, if you are agraduate student is engaged in teaching Under the general valuation rules, if your flight federal employee or retiree).or research activities for that institution. on an employer-provided piloted aircraft is pri-
marily personal and you control the use of the• Representing payment for teaching, re-
aircraft for the flight, the value is the amount itsearch, or other services if you receive the Elective Deferrals
would cost to charter the flight from a third party.amount under the National Health Service
If you are covered by certain kinds of retirementIf there is more than one employee on theCorps Scholarship Program or the Armed
plans, you can choose to have part of yourflight, the cost to charter the aircraft must beForces Health Professions Scholarship compensation contributed by your employer to adivided among those employees. The divisionand Financial Assistance Program. retirement fund, rather than have it paid to you.must be based on all the facts, including which
The amount you set aside (called an electiveFor more information, see Publication 970. employee or employees control the use of the
deferral) is treated as an employer contributionaircraft.
to a qualified plan. An elective deferral, otherWorking Condition Benefits
Special valuation rules. You generally can than a designated Roth contribution (discussed
If your employer provides you with a product or use a special valuation rule for a fringe benefit later), is not included in wages subject to income
service and the cost of it would have been allow- only if your employer uses the rule. If your em- tax at the time contributed. However, it is in-
able as a business or depreciation deduction if ployer uses a special valuation rule, you cannot cluded in wages subject to social security and
you paid for it yourself, the cost is not included in use a different special rule to value that benefit. Medicare taxes.
You always can use the general valuation ruleyour income. Elective deferrals include elective contribu-
discussed earlier, based on facts and circum- tions to the following retirement plans. 
Example. You work as an engineer and stances, even if your employer uses a special
1. Cash or deferred arrangements (sectionyour employer provides you with a subscription rule.
401(k) plans).to an engineering trade magazine. The cost of If you and your employer use a special valua-
tion rule, you must include in your income thethe subscription is not included in your income 2. The Thrift Savings Plan for federal employ-
amount your employer determines under thebecause the cost would have been allowable to ees.
special rule minus the sum of:you as a business deduction if you had paid for 3. Salary reduction simplified employee pen-the subscription yourself. 1. Any amount you repaid your employer, sion plans (SARSEP).
plus 4. Savings incentive match plans for employ-
Valuation of Fringe Benefits 2. Any amount specifically excluded from in- ees (SIMPLE plans).
come by law. 5. Tax-sheltered annuity plans (403(b) plans).If a fringe benefit is included in your income, the
The special valuation rules are the following.amount included is generally its value deter- 6. Section 501(c)(18)(D) plans. (But see Re-mined under the general valuation rule or under • The automobile lease rule. porting by employer, later.)
the special valuation rules. For an exception,
• The vehicle cents-per-mile rule. 7. Section 457 plans.see Group-Term Life Insurance, earlier.
• The commuting rule.
Overall limit on deferrals. For 2007, you gen-General valuation rule. You must include in • The unsafe conditions commuting rule. erally should not have deferred more than a totalyour income the amount by which the fair market
of $15,500 of contributions to the plans listed invalue of the fringe benefit is more than the sum • The employer-operated eating-facility rule.
(1) through (3) above. The specific plan limits forof:
the plans listed in (4) through (7) above areFor more information on these rules, see Pub-
1. The amount, if any, you paid for the bene- discussed later.lication 15-B, Employer’s Tax Guide to Fringe
fit, plus Your employer or plan administrator shouldBenefits.
apply the proper annual limit when figuring your For information on the non-commercial flight2. The amount, if any, specifically excluded plan contributions. However, you are responsi-and commercial flight valuation rules, see sec-from your income by law. ble for monitoring the total you defer to ensuretions 1.61-21(g) and 1.61-21(h) of the regula-
that the deferrals are not more than the overallIf you pay fair market value for a fringe benefit, tions.
limit.no amount is included in your income.
Fair market value. The fair market value of Retirement Plan Catch-up contributions. You may be allowed
a fringe benefit is determined by all the facts and catch-up contributions (additional elective defer-Contributions
circumstances. It is the amount you would have rals) if you are age 50 or older by the end of your
to pay a third party to buy or lease the benefit. Your employer’s contributions to a qualified re- tax year. For more information about catch-up
This is determined without regard to: tirement plan for you are not included in income contributions to 403(b) plans, see chapter 6 of
at the time contributed. (Your employer can tell Publication 571, Tax Sheltered Annuity Plans• Your perceived value of the benefit, or you whether your retirement plan is qualified.) (403(b) Plans).
• The amount your employer paid for the However, the cost of life insurance coverage For more information about additional elec-
benefit. included in the plan may have to be included. tive deferrals to:
Page 8 Publication 525 (2007)

Page 9 of 40 of Publication 525 8:27 -  2-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• SEPs (SARSEPs), see Salary Reduction 4. Other amounts received (cash or noncash) elective deferrals to the plan designated as af-
ter-tax Roth contributions. Designated RothSimplified Employee Pension in Publica- for personal services you performed, in-
contributions are treated as elective deferrals,tion 560, Retirement Plans for Small Busi- cluding, but not limited to, the following
except that they are included in income. Yourness. items.
retirement plan must maintain separate ac-• SIMPLE plans, see How Much Can Be a. Commissions and tips. counts and recordkeeping for the designatedContributed on Your Behalf? in chapter 3 Roth contributions.b. Fringe benefits.of Publication 590. Qualified distributions from a Roth plan are
c. Bonuses. not included in income. Generally, a distribution• Section 457 plans, see Limit for deferrals
made before the end of the 5-tax-year periodunder section 457 plans, later. 5. Employer contributions (elective deferrals) beginning with the first tax year for which you
to: made a designated Roth contribution to the plan
Limit for deferrals under SIMPLE plans. If is not a qualified distribution.a. The section 457 plan.you are a participant in a SIMPLE plan, you
Reporting by employer. Your employer gen-generally should not have deferred more than b. Qualified cash or deferred arrange- erally should not include elective deferrals in$10,500 in 2007.  Amounts you defer under a ments (section 401(k) plans) that are your wages in box 1 of Form W-2. Instead, yourSIMPLE plan count toward the overall limit not included in your income. employer should mark the Retirement plan($15,500 for 2007) and may affect the amount checkbox in box 13 and show the total amountc. A salary reduction simplified employeeyou can defer under other elective deferral deferred in box 12.pension (SARSEP).plans.
Section 501(c)(18)(D) contributions.d. A tax-sheltered annuity (section 403(b)
Wages shown in box 1 of your Form W-2 shouldLimit for tax-sheltered annuities. If you are a plan).
not have been reduced for contributions youparticipant in a tax-sheltered annuity plan e. A savings incentive match plan for em- made to a section 501(c)(18)(D) retirement plan.(403(b) plan), the limit on elective deferrals for ployees (SIMPLE plan). The amount you contributed should be identified2007 generally is $15,500. However, if you have
with code “H” in box 12. You may deduct theat least 15 years of service with a public school f. A section 125 cafeteria plan.
amount deferred subject to the limits that apply.system, a hospital, a home health service
Include your deduction in the total on FormInstead of using the amounts listed above toagency, a health and welfare service agency, a 1040, line 36. Enter the amount anddetermine your includible compensation, yourchurch, or a convention or association of “501(c)(18)(D)” on the dotted line next to line 36.employer can use any of the following amounts.churches (or associated organization), the limit
on elective deferrals is increased by the least of Designated Roth contributions.  These• Your wages as defined for income taxthe following amounts. contributions are elective deferrals but are in-withholding purposes. cluded in your wages in box 1 of Form W-2.
1. $3,000. • Your wages as reported in box 1 of Form Designated Roth contributions to a section
W-2, Wage and Tax Statement. 401(k) plan are reported using code AA in box2. $15,000, reduced by increases to the over-
12, or, for section 403(b) plans, code BB in boxall limit that you were allowed in earlier • Your wages that are subject to social se- 12.years because of this years-of-service rule. curity withholding (including elective defer-
rals). Excess deferrals. If your deferrals exceed the3. $5,000 times your number of years of serv-
limit, you must notify your plan by the date re-ice for the organization, minus the total Increased limit. During any, or all, of the quired by the plan. If the plan permits, the ex-elective deferrals under the plan for earlier last 3 years ending before you reach normal cess amount will be distributed to you. If youyears. participate in more than one plan, you can haveretirement age under the plan, your plan may
For more information, see Publication 571. the excess paid out of any of the plans thatprovide that your limit is the lesser of:
permit these distributions. You must notify each
1. Twice the dollar limit for the year, orLimit for deferral under section 501(c)(18) plan by the date required by that plan of the
plans. If you are a participant in a section amount to be paid from that particular plan. The2. The limit for prior years minus the amount
plan then must pay you the amount of the ex-501(c)(18) plan (a trust created before June 25, you deferred in prior years plus the lesser cess, along with any income earned on that1959, funded only by employee contributions), of: amount, by April 15 of the following year.you should have deferred no more than the
You must include the excess deferral in yourlesser of $7,000 or 25% of your compensation. a. Your includible compensation for the
income for the year of the deferral unless youcurrent year, or
have an excess deferral of a designated RothLimit for deferrals under section 457 plans. b. The dollar limit for the current year. contribution. File Form 1040 to add the excessIf you are a participant in a section 457 plan (a
deferral amount to your wages on line 7. Do notdeferred compensation plan for employees of
use Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ to report ex-Catch-up contributions. You generallystate or local governments or tax-exempt orga-
cess deferral amounts.can have additional elective deferrals made tonizations), you should have deferred no more
your governmental section 457 plan if:than the lesser of your includible compensation Excess not distributed. If you do not take
or $15,500. However, if you are within 3 years of out the excess amount, you cannot include it in• You reached age 50 by the end of the
normal retirement age, you may be allowed an the cost of the contract even though you in-year, and
cluded it in your income. Therefore, you areincreased limit if the plan allows it. See In-
• No other elective deferrals can be made taxed twice on the excess deferral left in thecreased limit, later.
for you to the plan for the year because of plan—once when you contribute it, and againIncludible compensation. This is the pay limits or restrictions. when you receive it as a distribution.you received for the year from the employer who
If you qualify, your limit can be the lesser of your Excess distributed to you. If you take outmaintained the section 457 plan. It generally
includible compensation or $15,500, plus the excess after the year of the deferral and youincludes all the following payments. 
$5,000. However, if you are within 3 years of receive the corrective distribution by April 15 of
1. Wages and salaries. retirement age and your plan provides the in- the following year, do not include it in income
creased limit earlier, that limit may be higher. again in the year you receive it. If you receive it2. Fees for professional services. later, you must include it in income in both the
3. The value of any employer-provided quali- Designated Roth contributions. Employers year of the deferral and the year you receive it.
fied transportation fringe benefit (defined with section 401(k) and section 403(b) plans can Any income on the excess deferral taken out is
under Transportation, earlier) that is not create qualified Roth contribution programs so taxable in the tax year in which you take it out. If
included in your income. that you may elect to have part or all of your you take out part of the excess deferral and the
Publication 525 (2007) Page 9

Page 10 of 40 of Publication 525 8:27 -  2-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
income on it, allocate the distribution proportion- contributions by treating them as distributed to subject to the additional tax on early distribu-
ately between the excess deferral and the in- you and then contributed by you to the plan. You tions.
come. must include the excess contributions in your
income as wages on Form 1040, line 7. YouYou should receive a Form 1099-R, Distribu- Stock Optionscannot use Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ totions From Pensions, Annuities, Retirement or
report excess contribution amounts.Profit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insurance Con- If you receive an option to buy or sell stock or
If you receive excess contributions from atracts, etc., for the year in which the excess other property as payment for your services, you
401(k) plan and any income earned on the con-deferral is distributed to you. Use the following may have income when you receive the option
tributions within 21/2 months after the close of therules to report a corrective distribution shown on (the grant), when you exercise the option (use itplan year, you must include them in your incomeForm 1099-R for 2007. to buy or sell the stock or other property), orin the year of the contribution. If you receive when you sell or otherwise dispose of the option• If the distribution was for a 2007 excess them later, or receive less than $100 excess or property acquired through exercise of thedeferral, your Form 1099-R should have contributions, include the excess contributions option. The timing, type, and amount of incomethe code “8” in box 7. Add the excess and earnings in your income in the year distrib- inclusion depend on whether you receive a non-deferral amount to your wages on your uted. If the excess contributions are recharacter- statutory stock option or a statutory stock option.2007 tax return. ized, you must include them in income in the Your employer can tell you which kind of optionyear a corrective distribution would have oc-• If the distribution was for a 2007 excess you hold.curred. For a SARSEP, the employer must notifydeferral to a designated Roth account,
you by March 15 following the year in whichyour Form 1099-R should have code “B” in
excess contributions are made that you mustbox 7. Do not add this amount to your Nonstatutory Stock Optionswithdraw the excess and earnings. You mustwages on your 2007 return.
include the excess contributions in your income• If the distribution was for a 2006 excess Grant of option. If you are granted a nonstat-in the year of the contribution (or the year of thedeferral, your Form 1099-R should have utory stock option, you may have income whennotification if less than $100) and include thethe code “P” in box 7. If you did not add you receive the option. The amount of income toearnings in your income in the year withdrawn.the excess deferral amount to your wages include and the time to include it depend onYou should receive a Form 1099-R for theon your 2006 tax return, you must file an whether the fair market value of the option canyear in which the excess contributions are dis-amended return on Form 1040X, be readily determined. The fair market value oftributed to you (or are recharacterized). AddAmended U.S. Individual Income Tax Re- an option can be readily determined if it is ac-excess contributions or earnings shown onturn. If you did not receive the distribution tively traded on an established market.Form 1099-R for 2007 to your wages on yourby April 17, 2007, you also must add it to The fair market value of an option that is not2007 tax return if code “8” is in box 7. If code “P”your wages on your 2007 tax return. traded on an established market can be readilyor “D” is in box 7, you may have to file an
determined only if all of the following conditions• If the distribution was for a 2005 excess amended 2006 or 2005 return on Form 1040X to
exist.deferral, your Form 1099-R should have add the excess contributions or earnings to your
the code “D” in box 7. If you did not add wages in the year of the contribution. • You can transfer the option.
the excess deferral amount to your wages Even though a corrective distribution of • You can exercise the option immediatelyon your 2005 tax return, you must file an excess contributions is reported on in full.amended return on Form 1040X. You also Form 1099-R, it is not otherwise
TIP
must add it to your wages on your 2007 • The option or the property subject to thetreated as a distribution from the plan. It cannotincome tax return. option is not subject to any condition orbe rolled over into another plan, and it is not
restriction (other than a condition to se-• If the distribution was for the income subject to the additional tax on early distribu-
cure payment of the purchase price) thatearned on an excess deferral, your Form tions.
has a significant effect on the fair market1099-R should have the code “8” in box 7.
value of the option.Add the income amount to your wages on
your 2007 income tax return, regardless of Excess Annual Additions • The fair market value of the option privi-
when the excess deferral was made. lege can be readily determined.
The amount contributed in 2007 to a definedReport a loss on a corrective distribution of an The option privilege for an option to buy is thecontribution plan is generally limited to theexcess deferral in the year the excess amount opportunity to benefit during the option’s exer-lesser of 100% of your compensation or(reduced by the loss) is distributed to you. In- cise period from any increase in the value of$45,000. Under certain circumstances, contribu-clude the loss as a negative amount on Form property subject to the option without risking anytions that exceed these limits (excess annual1040, line 21 and identify it as “Loss on Excess capital. For example, if during the exercise pe-additions) may be corrected by a distribution ofDeferral Distribution.” riod the fair market value of stock subject to anyour elective deferrals or a return of your af-
option is greater than the option’s exercise price,ter-tax contributions and earnings from theseEven though a corrective distribution of a profit may be realized by exercising the optioncontributions.excess deferrals is reported on Form and immediately selling the stock at its higherA corrective payment of excess annual addi-1099-R, it is not otherwise treated as a
TIP
value. The option privilege for an option to sell istions consisting of elective deferrals or earningsdistribution from the plan. It cannot be rolled the opportunity to benefit during the exercisefrom your after-tax contributions is fully taxableover into another plan, and it is not subject to the period from a decrease in the value of the prop-in the year paid. A corrective payment consistingadditional tax on early distributions. erty subject to the option.of your after-tax contributions is not taxable.
If you received a corrective payment of ex-
If you or a member of your family is ancess annual additions, you should receive a
Excess Contributions officer, director, or more-than-10%separate Form 1099-R for the year of the pay-
owner of an expatriated corporation,CAUTION
!
ment with the code “E” in box 7. Report the totalIf you are a highly compensated employee, the you may owe an excise tax on the value ofpayment shown in box 1 of Form 1099-R on linetotal of your elective deferrals and other contri- nonstatutory options and other stock-based16a of Form 1040 or line 12a of Form 1040A.butions made for you for any year under a sec- compensation from that corporation. For moreReport the taxable amount shown in box 2a oftion 401(k) plan or SARSEP can be, as a information on the excise tax, see Internal Reve-Form 1099-R on line 16b of Form 1040 or linepercentage of pay, no more than 125% of the nue Code section 4985.12b of Form 1040A.average deferral percentage (ADP) of all eligible
non-highly compensated employees. Option with readily determinable value. IfEven though a corrective distribution of
you receive a nonstatutory stock option that has If the total contributed to the plan is more excess annual additions is reported on
a readily determinable fair market value at thethan the amount allowed under the ADP test, the Form 1099-R, it is not otherwise
TIP
time it is granted to you, the option is treated likeexcess contributions must be either distributed treated as a distribution from the plan. It cannot
other property received as compensation. Seeto you or recharacterized as after-tax employee be rolled over into another plan, and it is not
Page 10 Publication 525 (2007)

Page 11 of 40 of Publication 525 8:27 -  2-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Restricted Property, later, for rules on how much your employer and you subsequently agree to if you dispose of the stock in the same year you
income to include and when to include it. How- reduce the stated principal amount of the note, exercise the option.
ever, the rule described in that discussion for you generally recognize compensation income See Restricted Property, later, for more infor-
choosing to include the value of property in your at the time and in the amount of the reduction. mation.
income for the year of the transfer does not Your AMT basis in stock acquiredTax form. If you receive compensation fromapply to a nonstatutory option. through an ISO is likely to differ fromemployer-provided nonstatutory stock options, itOption without readily determinable value. your regular tax basis. Therefore, keep
RECORDS
is reported in box 1 of Form W-2. It also isIf the fair market value of the option is not readily adequate records for both the AMT and regularreported in box 12 using code “V.”determinable at the time it is granted to you tax so that you can figure your adjusted gain or If you are a nonemployee spouse and you(even if it is determined later), you do not have loss.exercise nonstatutory stock options you re-income until you exercise or transfer the option. ceived incident to a divorce, the income is re-
Example. Your employer, M Company,ported to you on Form 1099-MISC,
Exercise or transfer of option. When you granted you an incentive stock option on April 6,Miscellaneous Income, in box 3.
exercise a nonstatutory stock option, the 2005, to buy 100 shares of M Company at $9 a
amount to include in your income depends on share, its fair market value at the time. YouSale of the stock. There are no special in-
whether the option had a readily determinable exercised the option on January 9, 2006, whencome rules for the sale of stock acquired through
value. the stock was selling on the open market for $14the exercise of a nonstatutory stock option. Re-
a share. On January 25, 2007, when the stockport the sale on Schedule D (Form 1040), Capi-Option with readily determinable value. was selling on the open market for $16 a share,tal Gains and Losses, for the year of the sale.When you exercise a nonstatutory stock option your rights to the stock first became transfera-You may receive a Form 1099-B, Proceeds fromthat had a readily determinable value at the time ble. You include $700 ($1,600 value when yourBroker and Barter Sale Transactions, reportingthe option was granted, you do not have to rights first became transferable minus $900 op-the sales proceeds.include any amount in income. tion price) as an adjustment on Form 6251, lineYour basis in the property you acquire underOption without readily determinable value. 13.the option is the amount you pay for it plus anyWhen you exercise a nonstatutory stock option amount you included in income upon grant orthat did not have a readily determinable value at Sale of the stock. You have taxable incomeexercise of the option.the time the option was granted, the restricted or a deductible loss when you sell the stock thatYour holding period begins as of the date youproperty rules apply to the property received. you bought by exercising the option. Your in-acquired the option, if it had a readily determina-The amount to include in your income is the come or loss is the difference between theble value, or as of the date you exercised ordifference between the amount you pay for the amount you paid for the stock (the option price)transferred the option, if it had no readily deter-property and its fair market value when it be- and the amount you receive when you sell it.minable value.comes substantially vested. If it is not substan- You generally treat this amount as capital gaintially vested at the time you exercise this or loss and report it on Schedule D (Form 1040)nonstatutory stock option (so that you may have Statutory Stock Options for the year of the sale.to give the stock back), you do not have to However, you may have ordinary income forinclude any amount in income. You include the There are two kinds of statutory stock options. the year that you sell or otherwise dispose of thedifference in income when the option becomes stock in either of the following situations.• Incentive stock options (ISOs), andsubstantially vested. For more information on
• You do not satisfy the holding period re-restricted property, see Restricted Property, • Options granted under employee stock
quirement.later. purchase plans.
• You satisfy the conditions described underTransfer in arm’s-length transaction. If For either kind of option, you must be an Option granted at a discount, under Em-you transfer a nonstatutory stock option without employee of the company granting the option, or ployee stock purchase plan, later.a readily determinable value in an arm’s-length a related company, at all times beginning withtransaction to an unrelated person, you must Report your ordinary income as wages on Formthe date the option is granted, until 3 monthsinclude in your income the money or other prop- 1040, line 7, for the year of the sale.before you exercise the option (for an incentiveerty you received for the transfer, as if you had stock option, 1 year before if you are disabled). Holding period requirement.  You satisfyexercised the option. Also, the option must be nontransferable except the holding period requirement if you do not sellTransfer in non-arm’s-length transaction. at death. the stock within 1 year after its transfer to you orIf you transfer a nonstatutory stock option with-  If you do not meet the employment require- within 2 years after the option was granted.out a readily determinable value in a ments, or you receive a transferable option, your However, you are considered to satisfy the hold-non-arm’s-length transaction (for example, a option is a nonstatutory stock option. ing period requirement if you sold the stock togift), the option is not treated as exercised or comply with conflict-of-interest requirements.closed at that time. You must include in your Grant of option. If you receive a statutory
income, as compensation, any money or prop- stock option, do not include any amount in your Incentive stock options (ISOs). If you sellerty received. When the transferee exercises income when the option is granted. stock acquired by exercising an ISO, you needthe option, you must include in your income, as to determine if you satisfied the holding periodcompensation, the excess of the fair market Exercise of option. If you exercise a statutory requirement.value of the stock acquired by the transferee stock option, do not include any amount in in-
over the sum of the exercise price paid and any come when you exercise the option. Holding period requirement satisfied. If
amount you included in income at the time you you sell stock acquired by exercising an ISO andAlternative minimum tax (AMT). For thetransferred the option. At the time of the exer- satisfy the holding period requirement, your gainAMT, you must treat stock acquired through thecise, the transferee recognizes no income and or loss from the sale is capital gain or loss.exercise of an ISO as if no special treatmenthas a basis in the stock acquired equal to the fair Report the sale on Schedule D (Form 1040).applied. This means that, when your rights in themarket value of the stock. The basis of your stock is the amount you paidstock are transferable or no longer subject to aAny transfer of this kind of option to a related for the stock.substantial risk of forfeiture, you must include asperson is treated as a non-arm’s-length transac- an adjustment in figuring alternative minimum Holding period requirement not satisfied.tion. See Regulations section 1.83-7 for the defi- taxable income the amount by which the fair If you sell stock acquired by exercising an ISO,nition of a related person. market value of the stock exceeds the option do not satisfy the holding period requirement,
Recourse note in satisfaction of the exer- price. Enter this adjustment on line 13 of Form and have a gain from the sale, the gain is ordi-
cise price of an option. If you are an em- 6251, Alternative Minimum Tax—Individuals. nary income up to the amount by which the
ployee, and you issue a recourse note to your Increase your AMT basis in any stock you ac- stock’s fair market value when you exe rcised the
employer in satisfaction of the exercise price of quire by exercising the ISO by the amount of the option exceeded the option pri ce. Any excess
an option to acquire your employer’s stock, and adjustment. However, no adjustment is required gain is capital gain. If you have a loss from the
Publication 525 (2007) Page 11

Page 12 of 40 of Publication 525 8:27 -  2-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
sale, it is a capital loss and you do not have any • The amount, if any, by which the price your income in the year you receive the prop-
ordinary income. erty. However, if you receive stock or other prop-paid under the option was exceeded by
erty that has certain restrictions that affect itsthe fair market value of the share at theReport the ordinary income as wages on line
value, you do not include the value of the prop-time the option was granted, or7, Form 1040. Report the capital gain or loss on
erty in your income until it has been substantiallySchedule D (Form 1040). In determining capital • The amount, if any, by which the price vested. (You can choose to include the value ofgain or loss, your basis is the amount you paid paid under the option was exceeded by the property in your income in the year it iswhen you exercised the option plus the amount the fair market value of the share at the transferred to you, as discussed later, ratherreported as wages. time of the disposition or death. than the year it is substantially vested.)
Example. Your employer, X Corporation, Until the property becomes substantiallyFor this purpose, if the option price was not fixed
granted you an ISO on March 11, 2005, to buy vested, it is owned by the person who makes theor determinable at the time the option was
100 shares of X Corporation stock at $10 a transfer to you, usually your employer. However,granted, the option price is figured as if the
share, its fair market value at the time. You any income from the property, or the right to useoption had been exercised at the time it wasexercised the option on January 4, 2006, when the property, is included in your income as addi-granted.the stock was selling on the open market for $12 tional compensation in the year you receive the
Any excess gain is capital gain. If you have aa share. On January 24, 2007, you sold the income or have the right to use the property.
loss from the sale, it is a capital loss, and you dostock for $15 a share. Although you held the When the property becomes substantially
not have any ordinary income.stock for more than a year, less than 2 years had vested, you must include its fair market value,
passed from the time you were granted the op- minus any amount you paid for it, in your income
Example. Your employer, Y Corporation,tion. In 2007, you must report the difference for that year.
granted you an option under its employee stockbetween the option price ($10) and the value of
the stock when you exercised the option ($12) purchase plan to buy 100 shares of stock of Y Example. Your employer, the RST Corpo-
as wages. The rest of your gain is capital gain, Corporation for $20 a share at a time when the ration, sells you 100 shares of its stock at $10 a
figured as follows: stock had a value of $22 a share. Eighteen share. At the time of the sale the fair market
months later, when the value of the stock was value of the stock is $100 a share. Under theSelling price ($15 × 100 shares) ..... $  1,500 $23 a share, you exercised the option, and 14 terms of the sale, the stock is under a substantialPurchase price ($10 × 100 shares) . . . −1,000 risk of forfeiture (you have a good chance ofmonths after that you sold your stock for $30 aGain ....................... $  5 0 0 losing it) for a 5-year period. Your stock is notshare. In the year of sale, you must report asAmount reported as wages substantially vested when it is transferred, sowages the difference between the option price[($12 × 100 shares) − $1,000] ...... − 200 you do not include any amount in your income in($20) and the value at the time the option was
Amount reported as capital gain $ 300 the year you buy it. At the end of the 5-yeargranted ($22). The rest of your gain ($8 per
period, the fair market value of the stock is $200share) is capital gain, figured as follows:
a share. You must include $19,000 in your in-Employee stock purchase plan. If you sold
come [100 shares × ($200 fair market value −Selling price ($30 × 100 shares) .... $  3,000stock acquired by exercising an option granted
$10 you paid)]. Dividends paid by the RST Cor-Purchase price (option price)under an employee stock purchase plan, you
poration on your 100 shares of stock are taxable($20 × 100 shares) ............. −2,000need to determine if you satisfied the holding
Gain ...................... $  1,000 to you as additional compensation during theperiod requirement. Amount reported as wages period the stock can be forfeited.
Holding period requirement satisfied. If [($22 × 100 shares) − $2,000] ..... − 200
you sold stock acquired by exercising an option Substantially vested. Property is substan-Amount reported as capital gain $ 800granted under an employee stock purchase tially vested when:
plan, and you satisfy the holding period require- Holding period requirement not satisfied. • It is transferable, orment, determine your ordinary income as fol- If you do not satisfy the holding period require-lows. • It is not subject to a substantial risk ofment, your ordinary income is the amount by forfeiture. (You do not have a goodYour basis is equal to the option price at the which the stock’s fair market value when you chance of losing it.)time you exercised your option and acquired the exercised the option exceeded the option price.stock. The timing and amount of pay period This ordinary income is not limited to your gain Transferable property. Property is trans-deductions do not affect your basis. from the sale of the stock. Increase your basis in ferable if you can sell, assign, or pledge yourYour holding period for the property you ac- the stock by the amount of this ordinary income. interest in the property to any person (other thanquire when you exercise an option begins on the The difference between your increased basis the transferor), and if the person receiving yourday after you exercise the option. and the selling price of the stock is a capital gain interest in the property is not required to give up
or loss. the property, or its value, if the substantial risk ofExample. XYZ Company has an employee
forfeiture occurs.stock purchase plan. The option price is the Example.   The facts are the same as in thelower of the stock price at the time the option is Substantial risk of forfeiture. A substan-previous example, except that you sold thegranted or at the time the option is exercised. tial risk of forfeiture exists if the rights in thestock only 6 months after you exercised theThe value of the stock when the option was property transferred depend on performing (oroption. You did not satisfy the holding periodgranted was $25. XYZ deducts $5 from A’s pay not performing) substantial services, or on arequirement, so you must report $300 as wagesevery week for 48 weeks (total = $240 ($5 x 48)). condition related to the transfer, and the possi-and $700 as capital gain, figured as follows:The value of the stock when the option is exer- bility of forfeiture is substantial if the condition iscised is $20. A receives 12 shares of XYZ stock not satisfied.Selling price ($30 × 100 shares) .... $3,000($240/$20). A’s holding period for all 12 shares
Purchase price (option price)begins the day after the option is exercised, Example. The Spin Corporation transfers to($20 × 100 shares) ............. −2,000even though the money used to purchase the you as compensation for services 100 shares ofGain ...................... $1,000shares was deducted from A’s pay on 48 sepa- its corporate stock for $100 a share. Under theAmount reported as wagesrate days. A’s basis in each share is $20. terms of the transfer, you must resell the stock to[($23 × 100 shares) − $2,000] ..... − 300
the corporation at $100 a share if you leave yourOption granted at a discount. If, at the Amount reported as capital gain job for any reason within 3 years from the date oftime the option was granted, the option price per [$3,000 – ($2,000 + $300)] $700 transfer. You must perform substantial servicesshare was less than 100% (but not less than
over a period of time and you must resell the85%) of the fair market value of the share, and
stock to the corporation at $100 a share (regard-you dispose of the share after meeting the hold- Restricted Property
less of its value) if you do not perform the serv-ing period requirement, or you die while owning
Generally, if you receive property for your serv- ices, so your rights to the stock are subject to athe share, you must include in your income as
substantial risk of forfeiture.compensation, the lesser of: ices, you must include its fair market value in
Page 12 Publication 525 (2007)

Page 13 of 40 of Publication 525 8:27 -  2-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Choosing to include in income for year of them as wages. Do not include them in the total
transfer. You can choose to include the value dividends received.
of restricted property at the time of transfer (mi- Stock you chose to include in your in-nus any amount you paid for the property) in Special Rules forcome. Dividends you receive on restrictedyour income for the year it is transferred. If you stock you chose to include in your income in themake this choice, the substantial vesting rules Certain Employeesyear transferred are treated the same as anydo not apply and, generally, any later apprecia- other dividends. You should receive a Formtion in value is not included in your compensa- This part of the publication deals with special1099-DIV showing these dividends. Do not in-tion when the property becomes substantially rules for people in certain types of employment:clude the dividends in your wages on your re-vested. Your basis for figuring gain or loss when members of the clergy, members of religiousturn. Report them as dividends.you sell the property is the amount you paid for it orders, people working for foreign employers,
plus the amount you included in income as com- military personnel, and volunteers.
pensation. Sale of property not substantially vested.
These rules apply to the sale or other disposition ClergyIf you make this choice, you cannot
of property that you did not choose to include inrevoke it without the consent of the If you are a member of the clergy, you mustyour income in the year transferred and that isInternal Revenue Service. Consent willCAUTION
!
include in your income offerings and fees younot substantially vested.be given only if you were under a mistake of fact receive for marriages, baptisms, funerals,as to the underlying transaction. If you sell or otherwise dispose of the prop- masses, etc., in addition to your salary. If theerty in an arm’s-length transaction, include inIf you forfeit the property after you have in- offering is made to the religious institution, it iscluded its value in income, your loss is the your income as compensation for the year of not taxable to you.amount you paid for the property minus any sale the amount realized minus the amount you If you are a member of a religious organiza-amount you realized on the forfeiture. paid for the property. If you exchange the prop- tion and you give your outside earnings to the
erty in an arm’s-length transaction for other organization, you still must include the earningsYou cannot make this choice for a non- property that is not substantially vested, treat the in your income. However, you may be entitled tostatutory stock option. new property as if it were substituted for the a charitable contribution deduction for theCAUTION
!
exchanged property. amount paid to the organization. See Publica-
tion 526. Also, see Members of Religious Or-The sale or other disposition of a nonstatu-
ders, later.How to make the choice. You make the tory stock option to a related person is not con-
choice by filing a written statement with the Inter- sidered an arm’s-length transaction. See Pension. A pension or retirement pay for anal Revenue Service Center where you file your Regulations section 1.83-7 for the definition of a member of the clergy usually is treated as anyreturn. You must file this statement no later than related person. other pension or annuity. It must be reported on30 days after the date the property was trans- If you sell the property in a transaction that is lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040 or on lines 12aferred. A copy of the statement must be attached not at arm’s length, include in your income as and 12b of Form 1040A.to your tax return for the year the property was compensation for the year of sale the total of anytransferred. You also must give a copy of this money you received and the fair market value ofstatement to the person for whom you per- Housingany substantially vested property you receivedformed the services and, if someone other than on the sale. In addition, you will have to reportyou received the property, to that person. Special rules for housing apply to members ofincome when the original property becomesYou must sign the statement and indicate on the clergy. Under these rules, you do not includesubstantially vested, as if you still held it. Reportit that you are making the choice under section in your income the rental value of a home (in-as compensation its fair market value minus the83(b) of the Internal Revenue Code. The state- cluding utilities) or a designated housing allow-total of the amount you paid for the property andment must contain all of the following informa- ance provided to you as part of your pay.the amount included in your income from thetion. However, the exclusion cannot be more than theearlier sale. reasonable pay for your service. If you pay for• Your name, address, and taxpayer identifi-
the utilities, you can exclude any allowance des-cation number. Example. In 2004, you paid your employer ignated for utility cost, up to your actual cost.$50 for a share of stock that had a fair market• A description of each property for which The home or allowance must be provided asvalue of $100 and was subject to forfeiture untilyou are making the choice. compensation for your services as an ordained,2007. In 2006, you sold the stock to your spouse licensed, or commissioned minister. However,• The date or dates on which the property for $10 in a transaction not at arm’s length. You you must include the rental value of the home orwas transferred and the tax year for which had compensation of $10 from this transaction. the housing allowance as earnings fromyou are making the choice. In 2007, when the stock had a fair market value self-employment on Schedule SE (Form 1040),
of $120, it became substantially vested. For• The nature of any restrictions on the prop- Self-Employment Tax, if you are subject to the
erty. 2007, you must report additional compensation self-employment tax. For more information, see
of $60, figured as follows: Publication 517, Social Security and Other Infor-• The fair market value at the time of trans-
mation for Members of the Clergy and Religiousfer (ignoring restrictions except those that Fair market value of stock at time Workers.will never lapse) of each property for of substantial vesting ........ $120which you are making the choice. Minus: Amount paid for stock . . . $50 Members of Religious OrdersMinus: Compensation previously• Any amount that you paid for the property.
included in income from sale to If you are a member of a religious order who has• A statement that you have provided copies spouse .................. 1 0 −60 taken a vow of poverty, how you treat earningsto the appropriate persons. Additional income $60 that you renounce and turn over to the order
depends on whether your services are per-Dividends received on restricted stock. formed for the order.Inherited property not substantially vested.Dividends you receive on restricted stock are
If you inherit property not substantially vested attreated as compensation and not as dividend Services performed for the order. If you are
the time of the decedent’s death, any incomeincome. Your employer should include these performing the services as an agent of the order
you receive from the property is considered in-payments on your Form W-2. If they also are in the exercise of duties required by the order,
come in respect of a decedent and is taxedreported on a Form 1099-DIV, Dividends and do not include in your income the amounts
according to the rules for restricted propertyDistributions, you should list them on Schedule turned over to the order.
received for services. For information about in-B (Form 1040) or Schedule 1 (Form 1040A), If your order directs you to perform services
come in respect of a decedent, see PublicationInterest and Ordinary Dividends for Form 1040A for another agency of the supervising church or
Filers, with a statement that you have included 559. an associated institution, you are considered to
Publication 525 (2007) Page 13

Page 14 of 40 of Publication 525 8:27 -  2-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
be performing the services as an agent of the taxable and must be included in your income asForeign Employer
a pension on lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040 ororder. Any wages you earn as an agent of an
on lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A. Do notSpecial rules apply if you work for a foreignorder that you turn over to the order are not
include in your income the amount of any reduc-employer.included in your income.
tion in retirement or retainer pay to provide a
U.S. citizen. If you are a U.S. citizen who survivor annuity for your spouse or childrenExample. You are a member of a church works in the United States for a foreign govern- under the Retired Serviceman’s Family Protec-order and have taken a vow of poverty. You ment, an international organization, a foreign tion Plan or the Survivor Benefit Plan.renounce any claims to your earnings and turn embassy, or any foreign employer, you must For a more detailed discussion of survivorover to the order any salaries or wages you include your salary in your income. annuities, see Publication 575.earn. You are a registered nurse, so your order
Social security and Medicare taxes. Youassigns you to work in a hospital that is an Disability. If you are retired on disability,
are exempt from social security and Medicareassociated institution of the church. However, see Military and Government Disability Pen-
employee taxes if you are employed in theyou remain under the general direction and con- sions under Sickness and Injury Benefits, later.
United States by an international organization ortrol of the order. You are considered to be an
a foreign government. However, you must pay Veterans’ benefits. Do not include in your in-agent of the order and any wages you earn at
self-employment tax on your earnings from serv- come any veterans’ benefits paid under any law,the hospital that you turn over to your order are
ices performed in the United States, even regulation, or administrative practice adminis-not included in your income. though you are not self-employed. This rule also tered by the Department of Veterans Affairs
applies if you are an employee of a qualifying (VA). The following amounts paid to veterans orServices performed outside the order. If wholly owned instrumentality of a foreign gov- their families are not taxable.you are directed to work outside the order, your ernment.services are not an exercise of duties required • Education, training, and subsistence al-
by the order unless they meet both of the follow- Employees of international organizations or lowances.
foreign governments. Your compensationing requirements. • Disability compensation and pension pay-for official services to an international organiza- ments for disabilities paid either to veter-• They are the kind of services that are ordi- tion is exempt from federal income tax if you are ans or their families.narily the duties of members of the order. not a citizen of the United States or you are a
• Grants for homes designed for wheelchaircitizen of the Philippines (whether or not you are• They are part of the duties that you must
living.a citizen of the United States).exercise for, or on behalf of, the religious
Your compensation for official services to aorder as its agent. • Grants for motor vehicles for veterans whoforeign government is exempt from federal in- lost their sight or the use of their limbs.If you are an employee of a third party, the come tax if all of the following are true.
services you perform for the third party will not • Veterans’ insurance proceeds and divi-• You are not a citizen of the United Statesbe considered directed or required of you by the dends paid either to veterans or their ben-or you are a citizen of the Philippinesorder. Amounts you receive for these services eficiaries, including the proceeds of a(whether or not you are a citizen of theare included in your income, even if you have veteran’s endowment policy paid beforeUnited States).taken a vow of poverty. death.
• Your work is like the work done by em- • Interest on insurance dividends left on de-Example 1. Mark Brown is a member of a ployees of the United States in foreign posit with the VA.religious order and has taken a vow of poverty. countries.
He renounces all claims to his earnings and • Benefits under a dependent-care assis-• The foreign government gives an equalturns over his earnings to the order. tance program.exemption to employees of the UnitedMark is a schoolteacher. He was instructed • The death gratuity paid to a survivor of aStates in its country.by the superiors of the order to get a job with a member of the Armed Forces who died
private tax-exempt school. Mark became an em- after September 10, 2001.Waiver of alien status. If you are an alien
ployee of the school, and, at his request, the who works for a foreign government or interna- • Payments made under the compensatedschool made the salary payments directly to the tional organization and you file a waiver under work therapy program.order. section 247(b) of the Immigration and National-
Because Mark is an employee of the school, ity Act to keep your immigrant status, any salary
you receive after the date you file the waiver ishe is performing services for the school rather Volunteers
not exempt under this rule. However, it may bethan as an agent of the order. The wages Mark
exempt under a treaty or agreement. See Publi- The tax treatment of amounts you receive as aearns working for the school are included in his
cation 519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens, for more volunteer is covered in the following discus-income.
information about treaties. sions.
Example 2. Gene Dennis is a member of a Nonwage income. This exemption applies Peace Corps. Living allowances you receivereligious order who, as a condition of member- only to employees’ wages, salaries, and fees. as a Peace Corps volunteer or volunteer leadership, has taken vows of poverty and obedience. Pensions and other income do not qualify for this for housing, utilities, household supplies, food,All claims to his earnings are renounced. Gene exemption. and clothing are exempt from tax.received permission from the order to establish
Employment abroad. For information on thea private practice as a psychologist and coun- Taxable allowances. The following al-
tax treatment of income earned abroad, seesels members of religious orders as well as lowances must be included in your income and
Publication 54.nonmembers. Although the order reviews reported as wages.
Gene’s budget annually, Gene controls not only • Allowances paid to your spouse and minorthe details of his practice but also the means by Military children while you are a volunteer leaderwhich his work as a psychologist is accom- training in the United States.Payments you receive as a member of a militaryplished.
service generally are taxed as wages except for • Living allowances designated by the Di-Gene’s private practice as a psychologist retirement pay, which is taxed as a pension. rector of the Peace Corps as basic com-does not make him an agent of the religious Allowances generally are not taxed. For more pensation. These are allowances fororder. The psychological services provided by information on the tax treatment of military al- personal items such as domestic help,Gene are not the type of services that are pro- lowances and benefits, see Publication 3, laundry and clothing maintenance, enter-vided by the order. The income Gene earns as a Armed Forces’ Tax Guide. tainment and recreation, transportation,psychologist is earned in his individual capacity. and other miscellaneous expenses.Gene must include in his income the earnings Military retirement pay. If your retirement
from his private practice. pay is based on age or length of service, it is • Leave allowances.
Page 14 Publication 525 (2007)

Page 15 of 40 of Publication 525 8:27 -  2-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Readjustment allowances or termination Income from sales at auctions, includ- Depletion. If you are the owner of an eco-
ing online auctions, may be business nomic interest in mineral deposits or oil and gaspayments. These are considered received
income. For more information, see wells, you can recover your investment throughby you when credited to your account. CAUTION
!
Publication 334. the depletion allowance. For information on this
subject, see chapter 9 of Publication 535.Example. Gary Carpenter, a Peace Corps
Rents From Personalvolunteer, gets $175 a month as a readjustment Coal and iron ore. Under certain circum-
stances, you can treat amounts you receiveallowance during his period of service, to be paid Property
from the disposal of coal and iron ore as pay-to him in a lump sum at the end of his tour of
ments from the sale of a capital asset, ratherIf you rent out personal property, such as equip-duty. Although the allowance is not available to
ment or vehicles, how you report your income than as royalty income. For information abouthim until the end of his service, Gary must in-
and expenses is generally determined by: gain or loss from the sale of coal and iron ore,clude it in his income on a monthly basis as it is
see Publication 544.credited to his account. • Whether or not the rental activity is a busi-
ness, and Sale of property interest. If you sell your
Volunteers in Service to America (VISTA). If complete interest in oil, gas, or mineral rights,• Whether or not the rental activity is con-you are a VISTA volunteer, you must include the amount you receive is considered paymentducted for profit.meal and lodging allowances paid to you in your for the sale of section 1231 property, not royalty
income as wages. Generally, if your primary purpose is income or income. Under certain circumstances, the sale
profit and you are involved in the rental activity is subject to capital gain or loss treatment on
National Senior Service Corps programs. with continuity and regularity, your rental activity Schedule D (Form 1040). For more information
Do not include in your income amounts you is a business. See Publication 535, Business on selling section 1231 property, see chapter 3
receive for supportive services or reimburse- Expenses, for details on deducting expenses for of Publication 544.
both business and not-for-profit activities.ments for out-of-pocket expenses from the fol- If you retain a royalty, an overriding royalty,
lowing programs. or a net profit interest in a mineral property forReporting business income and expenses. the life of the property, you have made a lease or• Retired Senior Volunteer Program If you are in the business of renting personal a sublease, and any cash you receive for the(RSVP). property, report your income and expenses on assignment of other interests in the property isSchedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040). The• Foster Grandparent Program. ordinary income subject to a depletion allow-form instructions have information on how to ance.• Senior Companion Program. complete them.
Part of future production sold. If you ownReporting nonbusiness income. If you are mineral property but sell part of the future pro-not in the business of renting personal property,Service Corps of Retired Executives duction, you generally treat the money you re-report your rental income on Form 1040, line 21.(SCORE). If you receive amounts for support- ceive from the buyer at the time of the sale as aList the type and amount of the income on theive services or reimbursements for out- loan from the buyer. Do not include it in yourdotted line next to line 21.of-pocket expenses from SCORE, do not in- income or take depletion based on it.clude these amounts in gross income. Reporting nonbusiness expenses. If you When production begins, you include all the
rent personal property for profit, include your proceeds in your income, deduct all the produc-Volunteer tax counseling. Do not include in rental expenses in the total amount you enter on tion expenses, and deduct depletion from thatyour income any reimbursements you receive Form 1040, line 36. Also, enter the amount and amount to arrive at your taxable income from thefor transportation, meals, and other expenses “PPR” on the dotted line next to line 36. property.you have in training for, or actually providing, If you do not rent personal property for profit,
volunteer federal income tax counseling for the your deductions are limited and you cannot re- Partnership Incomeelderly (TCE). port a loss to offset other income. See Activity
not for profit under Other Income in the discus-You can deduct as a charitable contribution A partnership generally is not a taxable entity.
sion of Miscellaneous Income, later.your unreimbursed out-of-pocket expenses in The income, gains, losses, deductions, and
taking part in the volunteer income tax assis- credits of a partnership are passed through to
tance (VITA) program. Royalties the partners based on each partner’s distributive
share of these items. For more information, see
Royalties from copyrights, patents, and oil, gas, Publication 541.
and mineral properties are taxable as ordinary
income. Partner’s distributive share. Your distribu-Business and   You generally report royalties in Part I of tive share of partnership income, gains, losses,Schedule E (Form 1040), Supplemental IncomeInvestment Income deductions, or credits generally is based on theand Loss. However, if you hold an operating oil, partnership agreement. You must report yourgas, or mineral interest or are in business as aThis section provides information on the treat- distributive share of these items on your returnself-employed writer, inventor, artist, etc., reportment of income from certain rents and royalties, whether or not they actually are distributed toyour income and expenses on Schedule C orand from interests in partnerships and S corpo- you. However, your distributive share of theSchedule C-EZ (Form 1040).rations. For additional information about busi- partnership losses is limited to the adjusted ba-
ness and investment income, you may want to sis of your partnership interest at the end of theCopyrights and patents. Royalties from
see the following publications. partnership year in which the losses took place.copyrights on literary, musical, or artistic works,
and similar property, or from patents on inven-• Publication 334, Tax Guide for Small Busi- Partnership agreement. The partnershiptions, are amounts paid to you for the right to useness (For Individuals Who Use Schedule agreement usually covers the distribution ofyour work over a specified period of time. Royal- profits, losses, and other items. However, if theC or C-EZ). ties generally are based on the number of units agreement does not state how a specific item of• Publication 527, Residential Rental Prop- sold, such as the number of books, tickets to a gain or loss will be shared, or the allocationerty (Including Rental of Vacation Homes). performance, or machines sold. stated in the agreement does not have substan-
tial economic effect, your distributive share is• Publication 541, Partnerships. Oil, gas, and minerals. Royalty income from
figured according to your interest in the partner-oil, gas, and mineral properties is the amount• Publication 544, Sales and Other Disposi- ship.you receive when natural resources are ex-tions of Assets. tracted from your property. The royalties are
• Publication 550, Investment Income and Partnership return. Although a partnershipbased on units, such as barrels, tons, etc., and
Expenses (Including Capital Gains and generally pays no tax, it must file an informationare paid to you by a person or company who
Losses). return on Form 1065, U.S. Return of Partnershipleases the property from you.
Publication 525 (2007) Page 15

Page 16 of 40 of Publication 525 8:27 -  2-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Income. This shows the result of the partner- Generally, Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S) Beginning on the day after you reach mini-
will tell you where to report each item of mum retirement age, payments you receive areship’s operations for its tax year and the items
income on your individual return. taxable as a pension or annuity. Report thethat must be passed through to the partners.
TIP
payments on lines 16a and 16b of Form 1040 orSchedule K-1 (Form 1065). You should re- Distributions. Generally, S corporation dis- on lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A. For moreceive from each partnership in which you are a tributions are a nontaxable return of your basis information on pensions and annuities, see Pub-member a copy of Schedule K-1 (Form 1065), in the corporation stock. However, in certain lication 575.Partner’s Share of Income, Deductions, Credits, cases, part of the distributions may be taxable Retirement and profit-sharing plans. If youetc., showing your share of income, deductions, as a dividend, or as a long-term or short-term receive payments from a retirement orcredits, and tax preference items of the partner- capital gain, or as both. The corporation’s distri- profit-sharing plan that does not provide for disa-ship for the tax year. Retain Schedule K-1 for butions may be in the form of cash or property. bility retirement, do not treat the payments as ayour records. Do not attach it to your Form 1040.
disability pension. The payments must be re-More information.   For more information, see
ported as a pension or annuity.the Instructions for Form 1120S.Partner’s return. You generally must report
partnership items on your individual return the Accrued leave payment. If you retire on disa-
same way as they are reported on the partner- bility, any lump-sum payment you receive for
ship return. That is, if the partnership had a accrued annual leave is a salary payment. The
Sickness andcapital gain, you report your share on Schedule payment is not a disability payment. Include it in
D (Form 1040). You report your share of partner- your income in the tax year you receive it.Injury Benefitsship ordinary income on Schedule E (Form
1040).
Generally, you must report as income any Military and GovernmentGenerally, Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) amount you receive for personal injury or sick- Disability Pensionswill tell you where to report each item of ness through an accident or health plan that is
income on your individual return.
TIP
paid for by your employer. If both you and your Certain military and government disability pen-
employer pay for the plan, only the amount you sions are not taxable.
receive that is due to your employer’s paymentsQualified joint venture. If you and your Service-connected disability. You may beis reported as income. However, certain pay-spouse materially participate as the only mem- able to exclude from income amounts you re-ments may not be taxable to you. For informa-bers of a jointly owned and operated business, ceive as a pension, annuity, or similar allowancetion on nontaxable payments, see Military andand you file a joint return for the tax year, you for personal injury or sickness resulting fromGovernment Disability Pensions and Othercan make a joint election to be taxed as a quali- active service in one of the following govern-Sickness and Injury Benefits, later in this discus-fied joint venture instead of a partnership. To ment services.sion.make this election, you must divide all items of
• The armed forces of any country.income, gain, loss, deduction, and credit be- Do not report as income any amounts
tween you and your spouse in accordance with paid to reimburse you for medical ex- • The National Oceanic and Atmospheric
your respective interests in the venture. Each of penses you incurred after the plan was Administration.
TIP
you must file a separate Schedule C or Sched- established. • The Public Health Service.ule C-EZ (Form 1040).
Cost paid by you. If you pay the entire cost of • The Foreign Service.
an accident or health plan, do not include anyS Corporation Income amounts you receive from the plan for personal Conditions for exclusion. Do not include
injury or sickness as income on your tax return.In general, an S corporation does not pay tax on the disability payments in your income if any of
If your plan reimbursed you for medical ex-its income. Instead, the income, losses, deduc- the following conditions apply.
penses you deducted in an earlier year, you maytions, and credits of the corporation are passed
1. You were entitled to receive a disabilityhave to include some, or all, of the reimburse-through to the shareholders based on each
payment before September 25, 1975.ment in your income. See Recoveries undershareholder’s pro rata share. You must report
Miscellaneous Income, later.your share of these items on your return. Gener- 2. You were a member of a listed govern-
ally, the items passed through to you will in- ment service or its reserve component, orCafeteria plans. Generally, if you are coveredcrease or decrease the basis of your S were under a binding written commitmentby an accident or health insurance plan throughcorporation stock as appropriate. to become a member, on September 24,a cafeteria plan, and the amount of the insur-
1975.ance premiums was not included in your in-
S corporation return. An S corporation must come, you are not considered to have paid the 3. You receive the disability payments for afile a return on Form 1120S, U.S. Income Tax premiums and you must include any benefits combat-related injury. This is a personalReturn for an S Corporation. This shows the you receive in your income. If the amount of the injury or sickness that:results of the corporation’s operations for its tax premiums was included in your income, you are
year and the items of income, losses, deduc- considered to have paid the premiums and any a. Results directly from armed conflict,
tions, or credits that affect the shareholders’ benefits you receive are not taxable. b. Takes place while you are engaged inindividual income tax returns.
extra-hazardous service,Disability PensionsSchedule K-1 (Form 1120S). You should
c. Takes place under conditions simulat-receive from the S corporation in which you are
If you retired on disability, you must include in ing war, including training exercisesa shareholder a copy of Schedule K-1 (Form
income any disability pension you receive under such as maneuvers, or1120S), Shareholder’s Share of Income, Deduc-
a plan that is paid for by your employer. Youtions, Credits, etc., showing your share of in- d. Is caused by an instrumentality of war.must report your taxable disability payments ascome, losses, deductions, and credits, of the S
wages on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040Acorporation for the tax year. Retain Schedule 4. You would be entitled to receive disabilityuntil you reach minimum retirement age. Mini-K-1 for your records. Do not attach it to your compensation from the Department of Vet-mum retirement age generally is the age atForm 1040. erans Affairs (VA) if you filed an applica-which you can first receive a pension or annuity tion for it. Your exclusion under thisif you are not disabled.Shareholder’s return. Your distributive share condition is equal to the amount you would
of the items of income, losses, deductions, or You may be entitled to a tax credit if be entitled to receive from the VA.
credits of the S corporation must be shown sep- you were permanently and totally dis-
arately on your Form 1040. The character of abled when you retired. For informa- Pension based on years of service. If you
TIP
these items generally is the same as if you had tion on this credit, see Publication 524, Credit for receive a disability pension based on years of
realized or incurred them personally. the Elderly or the Disabled. service, you generally must include it in your
Page 16 Publication 525 (2007)

Page 17 of 40 of Publication 525 8:27 -  2-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
income. However, if the pension qualifies for the be reimbursed under Medicare, except If part of your workers’ compensation
exclusion for a service-connected disability (dis- where Medicare is a secondary payer or reduces your social security or
cussed earlier), do not include in income the part the contract makes per diem or other peri- equivalent railroad retirement benefitsCAUTION
!
of your pension that you would have received if odic payments without regard to ex- received, that part is considered social security
the pension had been based on a percentage of penses. (or equivalent railroad retirement) benefits and
disability. You must include the rest of your pen- may be taxable. For a discussion of the taxability
sion in your income. of these benefits, see Other Income under Mis-Qualified long-term care services. Qualified cellaneous Income, later.long-term care services are:Retroactive VA determination. If you retire
from the armed services based on years of serv- Return to work. If you return to work after• Necessary diagnostic, preventive, thera-ice and are later given a retroactive serv- qualifying for workers’ compensation, salarypeutic, curing, treating, mitigating, rehabili-ice-connected disability rating by the VA, your payments you receive for performing light dutiestative services, and maintenance andretirement pay for the retroactive period is ex- are taxable as wages.personal care services, andcluded from income up to the amount of VA
Disability pension. If your disability pension• Required by a chronically ill individual anddisability benefits you would have been entitled
is paid under a statute that provides benefitsprovided pursuant to a plan of care pre-to receive. You can claim a refund of any tax
only to employees with service-connected disa-scribed by a licensed health care practi-paid on the excludable amount (subject to the
bilities, part of it may be workers’ compensation.tioner.statute of limitations) by filing an amended re-
That part is exempt from tax. The rest of yourturn on Form 1040X for each previous year
pension, based on years of service, is taxable asduring the retroactive period. Chronically ill individual. A chronically ill in- pension or annuity income. If you die, the part ofIf you receive a lump-sum disability sever- dividual is one who has been certified by a your survivors’ benefit that is a continuation ofance payment and are later awarded VA disabil- licensed health care practitioner within the previ- the workers’ compensation is exempt from tax.ity benefits, exclude 100% of the severance ous 12 months as one of the following.
benefit from your income. However, you must
• An individual who, for at least 90 days, isinclude in your income any lump-sum readjust- Other Sickness
unable to perform at least two activities ofment or other nondisability severance payment and Injury Benefitsdaily living without substantial assistanceyou received on release from active duty, even if
due to loss of functional capacity. Activi-you are later given a retroactive disability rating In addition to disability pensions and annuities,
ties of daily living are eating, toileting,by the VA. you may receive other payments for sickness or
transferring, bathing, dressing, and conti- injury.
nence.Terrorist attack or military action. Do not
Railroad sick pay. Payments you receive asinclude in your income disability payments you • An individual who requires substantial su- sick pay under the Railroad Unemployment In-receive for injuries resulting directly from a ter- pervision to be protected from threats to surance Act are taxable and you must includerorist or military action. health and safety due to severe cognitive them in your income. However, do not includeA terrorist action is one that is directed impairment. them in your income if they are for an on-the-jobagainst the United States or any of its allies injury.(including a multinational force in which the
Limit on exclusion. The exclusion for pay-United States is participating). A military action Black lung benefit payments. These pay-ments made on a per diem  or other periodicis one that involves the armed forces of the ments are similar to workers’ compensation andbasis under a long-term care insurance contractUnited States and is a result of actual or generally are not taxable.is subject to a limit. The limit applies to the totalthreatened violence or aggression against the Federal Employees’ Compensation Actof these payments and any accelerated deathUnited States or any of its allies, but does not (FECA). Payments received under this Act forbenefits made on a per diem or other periodicinclude training exercises. personal injury or sickness, including paymentsbasis under a life insurance contract because
to beneficiaries in case of death, are not taxable.the insured is chronically ill. (For more informa-Long-Term Care However, you are taxed on amounts you receivetion on accelerated death benefits, see Life In-
Insurance Contracts under this Act as continuation of pay for up to 45surance Proceeds  under Miscellaneous
days while a claim is being decided. Report thisIncome, later.)Long-term care insurance contracts generally income on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A orUnder this limit, the excludable amount forare treated as accident and health insurance on line 1 of Form 1040EZ. Also, pay for sickany period is figured by subtracting any reim-contracts. Amounts you receive from them leave while a claim is being processed is taxablebursement received (through insurance or oth-(other than policyholder dividends or premium and must be included in your income as wages.erwise) for the cost of qualified long-term carerefunds) generally are excludable from income services during the period from the larger of the If part of the payments you receiveas amounts received for personal injury or sick- following amounts. under FECA reduces your social se-ness. To claim an exclusion for payments made
curity or equivalent railroad retirementon a per diem or other periodic basis under a • The cost of qualified long-term care serv-
CAUTION
!
benefits received, that part is considered sociallong-term care insurance contract, you must file ices during the period.
security (or equivalent railroad retirement) bene-Form 8853 with your return. • The dollar amount for the period ($260 per fits and may be taxable. For a discussion of theA long-term care insurance contract is an day for any period in 2007). taxability of these benefits, see Other Incomeinsurance contract that only provides coverage
under Miscellaneous Income, later.See Section C of Form 8853 and its instructionsfor qualified long-term care services. The con-
for more information. You can deduct the amount you spend to buytract must:
back sick leave for an earlier year to be eligible• Be guaranteed renewable, for nontaxable FECA benefits for that period. It isWorkers’ Compensation
a miscellaneous deduction subject to the 2% of• Not provide for a cash surrender value or
AGI limit on Schedule A (Form 1040). If you buyAmounts you receive as workers’ compensationother money that can be paid, assigned,
back sick leave in the same year you used it, thefor an occupational sickness or injury are fullypledged, or borrowed,
amount reduces your taxable sick leave pay. Doexempt from tax if they are paid under a workers’• Provide that refunds, other than refunds not deduct it separately.compensation act or a statute in the nature of aon the death of the insured or complete workers’ compensation act. The exemption alsosurrender or cancellation of the contract, Other compensation. Many other amountsapplies to your survivors. The exemption, how-and dividends under the contract may be you receive as compensation for sickness orever, does not apply to retirement plan benefitsused only to reduce future premiums or injury are not taxable. These include the follow-you receive based on your age, length of serv-increase future benefits, and ing amounts. ice, or prior contributions to the plan, even if you
• Generally not pay or reimburse expenses retired because of an occupational sickness or • Compensatory damages you receive for
incurred for services or items that would injury. physical injury or physical sickness,
Publication 525 (2007) Page 17

Page 18 of 40 of Publication 525 8:27 -  2-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
whether paid in a lump sum or in periodic services you receive in bartering. If you ex- Under backup withholding, the barter ex-
payments. See Court awards and dam- change must withhold, as income tax, 28% ofchange services with another person and you
ages under Other Income, later. the income if:both have agreed ahead of time as to the value
of the services, that value will be accepted as • You do not give the barter exchange your• Benefits you receive under an accident or fair market value unless the value can be shown taxpayer identification number (generally ahealth insurance policy on which either to be otherwise. social security number or an employeryou paid the premiums or your employer  Generally, you report this income on Sched- identification number), orpaid the premiums but you had to include ule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040). However,them in your income. • The IRS notifies the barter exchange thatif the barter involves an exchange of something
you gave it an incorrect identification num-• Disability benefits you receive for loss of other than services, such as in Example 4 be-
ber.income or earning capacity as a result of low, you may have to use another form or sched-
injuries under a no-fault car insurance pol- ule instead. If you join a barter exchange, you must certifyicy. under penalties of perjury that your taxpayerExample 1. You are a self-employed attor- identification number is correct and that you are• Compensation you receive for permanent ney who performs legal services for a client, a not subject to backup withholding. If you do notloss or loss of use of a part or function of small corporation. The corporation gives you make this certification, backup withholding mayyour body, or for your permanent disfig- shares of its stock as payment for your services. begin immediately. The barter exchange willurement. This compensation must be You must include the fair market value of the give you a Form W-9, Request for Taxpayerbased only on the injury and not on the shares in your income on Schedule C or Sched- Identification Number and Certification, or a sim-period of your absence from work. These ule C-EZ (Form 1040) in the year you receive ilar form, for you to make this certification. Thebenefits are not taxable even if your em- them. barter exchange will withhold tax only up to theployer pays for the accident and health
amount of any cash paid to you or deposited inplan that provides these benefits. Example 2. You are a self-employed ac- your account and any scrip or credit issued to
countant. You and a house painter are members you (and converted to cash).
Reimbursement for medical care. A reim- of a barter club. Members get in touch with each
bursement for medical care generally is not tax- other directly and bargain for the value of the If tax is withheld from your barter in-
able. However, it may reduce your medical services to be performed. In return for account- come, the barter exchange will report
expense deduction. If you receive reimburse- ing services you provided, the house painter the amount of tax withheld on Form
TIP
ment for an expense you deducted in an earlier painted your home. You must report as your 1099-B, or similar statement.
year, see Recoveries, later. income on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form
1040) the fair market value of the house paintingIf you receive an “advance reimbursement” Canceled Debtsservices you received. The house painter mustor “loan” for future medical expenses from your
include in income the fair market value of theemployer without regard to whether you suffered Generally, if a debt you owe is canceled oraccounting services you provided.a personal injury or sickness or incurred medical forgiven, other than as a gift or bequest, youexpenses, that amount is included in your in- must include the canceled amount in your in-Example 3. You are self-employed and acome, whether or not you incur uninsured medi- come. You have no income from the canceledmember of a barter club. The club uses creditcal expenses during the year. debt if it is intended as a gift to you. A debtunits as a means of exchange. It adds creditReimbursements received under your em- includes any indebtedness for which you areunits to your account for goods or services youployer’s plan for expenses incurred before the liable or which attaches to property you hold.provide to members, which you can use toplan was established are included in income. If the debt is a nonbusiness debt, report thepurchase goods or services offered by otherAmounts you receive under a reimburse- canceled amount on Form 1040, line 21. If it is amembers of the barter club. The club subtractsment plan that provides for the payment of un- business debt, report the amount on Schedule Ccredit units from your account when you receiveused reimbursement amounts in cash or other or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040) (or on Schedulegoods or services from other members. Youbenefits are included in your income. However, F (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From Farming, ifmust include in your income the value of thea qualified HSA distribution from a health flexible the debt is farm debt and you are a farmer).credit units that are added to your account, evenspending account or health reimbursement ac-
though you may not actually receive goods orcount can be made to a health savings account. Form 1099-C. If a Federal Governmentservices from other members until a later taxFor details, see Publication 969. agency, financial institution, or credit unionyear. cancels or forgives a debt you owe of $600 or Reimbursements received under your em-
more, you will receive a Form 1099-C, Cancella-ployer’s plan of the amount paid for nonprescrip- Example 4. You own a small apartment tion of Debt. The amount of the canceled debt istion medicines and drugs (such as allergy building. In return for 6 months rent-free use of shown in box 2.medicine, pain reliever, and cold medicine) are an apartment, an artist gives you a work of artnot included in income. However, reimburse- Interest included in canceled debt. If anyshe created. You must report as rental incomements of the amount paid for dietary supple- interest is forgiven and included in the amount ofon Schedule E (Form 1040) the fair market valuements (such as vitamins) that are merely canceled debt in box 2, the amount of interestof the artwork, and the artist must report asbeneficial to your general health are included in also will be shown in box 3. Whether or not youincome on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Formincome. must include the interest portion of the canceled1040) the fair rental value of the apartment.
debt in your income depends on whether the
Form 1099-B from barter exchange. If you interest would be deductible if you paid it. See
exchanged property or services through a barter Deductible debt under Exceptions, later.
Miscellaneous Income exchange, Form 1099-B, Proceeds from Broker If the interest would not be deductible (such
and Barter Exchange Transactions, or a similar as interest on a personal loan), include in your
This section discusses various types of income. statement from the barter exchange should be income the amount from Form 1099-C, box 2. If
You may have taxable income from certain sent to you by January 31, 2008. It should show the interest would be deductible (such as on a
transactions even if no money changes hands. the value of cash, property, services, credits, or business loan), include in your income the net
For example, you may have taxable income if scrip you received from exchanges during 2007. amount of the canceled debt (the amount shown
you lend money at a below-market interest rate The IRS also will receive a copy of Form 1099-B. in box 2 less the interest amount shown in box
or have a debt you owe canceled. 3).
Backup withholding. The income you re-
ceive from bartering generally is not subject to Discounted mortgage loan. If your financialBartering
regular income tax withholding. However, institution offers a discount for the early payment
backup withholding will apply in certain circum-Bartering is an exchange of property or services. of your mortgage loan, the amount of the dis-
stances to ensure that income tax is collected onYou must include in your income, at the time count is canceled debt. You must include the
this income.received, the fair market value of property or canceled amount in your income.
Page 18 Publication 525 (2007)

Page 19 of 40 of Publication 525 8:27 -  2-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Mortgage relief upon sale or other disposi- a. Under an agreement with an entity de- • The debt is canceled in a bankruptcy case
tion. If you are personally liable for a mortgage scribed in (1) or (2) that provided the under title 11 of the U.S. Code. See Publi-
(recourse debt), and you are relieved of the funds to the institution to make the loan, cation 908, Bankruptcy Tax Guide.
mortgage when you dispose of the property, you or • The debt is canceled when you are insol-may realize gain or loss up to the fair market b. As part of a program of the institution vent. However, you cannot exclude anyvalue of the property. To the extent the mort- designed to encourage students to amount of canceled debt that is more thangage discharge exceeds the fair market value of serve in occupations or areas with un- the amount by which you are insolvent.the property, it is income from discharge of in- met needs and under which the serv- See Publication 908.debtedness unless it qualifies for exclusion ices provided are for or under theunder Excluded debt, later. Report any income • The debt is qualified farm debt and is can-direction of a governmental unit or afrom discharge of indebtedness on nonbusiness celed by a qualified person. See chapter 3tax-exempt section 501(c)(3) organiza-debt that does not qualify for exclusion as other of Publication 225, Farmer’s Tax Guide.tion (defined later).income on Form 1040, line 21. • The debt is qualified real property busi- If you are not personally liable for a mort- A loan to refinance a qualified student loan ness debt. See chapter 5 of Publicationgage (nonrecourse debt), and you are relieved also will qualify if it was made by an educational 334.of the mortgage when you dispose of the prop- institution or a tax-exempt section 501(a) organi-erty (such as through foreclosure or reposses- • The cancellation is intended as a gift.zation under its program designed as describedsion), that relief is included in the amount you in (3)(b) above.realize. You may have a taxable gain if the An educational institution is an organization Host or Hostessamount you realize exceeds your adjusted basis with a regular faculty and curriculum and a regu-in the property. Report any gain on nonbusiness larly enrolled body of students in attendance at If you host a party at which sales are made, anyproperty as a capital gain. the place where the educational activities are gift you receive for giving the party is a paymentSee Foreclosures and Repossessions  in carried on. for helping a direct seller make sales. You mustPublication 544 for more information. A section 501(c)(3) organization is any cor- report it as income at its fair market value.
poration, community chest, fund, or foundationStockholder debt. If you are a stockholder in Your out-of-pocket party expenses are sub-
organized and operated exclusively for one ora corporation and the corporation cancels or ject to the 50% limit for meal and entertainment
more of the following purposes.forgives your debt to it, the canceled debt is a expenses. These expenses are deductible as
constructive distribution that is generally divi- miscellaneous itemized deductions subject to• Charitable.dend income to you. For more information, see the 2% of AGI limit on Schedule A (Form 1040),
• Educational.Publication 542, Corporations. but only up to the amount of income you receive
If you are a stockholder in a corporation and for giving the party.• Fostering national or international amateuryou cancel a debt owed to you by the corpora- For more information about the 50% limit forsports competition (but only if none of thetion, you generally do not realize income. This is meal and entertainment expenses, see 50%organization’s activities involve providingbecause the canceled debt is considered as a Limit in Publication 463.athletic facilities or equipment).contribution to the capital of the corporation
• Literary.equal to the amount of debt principal that you Life Insurance Proceeds
canceled. • Preventing cruelty to children or animals. Life insurance proceeds paid to you because ofRepayment of canceled debt. If you included • Religious. the death of the insured person are not taxablea canceled amount in your income and later pay unless the policy was turned over to you for a• Scientific.the debt, you may be able to file a claim for price. This is true even if the proceeds were paidrefund for the year the amount was included in • Testing for public safety. under an accident or health insurance policy orincome. You can file a claim on Form 1040X if an endowment contract.the statute of limitations for filing a claim is still Exception. You do have income if your stu-open. The statute of limitations generally does Proceeds not received in installments. Ifdent loan was made by an educational institu-not end until 3 years after the due date of your death benefits are paid to you in a lump sum ortion and is canceled because of services youoriginal return. other than at regular intervals, include in yourperformed for the institution or other organiza-
income only the benefits that are more than thetion that provided the funds.
amount payable to you at the time of the insured
Education loan repayment assistance.Exceptions person’s death. If the benefit payable at death is
Education loan repayments made to you by the not specified, you include in your income theThere are several exceptions to the inclusion of National Health Service Corps Loan Repayment benefit payments that are more than the presentcanceled debt in income. These are explained Program (NHSC Loan Repayment Program) or value of the payments at the time of death.next. a state education loan repayment program eligi-
Proceeds received in installments. If you re-ble for funds under the Public Health Service ActStudent loans. Certain student loans contain ceive life insurance proceeds in installments,are not taxable if you agree to provide primarya provision that all or part of the debt incurred to you can exclude part of each installment fromhealth services in health professional shortageattend the qualified educational institution will be your income.areas.canceled if you work for a certain period of time To determine the excluded part, divide the
in certain professions for any of a broad class of Deductible debt. You do not have income amount held by the insurance company (gener-
employers. from the cancellation of a debt if your payment of ally the total lump sum payable at the death of
You do not have income if your student loan the debt would be deductible. This exception the insured person) by the number of install-
is canceled after you agreed to this provision applies only if you use the cash method of ac- ments to be paid. Include anything over this
and then performed the services required. To counting. For more information, see chapter 5 of excluded part in your income as interest.
qualify, the loan must have been made by: Publication 334.
Example. The face amount of the policy is1. The Federal Government, a state or local Price reduced after purchase. Generally, if $75,000 and, as beneficiary, you choose to re-government, or an instrumentality, agency, the seller reduces the amount of debt you owe ceive 120 monthly installments of $1,000 each.or subdivision thereof, for property you purchased, you do not have The excluded part of each installment is $625
income from the reduction. The reduction of the2. A tax-exempt public benefit corporation ($75,000 ÷ 120), or $7,500 for an entire year.
debt is treated as a purchase price adjustmentthat has assumed control of a state, The rest of each payment, $375 a month (or
and reduces your basis in the property.county, or municipal hospital, and whose $4,500 for an entire year), is interest income to
employees are considered public employ- you.Excluded debt. Do not include a canceledees under state law, or debt in your gross income in the following situa- Installments for life. If, as the beneficiary
3. An educational institution: tions. under an insurance contract, you are entitled to
Publication 525 (2007) Page 19

Page 20 of 40 of Publication 525 8:27 -  2-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
receive the proceeds in installments for the rest Split-dollar life insurance. Generally, a has been certified by a physician as having an
split-dollar life insurance arrangement is an ar- illness or physical condition that can reasonablyof your life without a refund or period-certain
rangement between an owner and a non-owner be expected to result in death within 24 monthsguarantee, you figure the excluded part of each
of a life insurance contract under which either from the date of the certification.installment by dividing the amount held by the
party to the arrangement pays all or part of theinsurance company by your life expectancy. If Exclusion for chronic illness. If the insuredpremiums, and one of the parties paying thethere is a refund or period-certain guarantee, the is a chronically ill individual who is not terminallypremiums is entitled to recover all or part ofamount held by the insurance company for this ill, accelerated death benefits paid on the basisthose premiums from the proceeds of the con-purpose is reduced by the actuarial value of the of costs incurred for qualified long-term caretract. There are two mutually exclusive regimesguarantee. services are fully excludable. Accelerated deathto tax split-dollar life insurance arrangements.Surviving spouse. If your spouse died benefits paid on a per diem  or other periodic
before October 23, 1986, and insurance pro- basis are excludable up to a limit. This limit1. Under the economic benefit regime, the
ceeds paid to you because of the death of your applies to the total of the accelerated deathowner of the life insurance contract is
spouse are received in installments, you can benefits and any periodic payments receivedtreated as providing current life insurance
exclude up to $1,000 a year of the interest in- from long-term care insurance contracts. Forprotection and other taxable economic
cluded in the installments. If you remarry, you information on the limit and the definitions ofbenefits to the non-owner of the contract.
can continue to take the exclusion. chronically ill individual, qualified long-term care2. Under the loan regime, the non-owner of services, and long-term care insurance con-the life insurance contract is treated asEmployer-owned life insurance contract. If tracts, see Long-Term Care Insurance Con-loaning premium payments to the owner ofyou are the policyholder of an employer-owned tracts under Sickness and Injury Benefits,the contract.life insurance contract, you must include in in- earlier.
come any life insurance proceeds received that Only one of these regimes applies to any one
Exception. The exclusion does not apply toare more than the premiums and any other policy. For more information, see sections
any amount paid to a person (other than theamounts you paid on the policy. You are subject 1.61-22 and 1.7872-15 of the regulations.
insured) who has an insurable interest in the lifeto this rule if you have a trade or business, you
of the insured because the insured:own a life insurance contract on the life of your
employee, and you (or a related person) are a Endowment Contract Proceeds • Is a director, officer, or employee of the
beneficiary under the contract. person, orAn endowment contract is a policy under whichHowever, you may exclude the full amount of
• Has a financial interest in the person’syou are paid a specified amount of money on athe life insurance proceeds if the following apply. business.certain date unless you die before that date, in
which case, the money is paid to your desig-1. You provided written notice about the in-
nated beneficiary. Endowment proceeds paid insurance to the employee and the em- Form 8853. To claim an exclusion for acceler-a lump sum to you at maturity are taxable only ifployee agreed to be insured. ated death benefits made on a per diem or otherthe proceeds are more than the cost of the periodic basis, you must file Form 8853 with2. Either: policy. To determine your cost, subtract any your return. You do not have to file Form 8853 toamount that you previously received under thea. The employee was your employee exclude accelerated death benefits paid on thecontract and excluded from your income fromwithin the 12-month period before basis of actual expenses incurred.the total premiums (or other consideration) paiddeath, or, at the time the contract was for the contract. Include the part of the lump sumissued, was a director or highly com- Recoveriespayment that is more than your cost in yourpensated employee, or income. A recovery is a return of an amount you de-b. The amount is paid to the family or des- Endowment proceeds that you choose to ducted or took a credit for in an earlier year. Theignated beneficiary of the employee. receive in installments instead of a lump-sum most common recoveries are refunds, reim-payment at the maturity of the policy are taxed bursements, and rebates of deductions itemizedas an annuity. This is explained in Publication on Schedule A (Form 1040). You also may haveInterest option on insurance. If an insurance 575. For this treatment to apply, you must recoveries of non-itemized deductions (such ascompany pays you interest only on proceeds choose to receive the proceeds in installments payments on previously deducted bad debts)from life insurance left on deposit, the interest before receiving any part of the lump sum. This and recoveries of items for which you previouslyyou are paid is taxable. election must be made within 60 days after the claimed a tax credit.If your spouse died before October 23, 1986, lump-sum payment first becomes payable to
and you chose to receive only the interest from you. Tax benefit rule. You must include a recoveryyour insurance proceeds, the $1,000 interest in your income in the year you receive it up to theexclusion for a surviving spouse does not apply. amount by which the deduction or credit youIf you later decide to receive the proceeds from Accelerated Death Benefits took for the recovered amount reduced your taxthe policy in installments, you can take the inter- in the earlier year. For this purpose, any in-est exclusion from the time you begin to receive Certain amounts paid as accelerated death ben- crease to an amount carried over to the currentthe installments. efits under a life insurance contract or viatical year that resulted from the deduction or credit issettlement before the insured’s death are ex- considered to have reduced your tax in the ear-Surrender of policy for cash. If you surren- cluded from income if the insured is terminally or lier year.der a life insurance policy for cash, you must chronically ill.
include in income any proceeds that are more Federal income tax refund. Refunds of fed-
than the cost of the life insurance policy. In Viatical settlement. This is the sale or assign- eral income taxes are not included in your in-
general, your cost (or investment in the contract) ment of any part of the death benefit under a life come because they are never allowed as a
is the total of premiums that you paid for the life insurance contract to a viatical settlement pro- deduction from income.
insurance policy, less any refunded premiums, vider. A viatical settlement provider is a person
State tax refund. If you received a state orrebates, dividends, or unrepaid loans that were who regularly engages in the business of buying
local income tax refund (or credit or offset) innot included in your income. or taking assignment of life insurance contracts
2007, you generally must include it in income ifon the lives of insured individuals who are termi-You should receive a Form 1099-R showing
you deducted the tax in an earlier year. Thenally or chronically ill and who meets the require-the total proceeds and the taxable part. Report
payer should send Form 1099-G, Certain Gov-ments of section 101(g)(2)(B) of the Internalthese amounts on lines 16a and 16b of Form
ernment Payments, to you by January 31, 2008.Revenue Code.1040 or on lines 12a and 12b of Form 1040A.
The IRS also will receive a copy of the Form
For information on when the proceeds Exclusion for terminal illness. Accelerated 1099-G. Use the worksheet in the 2007 Form
are excluded from income, see Accel- death benefits are fully excludable if the insured 1040 instructions for line 10 to figure the amount
erated Death Benefits, later.
TIP
is a terminally ill individual. This is a person who (if any) to include in your income. See Itemized
Page 20 Publication 525 (2007)

Page 21 of 40 of Publication 525 8:27 -  2-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Deduction Recoveries, later, for when you must You must allocate the $400 refund between the amount of tax shown on your 2006
use Worksheet 2 on page 23 of this publication. 2006 and 2007, the years in which you paid the Form 1040, line 46.
After 2003, you could choose to deduct for a tax on which the refund is based. You paid 75% 8. You could be claimed as a dependent bytax year either: ($3,000 ÷ $4,000) of the estimated tax in 2006, someone else in 2006.so 75% of the $400 refund, or $300, is for• State and local income taxes, or 9. You had to use the Itemized Deductionsamounts you paid in 2006 and is a recovery
• State and local general sales taxes. Worksheet in the 2006 Schedule A instruc-item. If all of the $300 is a taxable recovery item,
tions because your 2006 adjusted grossyou will include $300 on Form 1040, line 10, for
For 2007, the maximum refund that you may income was over $150,500 ($75,250 if2007, and attach a copy of your computation
have to include in income is limited to the excess married filing separately) and both of theshowing why that amount is less than the
of the tax you chose to deduct for that year over following apply.amount shown on the Form 1099-G you re-
the tax you did not choose to deduct for that ceived from the state.
a. You could not deduct all of the amountyear. The balance ($100) of the $400 refund is for
on the 2006 Itemized Deductions Work-your January 2007 estimated tax payment.Example 1. For 2006 you can choose an sheet, line 1.When you figure your deduction for state and$11,000 state income tax deduction or a local income taxes paid during 2007, you will b. The amount on line 8 of that 2006 work-$10,000 state general sales tax deduction. You reduce the $1,000 paid in January by $100. Your sheet would be more than the amountchoose to deduct the state income tax. In 2007 deduction for state and local income taxes paid on line 4 of that worksheet if the amountyou receive a $2,500 state income tax refund. during 2007 will include the January net amount on line 4 were reduced by 80% of theThe maximum refund that you may have to in- of $900 ($1,000 − $100), plus any estimated refund you received in 2007.clude in income is $1,000, since you could have state income taxes paid in 2007 for 2007, anddeducted $10,000 in state general sales tax. any state income tax withheld during 2007.
If you also recovered an amount de-Example 2. For 2006 you can choose an Deductions not itemized. If you did not item- ducted as a non-itemized deduction,$11,500 state general sales tax deduction ize deductions for the year for which you re- figure the amount of that recovery toCAUTION
!
based on actual expenses or an $11,200 state ceived the recovery of an expense that was include in your income and add it to your ad-income tax deduction. You choose to deduct the deductible only if you itemized, do not include justed gross income before applying the rulesgeneral sales tax deduction. In 2007 you return any of the recovery amount in your income. explained here. See Non-Itemized Deductionan item you had purchased and receive a $500
Recoveries, later.sales tax refund. In 2007 you also receive a Example. You claimed the standard deduc-$1,500 state income tax refund. The maximum tion on your 2006 federal income tax return. In Total recovery included in income. If yourefund that you may have to include in income is 2007 you received a refund of your 2006 state recover any amount that you deducted in an$500, since it is less than the excess of the tax income tax. Do not report any of the refund as earlier year on Schedule A (Form 1040), youdeducted ($11,500) over the tax you did not income because you did not itemize deductions generally must include the full amount of thechoose to deduct ($11,200 − $1,500 = $9,700). for 2006. recovery in your income in the year you receiveSince you did not choose to deduct the state it. This rule applies if, for the earlier year, all ofincome tax, you do not include the state income the following statements are true.tax refund in income. Itemized Deduction Recoveries
1. Your itemized deductions exceeded theMortgage interest refund. If you received a The following discussion explains how to deter- standard deduction by at least the amountrefund or credit in 2007 of mortgage interest paid mine the amount to include in your income from of the recovery. (If your itemized deduc-in an earlier year, the amount should be shown a recovery of an amount deducted in an earlier tions did not exceed the standard deduc-in box 3 of your Form 1098, Mortgage Interest year as an itemized deduction. However, you tion by at least the amount of the recovery,Statement. Do not subtract the refund amount generally do not need to use this discussion if see Standard deduction limit, later.)from the interest you paid in 2007. You may the recovery is for state or local income taxeshave to include it in your income under the rules 2. You had taxable income. (If you had nopaid in 2006. Instead, use the worksheet in theexplained in the following discussions. taxable income, see Negative taxable in-2007 Form 1040 instructions for line 10 to figure
come, later.)Interest on recovery. Interest on any of the the amount (if any) to include in your income.
amounts you recover must be reported as inter- You cannot use the Form 1040 worksheet 3. Your deduction for the item recoveredest income in the year received. For example, and must use this discussion if any of the follow- equals or exceeds the amount recovered.report any interest you received on state or local ing statements are true. (If your deduction was less than theincome tax refunds on Form 1040, line 8a. amount recovered, see Recovery limited to1. The recovery is for a tax year other than deduction, later.)Recovery and expense in same year. If the 2006.refund or other recovery and the expense occur 4. Your itemized deductions were not subject2. The recovery is for a deducted item otherin the same year, the recovery reduces the de- to the limit on itemized deductions. (If yourthan state or local income taxes, such as aduction or credit and is not reported as income. deductions were limited, see Itemized de-general sales tax or real property tax re- ductions limited, later.)Recovery for 2 or more years. If you receive fund.a refund or other recovery that is for amounts 5. You had no unused tax credits. (If you had3. On your 2006 Form 1040, line 42 wasyou paid in 2 or more separate years, you must unused tax credits, see Unused tax cred-more than line 41.allocate, on a pro rata  basis, the recovered its, later.)amount between the years in which you paid it. 4. You received a refund of state and local 6. You were not subject to alternative mini-This allocation is necessary to determine the income taxes in 2007 that was more than mum tax. (If you were subject to alternativeamount of recovery from any earlier years and to the excess of your 2006 state and local minimum tax, see Subject to alternativedetermine the amount, if any, of your allowable income tax deduction over the amount you minimum tax, later.)deduction for this item for the current year. could have deducted for your 2006 state
If any of the above statements is not true,and local general sales tax.Example. You paid 2006 estimated state see Total recovery not included in income, later.income tax of $4,000 in four equal payments. 5. You made your last payment of 2006 state
You made your fourth payment in January 2007. State tax refund. In addition to the previousor local estimated tax in 2007.
You had no state income tax withheld during six items, you must include in your income the6. You owed alternative minimum tax for2006. In 2007, you received a $400 tax refund full amount of a refund of state or local income2006.based on your 2006 state income tax return. You tax or general sales tax if the excess of the tax
claimed itemized deductions each year on your 7. You could not deduct all your tax credits you deducted over the tax you did not d educt is
federal income tax return. for 2006 because their total was more than more than the refund of the tax deducted.
Publication 525 (2007) Page 21

Page 22 of 40 of Publication 525 8:27 -  2-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If the refund is more than the excess, see was due to your state income tax refund. Your reimbursement from your medical insuranc e for
Total recovery not included in income, later. state income tax was more than your state gen- your 2006 expenses. The only amount of the
eral sales tax by $600. The amount you report $500 reimbursement that must be included inWhere to report. Enter your state or local as a state tax refund on Form 1040, line 10, is your income for 2007 is $200—the amount ac-income tax refund on Form 1040, line 10, and $300 [($500 ÷ $2,500) × $1,500]. The balance of tually deducted.the total of all other recoveries as other income the taxable recoveries, $1,200, is reported ason Form 1040, line 21. You cannot use Form other income on Form 1040, line 21. Itemized deductions limited. You were sub-1040A or Form 1040EZ. ject to the limit on itemized deductions in theStandard deduction limit. You generally are earlier year if your adjusted gross income (AGI)Example. For 2006, you filed a joint return. allowed to claim the standard deduction if you do was more than a base amount. For example,Your taxable income was $60,000 and you were not itemize your deductions. Only your itemized this amount was:not entitled to any tax credits. Your standard deductions that are more than your standard
deduction was $10,300, and you had itemized deduction are subject to the recovery rule (un- • For 2006, $150,500 ($75,250 if married
deductions of $12,000. In 2007, you received less you are required to itemize your deduc- filing separately),
the following recoveries for amounts deducted tions). If your total deductions on the earlier year • For 2005, $145,950 ($72,975 if marriedon your 2006 return: return were not more than your income for that filing separately), andyear, include in your income this year the lesser
Medical expenses .............. $200 of: • For 2004, $142,700 ($71,350 if marriedState and local income tax refund .... 4 0 0 filing separately).• Your recoveries, orRefund of mortgage interest ........ 3 2 5
If the limit applied, your itemized deductionsTotal recoveries ................ $925 • The amount by which your itemized de- were reduced by the smaller of the followingductions exceeded the standard deduc-None of the recoveries were more than the amounts.tion.deductions taken for 2006. The difference be-
tween the state and local income tax you de- • 3% of the amount by which your AGI ex-
Standard deduction for earlier years. Toducted and your local general sales tax was ceeded the base amount.
determine if amounts recovered in 2007 must bemore than $400. • 80% of your otherwise allowable deduc-included in your income, you must know theYour total recoveries are less than the tions other than medical and dental ex-standard deduction for your filing status for theamount by which your itemized deductions ex- penses, investment interest expense,year the deduction was claimed. The standardceeded the standard deduction ($12,000 − nonbusiness casualty and theft losses,deduction tables for 2006, 2005, and 2004 are$10,300 = $1,700), so you must include your and gambling losses.shown in Tables 2, 3, and 4. If you need thetotal recoveries in your income for 2007. Report
standard deduction amounts for years beforethe state and local income tax refund of $400 on In 2006, your itemized deductions were reduced
2004, see the copy of your return for that year.    Form 1040, line 10, and the balance of your by only 2/3 of the smaller amount.
recoveries, $525, on Form 1040, line 21. If the amount you recovered was deducted inExample. You filed a joint return for 2006
a year in which your itemized deductions wereTotal recovery not included in income. If with taxable income of $45,000. Your itemized
limited, you must include it in income up to theone or more of the six statements listed in the deductions were $10,650. The standard deduc-
difference between the amount of itemized de-preceding discussion is not true, you may be tion that you could have claimed was $10,300. In
ductions actually allowed that year and theable to exclude at least part of the recovery from 2007, you recovered $2,100 of your 2006 item-
amount you would have been allowed (theyour income. If statements (4), (5), and (6) are ized deductions. None of the recoveries were
greater of your itemized deductions or your stan-true (your itemized deductions were not limited, more than the actual deductions for 2006. In-
dard deduction) if you had figured your deduc-you had no unused tax credits, and you were not clude $350 of the recoveries in your 2007 in-
tions using only the net amount of the recoverysubject to the alternative minimum tax), you can come. This is the smaller of your recoveries
item.use Worksheet 2 on the next page to determine ($2,100) or the amount by which your itemized
the part of your recovery to include in your in- To determine the part of the recovery youdeductions were more than the standard deduc-
come. You also can use Worksheet 2 to deter- must include in income, follow the two stepstion ($10,650 − $10,300 = $350).
mine the part of a state tax refund (discussed below.Negative taxable income. If your taxable in-earlier) to include in income.
come was a negative amount, reduce the recov- 1. Figure the greater of:
Allocating the included part. If you are not ery you must otherwise include in your income
required to include all of your recoveries in your a. The standard deduction for the earlierby the negative amount. For example, line 42
income, and you have both a state income tax year, orwas more than line 41 on your 2006 Form 1040.
refund and other itemized deduction recoveries, b. The amount of itemized deductions youyou must allocate the taxable recoveries be- Example. The facts are the same as in the would have been allowed for the earliertween the state income tax refund you report on previous example except line 42 was $200 more year (after taking into account the limitForm 1040, line 10, and the amount you report than line 41 on your 2006 Form 1040 giving you on itemized deductions) if you had fig-as other income on Form 1040, line 21. If you do a negative taxable income of $200. You must ured them using only the net amount ofnot use Worksheet 2, make the allocation as include $150 in your 2007 income, rather than the recovery item. The net amount isfollows. $350. the amount you actually paid reduced
by the recovery amount.1. Divide your state income tax refund by the Recovery limited to deduction. You do not
total of all your itemized deduction recov- include in your income any amount of your re- Note. If you were required to itemize your
eries. covery that is more than the amount you de- deductions in the earlier year, use step 1(b)
ducted in the earlier year. The amount you and not step 1(a).2. Multiply the amount of taxable recoveries include in your income is limited to the smallerby the percentage in (1). This is the 2. Subtract the amount in step 1 from theof:amount you report as a state income tax amount of itemized deductions actually al-
refund. • The amount deducted on Schedule A lowed in the earlier year after applying the
(Form 1040), or limit on itemized deductions.3. Subtract the result in (2) above from the
amount of taxable recoveries. This is the • The amount recovered. The result of step 2 is the amount of the recov-
amount you report as other income. ery to include in your income for the year you
receive the recovery. If your taxable income forExample. During 2006, you paid $1,700 for
the earlier year was a negative amount, reduceExample. In 2007 you recovered $2,500 of medical expenses. From this amount you sub-
your recovery by the negative amount.your 2006 itemized deductions, but the recov- tracted $1,500, which was 7.5% of your adjusted
If you had unused tax credits in the earliereries you must include in your 2007 income are gross income. Your actual medical expense de-
year, see Unused tax credits on page 24.only $1,500. Of the $2,500 you recovered, $500 duction was $200. In 2007, you received a $500
Page 22 Publication 525 (2007)

Page 23 of 40 of Publication 525 8:27 -  2-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet 2. Recoveries of Itemized Deductions
To determine whether you should complete this worksheet to figure the part of a recovery amount to include in
income on your 2007 Form 1040, see Total recovery not included in income under Itemized Deduction Recoveries. If
you recovered amounts from more than one year, such as a state income tax refund from 2006 and a casualty loss
reimbursement from 2005, complete a separate worksheet for each year. Use information from Schedule A (Form
1040) for the year the expense was deducted.
A recovery is included in income only to the extent of the deduction amount that reduced your tax in the prior year
(year of the deduction). If you were subject to the alternative minimum tax or your tax credits reduced your tax to
zero, see Unused tax credits and Subject to alternative minimum tax under Itemized Deduction Recoveries. If your
recovery was for an itemized deduction that was limited, you should read Itemized deductions limited under Itemized
Deduction Recoveries.
1. State/local income tax refund or credit
1 ....................................... 1 .
2. Enter the total of all other Schedule A refunds or reimbursements
(excluding the amount you entered on line 1)2 .................................. 2 .
3. Add lines 1 and 2 ........................................................ 3 .
4. Itemized deductions for the prior year
(for example, line 28 of Schedule A for 2006) .................. 4 .
5. Enter any amount previously refunded to you
(do not enter an amount from line 1 or line 2) .................. 5 .
6. Subtract line 5 from line 4 ................................. 6 .
7. Standard deduction for the prior year. (The standard deduction
amounts for 2006, 2005, and 2004 are shown in Tables 2, 3, and 4.) 7.
8. Subtract line 7 from line 6. If the result is zero or less, stop here.
The amounts on lines 1 and 2 are not taxable .................................. 8 .
9. Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 8 ........................................... 9 .
10. Taxable income for prior year 3 (for example, line 43, Form 1040 for
2006) ................................................ 1 0 .
11. Amount to include in income for 2007:
• If line 10 is zero or more, enter the amount from line 9.
• If line 10 is a negative amount, add lines 9 and 10 and enter the result
(but not less than zero).4 ............................................... 1 1 .
If line 11 equals line 3—
Enter the amount from line 1 on line 10, Form 1040.
Enter the amount from line 2 on line 21, Form 1040.
If line 11 is less than line 3 and either line 1 or line 2 is zero—
If there is an amount on line 1, enter the amount from line 11 on line 10, Form 1040.
If there is an amount on line 2, enter the amount from line 11 on line 21, Form 1040.
If line 11 is less than line 3, and there are amounts on both lines 1 and 2, complete the following
worksheet.
A. Divide the amount on line 1 by the amount on line 3. Enter the
percentage ......................................... A .
B. Multiply the amount on line 11 by the percentage on line A.
Enter the result here and on line 10, Form 1040 ............................... B .
C. Subtract the amount on line B from the amount on line 11.
Enter the result here and on line 21, Form 1040 ............................... C .
1 Do not enter more than the amount deducted for the prior year. Do not enter more than the excess of your state and local income tax deduction over your
state and local general sales taxes you could have deducted.
2 Do not enter more than the amount deducted for the prior year. If you deducted state and local general sales taxes and received a refund of those taxes,
include the amount on line 2, but do not enter more than the excess of your sales tax deduction over your state and local income tax you could have
deducted.
3 If taxable income is a negative amount (for example, line 42 was more than line 41 on your 2006 Form 1040), enter that amount in brackets. Do not enter
zero unless your taxable income is exactly zero. Taxable income will have to be adjusted for any net operating loss carryover. For more information, see
Publication 536, Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for Individuals, Estates, and Trusts.
4 For example, $700 + ($400) = $300.
Publication 525 (2007) Page 23

Page 24 of 40 of Publication 525 8:27 -  2-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 2. 2006 Standard Deduction Tables
Caution: If you are married filing a separate return and your
spouse itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien, you
cannot take the standard deduction even if you were born before
January 2, 1942, or you are blind.
Table I. Standard Deduction Chart for Most People*
Table III. Standard Deduction Worksheet forTHEN your standard Dependents*IF your filing status is . . . deduction is . . .
Single or Married filing separately $5,150 If you were born before January 2, 1942, or you were blind, check the
correct number of boxes below. Then go to the worksheet.Married filing joint return or Qualifying 10,300
widow(er) with dependent child
You Born before
Head of household 7,550 January 2, 1942 /H18554 Blind /H18554
Your spouse, if* DO NOT use this chart if you were born before January 2, 1942, or you are
claiming spouse’s Born beforeblind, OR if someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if
married filing jointly). Use Table II or III instead. exemption January 2, 1942 /H18554 Blind /H18554
Table II. Standard Deduction Chart for People Who Total number of boxes you checked ____
Were Born Before January 2, 1942, or Were Blind*
1. Enter your earned income (defined below). If
none, enter -0- 1.Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the chart.
2.  Additional amount 2. $300You Born before
January 2, 1942 /H18554Blind /H18554 3.  Add lines 1 and 2 3.Your spouse, if claiming Born before
spouse’s exemption January 2, 1942 /H18554Blind /H18554 4. Minimum standard deduction 4. $850
Total number of boxes you checked ____ 5. Enter the larger of line 3 or line 4 5.
IF your AND the number on THEN your 6. Enter the amount shown below for your filing 6.
filing status is . . . the line above is . . . standard deduction status.is . . .
• Single or Married filing separately—$5,150
Single 1 $ 6,400 • Married filing jointly—$10,300
2 7,650 • Head of household—$7,550
Married filing joint return or 1 11,300 7. Standard deduction.Qualifying widow(er) with 2 12,300
a. Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6. If born after 7a.dependent child 3 13,300
January 1, 1942, and not blind, stop here. This4 14,300
is your standard deduction. Otherwise, go on toMarried filing separate return 1 6,150 line 7b.2 7,150 b.If born before January 2, 1942, or blind, multiply 7b.3 8,150
$1,250 ($1,000 if married) by the number in the4 9,150
box above.
Head of household 1 8,800 c. Add lines 7a and 7b. This is your standard 7c.2 10,050 deduction for 2006.
*If someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if married filing Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees, andjointly), use Table III instead.
other compensation received for personal services you performed. It
also includes any amount received as a scholarship that you must
include in your income.
*Use this worksheet ONLY if someone else can claim an exemption for you (or
your spouse if married filing jointly).
For more information on this computation, $5,000 refund that Eileen must include in her If Eileen had used the $35,000 net amount  of
see Revenue Ruling 93-75. This ruling is in income for 2007. state income tax to figure her itemized deduc-
Cumulative Bulletin 1993-2. tions for 2006, the deduction allowed would
AGI for 2006 ................ $1,150,500 have been $16,333. This is her otherwise allow-
State income taxes paid in 2006 . . . $40,000Example. Eileen Martin is single. She had able deduction of $35,000 reduced by $18,6673% reduction (amount on an AGI of $1,150,500 and itemized her deduc- (($35,000 × 80% = $28,000) − ($28,000 ÷ 3.0)).2006 Itemized Deductiontions on her federal income tax return for 2006. By deducting the full $20,000 paid in 2006, sheWorksheet, line 8)She was not subject to alternative minimum tax derived a tax benefit of $3,667 ($20,000 − [($1,150,500 − $150,500) × 3%] . . . $30,000
and was not entitled to any credit against income $16,333). Therefore, only $3,667 of the $5,00080% reduction (amount on 
tax. Her only allowable deduction was $40,000 refund is included in her income for 2007.2006 Itemized Deduction
of state income taxes. Her state general sales Worksheet, line 4)
($40,000 × 80%) ............. $32,000tax was $20,000. Eileen deducted only $20,000 Unused tax credits. If you recover an item
Lesser of 3% reduction orof her state income taxes in 2006 because her deducted in an earlier year in which you had80% reduction ........ $30,000otherwise allowable deductions of $40,000 were unused tax credits, you must refigure the earlierLimit reduced (1/3)....... −$10,000reduced by $20,000. In 2007, she received a year’s tax to determine if you must include the2006 deduction (amount on $5,000 refund of her state income taxes for recovery in your income. To do this, add the2006 Itemized Deduction2006. amount of the recovery to your earlier year’sWorksheet, line 12)
taxable income and refigure the tax and theThe following shows how Eileen figured the ($40,000 − $20,000) .......... $20,000
Refund received in 2007 of 2006 credits on the recomputed amount. If the recom-$20,000 reduction and other amounts from the
state income tax ............. $ 5,000 puted tax, after application of the credits, is moreItemized Deduction Worksheet in the 2006
Net amount of 2006 state income than the actual tax in the earlier year, include theSchedule A (Form 1040) instructions. These
tax ($40,000 − $5,000) ......... $35,000 recovery in your income up to the amount of theamounts are needed to figure the part of the
Page 24 Publication 525 (2007)

Page 25 of 40 of Publication 525 8:27 -  2-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 3. 2005 Standard Deduction Tables
Caution: If you are married filing a separate return and your
spouse itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien, you
cannot take the standard deduction even if you were born before
January 2, 1941, or you are blind.
Table I. Standard Deduction Chart for Most People*
Table III. Standard Deduction Worksheet forTHEN your standard Dependents*IF your filing status is . . . deduction is . . .
Single or Married filing separately $5,000 If you were born before January 2, 1941, or you were blind, check the
correct number of boxes below. Then go to the worksheet.Married filing joint return or Qualifying 10,000
widow(er) with dependent child
You Born before
Head of household 7,300 January 2, 1941 /H18554 Blind /H18554
Your spouse, if* DO NOT use this chart if you were born before January 2, 1941, or you are
claiming spouse’s Born beforeblind, OR if someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if
married filing jointly). Use Table II or III instead. exemption January 2, 1941 /H18554 Blind /H18554
Table II. Standard Deduction Chart for People Who Total number of boxes you checked ____
Were Born Before January 2, 1941, or Were Blind*
1. Enter your earned income (defined below). If
none, enter -0- 1.Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the chart.
2.  Additional amount 2. $250You Born before
January 2, 1941 /H18554Blind /H18554 3.  Add lines 1 and 2 3.Your spouse, if claiming Born before
spouse’s exemption January 2, 1941 /H18554Blind /H18554 4. Minimum standard deduction 4. $800
Total number of boxes you checked _____ 5. Enter the larger of line 3 or line 4 5.
THEN your 6. Enter the amount shown below for your filing 6.
IF your AND the number on standard deduction status.filing status is . . . the line above is . . . is . . .
• Single or Married filing separately—$5,000
Single 1 $ 6,250 • Married filing jointly—$10,000
2 7,500 • Head of household—$7,300
Married filing joint return or 1 11,000 7. Standard deduction.Qualifying widow(er) with 2 12,000
a. Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6. If born after 7a.dependent child 3 13,000
January 1, 1941, and not blind, stop here. This4 14,000
is your standard deduction. Otherwise, go on toMarried filing separate return 1 6,000 line 7b.2 7,000 b. If born before January 2, 1941, or blind, multiply 7b.3 8,000
$1,250 ($1,000 if married) by the number in the4 9,000
box above.
Head of household 1 8,550 c. Add lines 7a and 7b. This is your standard 7c.2 9,800 deduction for 2005.
*If someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if married filing Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees, andjointly), use Table III instead.
other compensation received for personal services you performed. It
also includes any amount received as a scholarship that you must
include in your income.
*Use this worksheet ONLY if someone else can claim an exemption for you (or
your spouse if married filing jointly).
deduction that reduced the tax in the earlier deductions. She reduces her 2006 itemized de- benefit from the deduction and you mu st include
the recovery in your income up to the amount ofductions by $1,000 and recomputes that year’syear. For this purpose, any increase to a credit
the deduction that reduced your tax in the earliertax on taxable income of $6,260. However, thecarried over to the current year that resulted
year.child care credit exceeds the recomputed tax offrom deducting the recovered amount in the
$628. Jean’s tax liability for 2006 is not changedearlier year is considered to have reduced your
by reducing her deductions by the recovery. Shetax in the earlier year. If the recovery is for an
Non-Itemized Deductiondid not have a tax benefit from the recovereditemized deduction claimed in a year in which
Recoveriesdeduction and does not include any of the recov-the deductions were limited, see Itemized de- ery in her income for 2007.ductions limited, earlier. This section discusses recovery of deductions
If your tax, after application of the credits, other than those deducted on Schedule A (FormSubject to alternative minimum tax. If you 1040).does not change, you did not have a tax benefit were subject to the alternative minimum tax in
from the deduction. Do not include the recovery the year of the deduction, you will have to re- Total recovery included in income. If youin your income. compute your tax for the earlier year to deter- recover an amount that you deducted in an ear-
mine if the recovery must be included in your lier year in figuring your adjusted gross income,Example. In 2006, Jean Black filed as head income. This will require a recomputation of your you generally must include the full amount of theof household and itemized her deductions. Her regular tax, as shown in the preceding example, recovery in your income in the year received.taxable income was $5,260 and her tax was and a recomputation of your alternative mini-
$528. She claimed a child care credit of $1,200. mum tax. If inclusion of the recovery does not Total recovery not included in income. If
The credit reduced her tax to zero and she had change your total tax, you do not include the any part of the deduction you took for the recov-
an unused tax credit of $672 ($1,200 − $528). In recovery in your income. However, if your total ered amount did not reduce your tax, you may
2007, Jean recovered $1,000 of her itemized tax increases by any amount, you received a tax be able to exclude at least part of the recovery
Publication 525 (2007) Page 25

Page 26 of 40 of Publication 525 8:27 -  2-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 4. 2004 Standard Deduction Tables
Caution: If you are married filing a separate return and your
spouse itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien, you
cannot take the standard deduction even if you were born before
January 2, 1940, or you are blind.
Table I. Standard Deduction Chart for Most People*
Table III. Standard Deduction Worksheet forTHEN your standard Dependents*IF your filing status is . . . deduction is . . .
Single or Married filing separately $4,850 If you were born before January 2, 1940, or you were blind, check the
correct number of boxes below. Then go to the worksheet.Married filing joint return or Qualifying 9,700
widow(er) with dependent child
You Born before
Head of household 7,150 January 2, 1940 /H18554 Blind /H18554
Your spouse, if* DO NOT use this chart if you were born before January 2, 1940, or you are
claiming spouse’s Born beforeblind, OR if someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if
married filing jointly). Use Table II or III instead. exemption January 2, 1940 /H18554 Blind /H18554
Table II. Standard Deduction Chart for People Who Total number of boxes you checked ____
Were Born Before January 2, 1940, or Were Blind*
1. Enter your earned income (defined below). If
none, enter -0- 1.Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the chart.
2.  Additional amount 2. $250You Born before
January 2, 1940 /H18554Blind /H18554 3.  Add lines 1 and 2 3.Your spouse, if claiming Born before
spouse’s exemption January 2, 1940 /H18554Blind /H18554 4. Minimum standard deduction 4. $800
Total number of boxes you checked ____ 5. Enter the larger of line 3 or line 4 5.
THEN your 6. Enter the amount shown below for your filing 6.
IF your AND the number on standard deduction status.filing status is . . . the line above is . . . is . . .
• Single or Married filing separately—$4,850
Single 1 6,050 • Married filing jointly or Qualifying widow(er)
2 7,250 with dependent child—$9,700
• Head of household—$7,150Married filing joint return or 1 10,650
Qualifying widow(er) with 2 11,600
7. Standard deduction.dependent child 3 12,550
a. Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6. If born after 7a.4 13,500
January 1, 1940, and not blind, stop here. ThisMarried filing separate return 1 5,800 is your standard deduction. Otherwise, go on to2 6,750 line 7b.3 7,700
b. If born before January 2, 1940, or blind, multiply 7b.4 8,650
$1,200 ($950 if married or qualifying widow(er)
Head of household 1 8,350 with dependent child) by the number in the box2 9,550 above.
c. Add lines 7a and 7b. This is your standard 7c.*If someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if married filing
jointly), use Table III instead. deduction for 2004.
Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees, and
other compensation received for personal services you performed. It
also includes any amount received as a scholarship that you must
include in your income.
*Use this worksheet ONLY if someone else can claim an exemption for you (or
your spouse if married filing jointly).
from your income. You must include the recov- credits on the recomputed amount. If the recom- you must increase your 2007 tax by the amount
puted tax, after application of the credits, is moreery in your income only up to the amount of the of the recovery, up to the amount by which the
than the actual tax in the earlier year, include thededuction that reduced your tax in the year of credit reduced your tax in the earlier year. You
recovery in your income up to the amount of thethe deduction. (See Tax benefit rule, earlier.) had a recovery if there was a downward price
deduction that reduced the tax in the earlier adjustment or similar adjustment on the item for
year. For this purpose, any increase to a credit which you claimed a credit.Negative taxable income. If your taxable in-
carried over to the current year that resultedcome was a negative amount, reduce the recov- This rule does not apply to the investmentfrom deducting the recovered amount in theery by that negative amount. For example, line credit or the foreign tax credit. Recoveries ofearlier year is considered to have reduced your42 was more than line 41 on your 2006 Form these credits are covered by other provisions oftax in the earlier year.1040. Include this reduced recovery in your in- the law. See Publication 514, Foreign Tax CreditIf your tax, after application of the credits,come. for Individuals, or Form 4255, Recapture of In-does not change, you did not have a tax benefit vestment Credit, for details.from the deduction. Do not include the recoveryUnused tax credits. If you recover an item in your income.deducted in an earlier year in which you had Survivor Benefits
unused tax credits, you must refigure the earlier
year’s tax to determine if you must include the Generally, payments made by or for an em-Amounts Recovered for Credits
recovery in your income. To do this, add the ployer because of an employee’s death must be
amount of the recovery to your earlier year’s included in income. The following discussionsIf you received a recovery in 2007 for an item for
taxable income and refigure the tax and the which you claimed a tax credit in an earlier year, explain the tax treatment of certa in payments
Page 26 Publication 525 (2007)

Page 27 of 40 of Publication 525 8:27 -  2-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
made to survivors. For additional information, Governmental program. If you contribute taxable only if the amounts you receive are more
to a governmental unemployment compensa- than your total payments into the fund. Reportsee Publication 559.
tion program and your contributions are not de- the taxable amount on Form 1040, line 21.
ductible, amounts you receive under theLump-sum payments. Lump-sum payments Payments by a union. Benefits paid to you asprogram are not included as unemploymentyou receive from a decedent’s employer as the an unemployed member of a union from regularcompensation until you recover your contribu-surviving spouse or beneficiary may be accrued union dues are included in your income on Formtions. If you deducted all of your contributions tosalary payments; distributions from employee 1040, line 21. However, if you contribute to athe program, the entire amount you receiveprofit-sharing, pension, annuity, or stock bonus special union fund and your payments to theunder the program is included in your income.plans; or other items that should be treated sep- fund are not deductible, the unemployment ben-arately for tax purposes. The tax treatment of Repayment of unemployment compensa- efits you receive from the fund are includible inthese lump-sum payments depends on the type tion. If you repaid in 2007 unemployment your income only to the extent they are moreof payment. compensation you received in 2007, subtract than your contributions.
the amount you repaid from the total amount youSalary or wages. Salary or wages received Guaranteed annual wage. Payments you re-received and enter the difference on line 19 ofafter the death of the employee are usually ordi- ceive from your employer during periods of un-Form 1040, line 13 of Form 1040A, or line 3 ofnary income to you. employment, under a union agreement thatForm 1040EZ. On the dotted line next to your
Qualified employee retirement plans. guarantees you full pay during the year, areentry, enter “Repaid” and the amount you re-
Lump-sum distributions from qualified employee taxable as wages. Include them on line 7 ofpaid. If you repaid unemployment compensation
retirement plans are subject to special tax treat- Form 1040 or Form 1040A or on line 1 of Formin 2007 that you included in your income in an
1040EZ.ment. For information on these distributions, see earlier year, you can deduct the amount repaid
Publication 575 (or Publication 721, if you are on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 23, if you item- State employees. Payments similar to athe survivor of a federal employee or retiree). ize deductions. If the amount is more than state’s unemployment compensation may be$3,000, see Repayments, later. made by the state to its employees who are notPublic safety officer killed in the line of duty. Tax withholding. You can choose to have covered by the state’s unemployment compen-If you are a survivor of a public safety officer who federal income tax withheld from your unem- sation law. Although the payments are fully tax-was killed in the line of duty, you may be able to ployment compensation. To make this choice, able, do not report them as unemploymentexclude from income certain amounts you re- complete Form W-4V, Voluntary Withholding compensation. Report these payments on Formceive. For this purpose, the term public safety Request, and give it to the paying office. Tax will 1040, line 21.officer includes law enforcement officers, be withheld at 10% of your payment.firefighters, chaplains, and rescue squad and
Welfare and OtherIf you do not choose to have tax with-ambulance crew members. For more informa-
held from your unemployment com-tion, see Publication 559. Public Assistance Benefits
pensation, you may be liable forCAUTION
!
Do not include in your income governmentalestimated tax. For more information on esti-Unemployment Benefits benefit payments from a public welfare fundmated tax, see Publication 505, Tax Withholding
based upon need, such as payments due toand Estimated Tax.The tax treatment of unemployment benefits you
blindness. Payments from a state fund for thereceive depends on the type of program paying
victims of crime should not be included in theSupplemental unemployment benefits.the benefits.
victims’ incomes if they are in the nature ofBenefits received from an employer-financed
welfare payments. Do not deduct medical ex-fund (to which the employees did not contribute)Unemployment compensation. You must in- penses that are reimbursed by such a fund. Youare not unemployment compensation. They areclude in your income all unemployment compen- must include in your income any welfare pay-taxable as wages and are subject to withholdingsation you receive. You should receive a Form ments that are compensation for services or thatfor income tax. They may be subject to social1099-G showing the amount paid to you. Gener- are obtained fraudulently.security and Medicare taxes. For more informa-ally, you enter unemployment compensation on
tion, see Supplemental Unemployment Benefitsline 19 of Form 1040, line 13 of Form 1040A, or Work-training program. Payments you re-in Publication 15-A, section 5, Employer’s Sup-line 3 of Form 1040EZ. ceive from a state welfare agency for taking partplemental Tax Guide. Report these payments in a work-training program are not included inTypes of unemployment compensation. on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A or on line your income, as long as the payments (exclu-Unemployment compensation generally in- 1 of Form 1040EZ. sive of extra allowances for transportation orcludes any amount received under an unem-
other costs) do not total more than the publicRepayment of benefits. You may have toployment compensation law of the United States
welfare benefits you would have received other-repay some of your supplemental unemploy-or of a state. It includes the following benefits.
wise. If the payments are more than the welfarement benefits to qualify for trade readjustment
• Benefits paid by a state or the District of benefits you would have received, the entireallowances under the Trade Act of 1974. If you
Columbia from the Federal Unemployment amount must be included in your income asrepay supplemental unemployment benefits in
Trust Fund. wages.the same year you receive them, reduce the
total benefits by the amount you repay. If you• State unemployment insurance benefits. Alternative trade adjustment assistancerepay the benefits in a later year, you must (ATAA) payments. Payments you receive• Railroad unemployment compensation include the full amount of the benefits in your from a state agency under the Demonstrationbenefits. income for the year you received them. Project for Alternative Trade Adjustment Assis-
Deduct the repayment in the later year as an tance for Older Workers (ATAA) must be in-• Disability payments from a government
adjustment to gross income on Form 1040. (You cluded in your income. The state must send youprogram paid as a substitute for unem-
cannot use Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ.) In- Form 1099-G to advise you of the amount youployment compensation. (Amounts re-
clude the repayment on Form 1040, line 36, and should include in income. The amount should beceived as workers’ compensation for
enter “Sub-Pay TRA” and the amount on the reported on Form 1040, line 21.injuries or illness are not unemployment
dotted line next to line 36. If the amount youcompensation. See Workers’ Compensa- Persons with disabilities. If you have a disa-repay in a later year is more than $3,000, yoution under Sickness and Injury Benefits, bility, you must include in income compensationmay be able to take a credit against your tax forearlier.) you receive for services you perform unless thethe later year instead of deducting the amount
compensation is otherwise excluded. However,• Trade readjustment allowances under the repaid. For information on this, see Repay-
you do not include in income the value of goods,ments, later.Trade Act of 1974.
services, and cash that you receive, not in return
• Unemployment assistance under the Dis- Private unemployment fund. Unemploy- for your services, but for your training and reha-
aster Relief and Emergency Assistance ment benefit payments from a private (nonun- bilitation because you have a disability. Excluda-
Act of 1974. ion) fund to which you voluntarily contribute are ble amounts include payments for transportation
Publication 525 (2007) Page 27

Page 28 of 40 of Publication 525 8:27 -  2-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
and attendant care, such as interpreter services qualified disaster mitigation payments are also Other Income
for the deaf, reader services for the blind, and most commonly paid to you in the period imme-
services to help mentally retarded persons do diately following damage to property as a result The following brief discussions are arranged in
their work. of a natural disaster. However, disaster mitiga- alphabetical order. Income items that are dis-
tion payments are grants you use to mitigate cussed in greater detail in another publicationDisaster relief grants. Do not include (reduce the severity of) potential damage from include a reference to that publication.post-disaster grants received under the Disaster future natural disasters. They are paid to you Activity not for profit. You must include onRelief and Emergency Assistance Act in your through state and local governments based on your return income from an activity from whichincome if the grant payments are made to help the provisions of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster you do not expect to make a profit. An exampleyou meet necessary expenses or serious needs Relief and Emergency Assistance Act or the of this type of activity is a hobby or a farm youfor medical, dental, housing, personal property, National Flood Insurance Act. operate mostly for recreation and pleasure.transportation, or funeral expenses. Do not de- You cannot increase the basis or adjusted Enter this income on Form 1040, line 21. Deduc-duct casualty losses or medical expenses that basis of your property for improvements made tions for expenses related to the activity areare specifically reimbursed by these disaster with nontaxable disaster mitigation payments. limited. They cannot total more than the incomerelief grants. If you have deducted a casualty
you report and can be taken only if you itemizeloss for the loss of your personal residence and Mortgage assistance payments. Payments
deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). Seeyou later receive a disaster relief grant for the made under section 235 of the National Housing
Not-for-Profit Activities in chapter 1 of Publica-loss of the same residence, you may have to Act for mortgage assistance are not included in
tion 535 for information on whether an activity isinclude part or all of the grant in your taxable the homeowner’s income. Interest paid for the
considered carried on for a profit.income. See Recoveries, earlier. Unemploy- homeowner under the mortgage assistance pro-
ment assistance payments under the Act are gram cannot be deducted. Alaska Permanent Fund dividend. If you re-taxable unemployment compensation. See Un- ceived a payment from Alaska’s mineral incomeReplacement housing payments. Replace-employment compensation under Unemploy- fund (Alaska Permanent Fund dividend), reportment housing payments made under the Uni-ment Benefits, earlier. it as income on line 21 of Form 1040, line 13 ofform Relocation Assistance and Real Property Form 1040A, or line 3 of Form 1040EZ. TheDisaster relief payments. You can exclude Acquisition Policies Act for Federal and Feder- state of Alaska sends each recipient a documentfrom income any amount you receive that is a ally Assisted Programs are not includible in that shows the amount of the payment with thequalified disaster relief payment. A qualified dis- gross income, but are includible in the basis of check. The amount also is reported to the IRS.aster relief payment is an amount paid to you: the newly acquired property.
Alimony. Include in your income on Form1. To reimburse or pay reasonable and nec- Relocation payments and home rehabilita- 1040, line 11, any alimony payments you re-essary personal, family, living, or funeral tion grants. A relocation payment under sec- ceive. Amounts you receive for child support areexpenses that result from a qualified disas- tion 105(a)(11) of the Housing and Community not income to you. For complete information,ter, Development Act made by a local jurisdiction to see Publication 504, Divorced or Separated In-
a displaced individual moving from a dividuals.2. To reimburse or pay reasonable and nec-
flood-damaged residence to another residenceessary expenses incurred for the repair or Below-market loans. A below-market loan isis not includible in gross income. Home rehabili-rehabilitation of your home or repair or re- a loan on which no interest is charged or ontation grants received by low-income homeown-placement of its contents to the extent it is which the interest is charged at a rate below theers in a defined area under the same act aredue to a qualified disaster, applicable federal rate. If you make a be-also not includible in gross income.
3. By a person engaged in the furnishing or low-market gift or demand loan, you must in-
Indian financing grants. Nonreimbursablesale of transportation as a common carrier clude the forgone interest (at the federal rate) as
grants under title IV of the Indian Financing Actbecause of the death or personal physical interest income on your return. These loans are
of 1974 to Indians to expand profit-making In-injuries incurred as a result of a qualified considered a transaction in which you, the
dian-owned economic enterprises on or neardisaster, or lender, are treated as having made:
reservations are not includible in gross income.4. By a federal, state, or local government, or • A loan to the borrower in exchange for a
agency or instrumentality in connection note that requires the payment of interestMedicare. Medicare benefits received under
with a qualified disaster in order to pro- at the applicable federal rate, andtitle XVIII of the Social Security Act are not
mote the general welfare. includible in the gross income of the individuals • An additional payment to the borrower,
for whom they are paid. This includes basic (partYou can exclude this amount only to the extent which the borrower transfers back to you
A (Hospital Insurance Benefits for the Aged))any expense it pays for is not paid for by insur- as interest.
and supplementary (part B (Supplementaryance or otherwise. The exclusion does not apply Depending on the transaction, the additionalMedical Insurance Benefits for the Aged)).if you were a participant or conspirator in a payment to the borrower is treated as a:terrorist action or his or her representative. Old-age, survivors, and disability insurance • Gift,A qualified disaster is: benefits (OASDI). OASDI payments under
section 202 of title II of the Social Security Act • Dividend,• A disaster which results from a terrorist or
are not includible in the gross income of themilitary action, • Contribution to capital,individuals to whom they are paid. This applies• A Presidentially declared disaster, or • Payment of compensation, orto old-age insurance benefits, and insurance
• A disaster which results from an accident benefits for wives, husbands, children, widows, • Another type of payment.involving a common carrier, or from any widowers, mothers and fathers, and parents, as
The borrower may have to report this paymentother event, which is determined to be cat- well as the lump-sum death payment.
as income, depending on its classification.astrophic by the Secretary of the Treasury
Nutrition Program for the Elderly. Foodor his or her delegate. For more information on below-market loans,benefits you receive under the Nutrition Pro-
see chapter 1 of Publication 550.gram for the Elderly are not taxable. If you pre-For amounts paid under item (4), a disaster is
pare and serve free meals for the program, Bribes. If you receive a bribe, include it in yourqualified if it is determined by an applicable
include in your income as wages the cash pay income.federal, state, or local authority to warrant assis-
you receive, even if you are also eligible for foodtance from the federal, state, or local govern- Campaign contributions. These contribu-benefits.ment, agency, or instrumentality. tions are not income to a candidate unless they
Disaster mitigation payments. You also Payments to reduce cost of winter energy. are diverted to his or her personal use. To be
can exclude from income any amount you re- Payments made by a state to qualified people to exempt from tax, the contributions mus t be
ceive that is a qualified disaster mitigation pay- reduce their cost of winter energy use are not spent for campaign purposes or kept in a fund
ment. Like qualified disaster relief payments, taxable. for use in future campaigns. However, interest
Page 28 Publication 525 (2007)

Page 29 of 40 of Publication 525 8:27 -  2-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
earned on bank deposits, dividends received on replaces. The character of the income as ordi- • The judgment or settlement to which your
contributed securities, and net gains realized on attorney fees and court costs apply mustnary income or capital gain depends on the
sales of contributed securities are taxable and occur after October 22, 2004.nature of the underlying claim. Include the fol-
must be reported on Form 1120-POL, U.S. In- lowing as ordinary income.
Pre-existing agreement. If you receivecome Tax Return for Certain Political Organiza-
1. Interest on any award. damages under a written binding agreement,tions. Excess campaign funds transferred to an
court decree, or mediation award that was inoffice account must be included in the office- 2. Compensation for lost wages or lost profits effect (or issued on or before) September 13,holder’s income on Form 1040, line 21, in the in most cases. 1995, do not include in income any of thoseyear transferred.
3. Punitive damages, in most cases. It does damages received on account of personal inju-Canceled sales contract. If you sell property not matter if they relate to a physical injury ries or sickness.(such as land or a residence) under a contract, or physical sickness.but the contract is canceled and you return the Credit card insurance. Generally, if you re-
buyer’s money in the same tax year as the 4. Amounts received in settlement of pension ceive benefits under a credit card disability or
original sale, you have no income from the sale. rights (if you did not contribute to the plan). unemployment insurance plan, the benefits are
If the contract is canceled and you return the taxable to you. These plans make the minimum5. Damages for:buyer’s money in a later tax year, you must monthly payment on your credit card account if
include your gain in your income for the year of you cannot make the payment due to injury,a. Patent or copyright infringement,
the sale. When you return the money and take illness, disability, or unemployment. Report on
b. Breach of contract, orback the property in the later year, you treat the Form 1040, line 21, the amount of benefits you
transaction as a purchase that gives you a new received during the year that is more than thec. Interference with business operations.basis in the property equal to the funds you amount of the premiums you paid during the
return to the buyer. year.6. Back pay and damages for emotional dis-Special rules apply to the reacquisition of
tress received to satisfy a claim under Title Down payment assistance. If you purchasereal property where a secured indebtedness
VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. a home and receive assistance from a nonprofit(mortgage) to the original seller is involved. For
corporation to make the down payment, thatfurther information, see Repossession in Publi- 7. Attorney fees and costs (including contin- assistance is not included in your income. If thecation 537, Installment Sales. gent fees) where the underlying recovery corporation qualifies as a tax-exempt charitableis included in gross income.Car pools. Do not include in your income organization, the assistance is treated as a gift
amounts you receive from the passengers for and is included in your basis of the house. If the Do not include in your income compensatorydriving a car in a car pool to and from work. corporation does not qualify, the assistance isdamages for personal physical injury or physicalThese amounts are considered reimbursement treated as a rebate or reduction of the purchasesickness (whether received in a lump sum orfor your expenses. However, this rule does not price and is not included in your basis.installments).apply if you have developed car pool arrange-
Employment agency fees. If you get a jobments into a profit-making business of transport- Emotional distress. Emotional distress it-
through an employment agency, and the fee ising workers for hire. self is not a physical injury or physical sickness,
paid by your employer, the fee is not includible inbut damages you receive for emotional distressCash rebates. A cash rebate you receive from your income if you are not liable for it. However,due to a physical injury or sickness are treateda dealer or manufacturer of an item you buy is if you pay it and your employer reimburses youas received for the physical injury or sickness.not income, but you must reduce your basis by for it, it is includible in your income.Do not include them in your income.the amount of the rebate.
If the emotional distress is due to a personal Energy conservation subsidies. You can
injury that is not due to a physical injury orExample. You buy a new car for $9,000 exclude from gross income any subsidy pro-
sickness (for example, unlawful discriminationcash and receive a $400 rebate check from the vided, either directly or indirectly, by public utili-
manufacturer. The $400 is not income to you. or injury to reputation), you must include the ties for the purchase or installation of an energy
Your basis in the car is $8,600. This is your basis damages in your income, except for any dam- conservation measure for a dwelling unit.
on which you figure gain or loss if you sell the ages you receive for medical care due to that Energy conservation measure. This in-car, and depreciation if you use it for business. emotional distress. Emotional distress includes cludes installations or modifications that are pri-physical symptoms that result from emotionalCasualty insurance and other reimburse- marily designed to reduce consumption ofdistress, such as headaches, insomnia, andments. You generally should not report these electricity or natural gas, or improve the man-stomach disorders.reimbursements on your return, unless you are agement of energy demand.
figuring gain or loss from the casualty or theft. Deduction for costs involved in unlawful Dwelling unit. This includes a house, apart-See Publication 547, Casualties, Disasters, and discrimination suits. You may be able to de- ment, condominium, mobile home, boat, or simi-Thefts, for more information. duct attorney fees and court costs paid to re- lar property. If a building or structure containscover a judgment or settlement for a claim ofCharitable gift annuities. If you are the bene- both dwelling and other units, any subsidy mustunlawful discrimination under various provisionsficiary of a charitable gift annuity, you must in- be properly allocated.
of federal, state, and local law listed in Internalclude the yearly annuity or fixed percentage
Revenue Code section 62(e), a claim against Estate and trust income.  An estate or trust,payment in your income.
unlike a partnership, may have to pay federalthe United States government, or a claim underThe payer will report the types of income you
income tax. If you are a beneficiary of an estatesection 1862(b)(3)(A) of the Social Security Act.received on Form 1099-R. Report the gross dis-
or trust, you may be taxed on your share of itsYou can claim this deduction as an adjustmenttribution from box 1 on Form 1040, line 16a, or
income distributed or required to be distributedto income on Form 1040, line 36. The followingon Form 1040A, line 12a, and the part taxed as
to you. However, there is never a double tax.rules apply.ordinary income (box 2a minus box 3) on Form
Estates and trusts file their returns on Form1040, line 16b, or on Form 1040A, line 12b. • The attorney fees and court costs may be 1041, U.S. Income Tax Return for Estates andReport the portion taxed as capital gain (box 3) paid by you or on your behalf in connec- Trusts, and your share of the income is reportedon Schedule D, line 8. tion with the claim for unlawful discrimina- to you on Schedule K-1 (Form 1041), Benefi-
tion, the claim against the United StatesChild support payments. You should not re- ciary’s Share of Income, Deductions, Credits,
government, or the claim under sectionport these payments on your return. See Publi- etc.
1862(b)(3)(A) of the Social Security Act.cation 504 for more information. Current income required to be distributed.
• The deduction you are claiming cannot beCourt awards and damages. To determine if If you are the beneficiary of an estate or trust
more than the amount of the judgment orsettlement amounts you receive by compromise that must distribute all of its current income, you
settlement you are including in income foror judgment must be included in your income, must report your share of the distributable net
the tax year.you must consider the item that the settlement income, whether or not you actually received it.
Publication 525 (2007) Page 29

Page 30 of 40 of Publication 525 8:27 -  2-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Current income not required to be distrib- Personal representatives. All personal for which the payments are made must be pro-
uted. If you are the beneficiary of an estate or representatives must include in their gross in- vided in your home.
trust and the fiduciary has the choice of whether come fees paid to them from an estate. If you You must include in your income diffi-
to distribute all or part of the current income, you are not in the trade or business of being an culty-of-care payments received for more than:
must report: executor (for instance, you are the executor of a • 10 qualified foster individuals under agefriend’s or relative’s estate), report these fees on• All income that is required to be distributed 19, orForm 1040, line 21. If you are in the trade orto you, whether or not it is actually distrib- business of being an executor, report these fees • 5 qualified foster individuals age 19 oruted, plus as self-employment income on Schedule C or older.
• All other amounts actually paid or credited Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040). The fee is not
to you, includible in income if it is waived. Maintaining space in home. If you are paid
to maintain space in your home for emergencyup to the amount of your share of distributable Manager of trade or business for bank-
foster care, you must include the payment innet income. ruptcy estate. Include in your income all pay-
your income.ments received from your bankruptcy estate forHow to report. Treat each item of income managing or operating a trade or business that Reporting taxable payments.  If you re-the same way that the estate or trust would treat you operated before you filed for bankruptcy. ceive payments that you must include in yourit. For example, if a trust’s dividend income is Report this income on Form 1040, line 21. income, you are in business as a foster-caredistributed to you, you report the distribution as
provider and you are self-employed. Report thedividend income on your return. The same rule Notary public. Report payments for these
payments on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZapplies to distributions of tax-exempt interest services on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ
(Form 1040). See Publication 587, Businessand capital gains. (Form 1040). These payments are not subject to
Use of Your Home (Including Use by DaycareThe fiduciary of the estate or trust must tell self-employment tax. (See the separate instruc-
Providers), to help you determine the amountyou the type of items making up your share of tions for Schedule SE (Form 1040) for details.)
you can deduct for the use of your home.the estate or trust income and any credits you Election precinct official. You should re-are allowed on your individual income tax return. ceive a Form W-2 showing payments for serv- Found property. If you find and keep property
Losses. Losses of estates and trusts gener- ices performed as an election official or election that does not belong to you that has been lost or
ally are not deductible by the beneficiaries. worker. Report these payments on line 7 of abandoned (treasure-trove), it is taxable to you
Form 1040 or Form 1040A or on line 1 of Form at its fair market value in the first year it is yourGrantor trust. Income earned by a grantor 1040EZ. undisputed possession.trust is taxable to the grantor, not the benefi-
ciary, if the grantor keeps certain control over Food program payments to daycare provid- Free tour. If you received a free tour from athe trust. (The grantor is the one who transferred ers. If you operate a daycare service and re- travel agency for organizing a group of tourists,property to the trust.) This rule applies if the ceive payments under the Child and Adult Care you must include its value in your income. Re-property (or income from the property) put into Food Program administered by the Department port the fair market value of the tour on Formthe trust will or may revert (be returned) to the of Agriculture that are not for your services, the 1040, line 21, if you are not in the trade orgrantor or the grantor’s spouse. payments generally are not included in your business of organizing tours. You cannot deductGenerally, a trust is a grantor trust if the income. However, you must include in your in- your expenses in serving as the voluntary leadergrantor has a reversionary interest valued (at come any part of the payments you do not use to of the group at the group’s request. If you organ-the date of transfer) at more than 5% of the provide food to individuals eligible for help under ize tours as a trade or business, report the tour’svalue of the transferred property. the program. value on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form
Expenses paid by another. If your personal 1040).Foreign currency transactions. If you haveexpenses are paid for by another person, such a gain on a personal foreign currency transac- Gambling winnings. You must include youras a corporation, the payment may be taxable to tion because of changes in exchange rates, you gambling winnings in your income on Formyou depending upon your relationship with that do not have to include that gain in your income 1040, line 21. If you itemize your deductions onperson and the nature of the payment. But if the unless it is more than $200. If the gain is more Schedule A (Form 1040), you can deduct gam-payment makes up for a loss caused by that than $200, report it as a capital gain. bling losses you had during the year, but only upperson, and only restores you to the position you
to the amount of your winnings.were in before the loss, the payment is not Foster care providers. Payments you re-includible in your income. Lotteries and raffles. Winnings from lotter-ceive from a state, political subdivision, or a
ies and raffles are gambling winnings. In addi-qualified foster care placement agency for pro-Fees for services. Include all fees for your tion to cash winnings, you must include in yourviding care to qualified foster individuals in yourservices in your income. Examples of these fees income the fair market value of bonds, cars,home generally are not included in your income.are amounts you receive for services you per-
houses, and other noncash prizes. However, theHowever, you must include in your income pay-form as:
difference between the fair market value and thements received for the care of more than 5
• A corporate director, cost of an oil and gas lease obtained from theindividuals age 19 or older and certain diffi-
government through a lottery is not includible inculty-of-care payments.• An executor, administrator, or personal
income.A qualified foster individual is a person who:representative of an estate,
Installment payments. Generally, if you• A manager of a trade or business you op- 1. Is living in a foster family home, and
win a state lottery prize payable in installments,erated before declaring Chapter 11 bank- 2. Was placed there by: you must include in your gross income the an-ruptcy,
nual payments and any amounts you receivea. An agency of a state or one of its politi-• A notary public, or designated as interest on the unpaid install-cal subdivisions, or ments. If you sell future lottery payments for a• An election precinct official.
lump sum, you must report the amount you re-b. A qualified foster care placement
ceive from the sale as ordinary income (Formagency.
If you are not an employee and the fees 1040, line 21) in the year you receive it.
for your services from the same payor
Form W-2G. You may have received aDifficulty-of-care payments. These aretotal $600 or more for the year, you
TIP
Form W-2G, Certain Gambling Winnings, show-additional payments that are designated by themay receive a Form 1099-MISC.
ing the amount of your gambling winnings andpayer as compensation for providing the addi-
any tax taken out of them. Include the amountCorporate director. Corporate director tional care that is required for physically, men-
from box 1 on Form 1040, line 21. Include thefees are self-employment income. Report these tally, or emotionally handicapped qualified foster
amount shown in box 2 on Form 1040, line 64,payments on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ individuals. A state must determine that the ad-
as federal income tax withheld.(Form 1040). ditional compensation is needed, and the care
Page 30 Publication 525 (2007)

Page 31 of 40 of Publication 525 8:27 -  2-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Gifts and inheritances. Generally, property your income on Form 1040, line 21, or on while you serve on the jury, you can deduct the
you receive as a gift, bequest, or inheritance is Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Form 1040) if amount turned over to your employer as an
not included in your income. However, if prop- from your self-employment activity. adjustment to income. Enter the amount you
erty you receive this way later produces income repay your employer on Form 1040, line 36.Indian fishing rights. If you are a member ofsuch as interest, dividends, or rents, that income Enter “Jury Pay” and the amount on the dotteda qualified Indian tribe that has fishing rightsis taxable to you. If property is given to a trust line next to line 36.secured by treaty, executive order, or an Act ofand the income from it is paid, credited, or dis- Congress as of March 17, 1988, do not include Kickbacks. You must include kickbacks, sidetributed to you, that income is also taxable to in your income amounts you receive from activi- commissions, push money, or similar paymentsyou. If the gift, bequest, or inheritance is the ties related to those fishing rights. The income is you receive in your income on Form 1040, lineincome from the property, that income is taxable not subject to income tax, self-employment tax, 21, or on Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Formto you. or employment taxes. 1040) if from your self-employment activity.Inherited pension or IRA. If you inherited a Interest on frozen deposits. In general, youpension or an individual retirement arrangement Example. You sell cars and help arrangeexclude from your income the amount of interest(IRA), you may have to include part of the inher- car insurance for buyers. Insurance brokers payearned on a frozen deposit. A deposit is frozenited amount in your income. See Survivors and back part of their commissions to you for refer-if, at the end of the calendar year, you cannotBeneficiaries in Publication 575, if you inherited ring customers to them. You must include thewithdraw any part of the deposit because:a pension. See What If You Inherit an IRA?  in kickbacks in your income.
Publication 590, if you inherited an IRA.
• The financial institution is bankrupt or in-
solvent, or Manufacturer incentive payments. YouExpected inheritance. If you sell an inter- must include as other income on Form 1040, lineest in an expected inheritance from a living per- • The state where the institution is located 21 (or Schedule C or Schedule C-EZ (Formson, include the entire amount you receive in has placed limits on withdrawals because 1040) if you are self-employed) incentive pay-gross income on Form 1040, line 21. other financial institutions in the state are ments from a manufacturer that you receive as abankrupt or insolvent.Bequest for services. If you receive cash salesperson. This is true whether you receive
or other property as a bequest for services you the payment directly from the manufacturer orExcludable amount. The amount of inter-performed while the decedent was alive, the through your employer.est you exclude from income for the year is thevalue is taxable compensation. interest that was credited on the frozen deposit Example. You sell cars for an automobilefor that tax year minus the sum of:Historic preservation grants. Do not include dealership and receive incentive payments fromin your income any payment you receive under the automobile manufacturer every time you sell1. The net amount withdrawn from the de-the National Historic Preservation Act to pre- a particular model of car. You report the incen-posit during that year, andserve a historically significant property. tive payments on Form 1040, line 21.
2. The amount that could have been with-Hobby losses. Losses from a hobby are not drawn at the end of that tax year (not re- Medical savings accounts (Archer MSAs anddeductible from other income. A hobby is an duced by any penalty for premature Medicare Advantage MSAs). You generallyactivity from which you do not expect to make a withdrawals of a time deposit). do not include in income amounts you withdrawprofit. See Activity not for profit, earlier under from your Archer MSA or Medicare AdvantageThe excluded part of the interest is included inOther Income. MSA if you use the money to pay for qualifiedyour income in the tax year it becomes with- medical expenses. Generally, qualified medicalIf you collect stamps, coins, or other drawable. expenses are those you can deduct on Sched-items as a hobby for recreation and
ule A (Form 1040). For more information aboutpleasure, and you sell any of the items, Interest on qualified savings bonds. YouCAUTION
!
Archer MSAs or Medicare Advantage MSAs,your gain is taxable as a capital gain. However, if may be able to exclude from income the interest
see Publication 969.you sell items from your collection at a loss, you from qualified U.S. savings bonds you redeem if
cannot deduct the loss. you pay qualified higher educational expenses
Moving expense reimbursements. You gen-in the same year. Qualified higher educational
erally should not report these benefits on yourHolocaust victims restitution. Restitution expenses are those you pay for tuition and re-
return. See Publication 521 for more informa-payments you receive as a Holocaust victim (or quired fees at an eligible educational institution
tion.the heir of a Holocaust victim) and interest for you, your spouse, or your dependent. A qual-
earned on the payments, including interest ified U.S. savings bond is a series EE bond Prizes and awards. If you win a prize in aearned on amounts held in certain escrow ac- issued after 1989 or a series I bond. The bond lucky number drawing, television or radio quizcounts or funds, are not taxable. You also do not must have been issued to you when you were 24 program, beauty contest, or other event, youinclude them in any computations in which you years of age or older. For more information on must include it in your income. For example, ifwould ordinarily add excludable income to your this exclusion, see Education Savings Bond you win a $50 prize in a photography contest,adjusted gross income, such as the computation Program in chapter 1 of Publication 550. you must report this income on Form 1040, lineto determine the taxable part of social security Interest on state and local government obli- 21. If you refuse to accept a prize, do not includebenefits. If the payments are made in property, gations. This interest is usually exempt from its value in your income.your basis in the property is its fair market value federal tax. However, you must show the Prizes and awards in goods or services mustwhen you receive it. amount of any tax-exempt interest on your fed- be included in your income at their fair marketExcludable restitution payments are pay- eral income tax return. For more information, value.ments or distributions made by any country or see State or Local Government Obligations inany other entity because of persecution of an Employee awards or bonuses. Cashchapter 1 of Publication 550.individual on the basis of race, religion, physical awards or bonuses given to you by your em-
or mental disability, or sexual orientation by Nazi Job interview expenses. If a prospective em- ployer for good work or suggestions generally
Germany, any other Axis regime, or any other ployer asks you to appear for an interview and must be included in your income as wages.
Nazi-controlled or Nazi-allied country, whether either pays you an allowance or reimburses you However, certain noncash employee achieve-
the payments are made under a law or as a for your transportation and other travel ex- ment awards can be excluded from income. See
result of a legal action. They include compensa- penses, the amount you receive generally is not Bonuses and awards under Miscellaneous
tion or reparation for property losses resulting taxable. You include in income only the amount Compensation, earlier.
from Nazi persecution, including proceeds you receive that is more than your actual ex- Prize points. If you are a salesperson andunder insurance policies issued before and dur- penses. receive prize points redeemable for merchan-ing World War II by European insurance compa-
Jury duty. Jury duty pay you receive must be dise, that are awarded by a distributor or manu-nies.
included in your income on Form 1040, line 21. If facturer to employees of dealers, you must
Illegal income. Illegal income, such as money you must give the pay to your employer because include their fair market value in your income.
from dealing illegal drugs, must be included in your employer continues to pay your salary The prize points are taxable in the ye ar they are
Publication 525 (2007) Page 31

Page 32 of 40 of Publication 525 8:27 -  2-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
paid or made available to you, rather than in the the total distribution is less than or equal to your income. These allowances a re not consid-
adjusted qualified higher education expenses.year you redeem them for merchandise. ered scholarship or fellowship grants.
See Publication 970 for more information.Pulitzer, Nobel, and similar prizes. If you Prizes. Scholarship prizes won in a contest
were awarded a prize in recognition of accom- are not scholarships or fellowships if you do notRailroad retirement annuities. The following
plishments in religious, charitable, scientific, ar- types of payments are treated as pension or have to use the prizes for educational purposes.
tistic, educational, literary, or civic fields, you annuity income and are taxable under the rules You must include these amounts in your income
generally must include the value of the prize in explained in Publication 575. on Form 1040, line 21, whether or not you use
your income. However, you do not include this the amounts for educational purposes.• Tier 1 railroad retirement benefits that areprize in your income if you meet all of the follow- more than the social security equivalenting requirements. Smallpox vaccine injuries. If you are an eligi-benefit.
ble individual who receives benefits under the1. You were selected without any action on • Tier 2 benefits. Smallpox Emergency Personnel Protection Actyour part to enter the contest or proceed- of 2003 for a covered injury resulting from a• Vested dual benefits.ing. covered countermeasure, you can exclude the
2. You are not required to perform substantial payment from your income (to the extent it is notRewards. If you receive a reward for providingfuture services as a condition for receiving allowed as a medical and dental expense de-information, include it in your income.the prize or award. duction on Schedule A (Form 1040)). Eligible
individuals include health care workers, emer-Sale of home. You may be able to exclude3. The prize or award is transferred by the gency personnel, and first responders in afrom income all or part of any gain from the salepayer directly to a governmental unit or smallpox emergency, who have received aor exchange of a personal residence. See Publi-tax-exempt charitable organization as des- smallpox vaccination.cation 523.ignated by you. The following conditions
apply to the transfer. Sale of personal items. If you sold an item Social security and equivalent railroad re-you owned for personal use, such as a car, tirement benefits. Social security ora. You cannot use the prize or award refrigerator, furniture, stereo, jewelry, or equivalent railroad retirement benefits, if tax-before it is transferred. silverware, your gain is taxable as a capital gain. able, must be included in the income of theReport it on Schedule D (Form 1040). You can-b. You should provide the designation person who has the legal right to receive thenot deduct a loss.before the prize or award is presented benefits. Whether any of your benefits are tax-However, if you sold an item you held forto prevent a disqualifying use. The des- able, and the amount that is taxable, depends oninvestment, such as gold or silver bullion, coins,ignation should contain: the amount of the benefits and your other in-or gems, any gain is taxable as a capital gain come.i. The purpose of the designation by and any loss is deductible as a capital loss. Social security benefits include any monthlymaking a reference to section Example. You sold a painting on an online benefit under Title II of the Social Security Act74(b)(3) of the Internal Revenue auction website for $100. You bought the paint- and any part of a tier I railroad retirement benefitCode, ing for $20 at a garage sale years ago. Report treated as a social security benefit. Social secur-
ii. A description of the prize or award, your $80 gain as a capital gain on Schedule D ity benefits do not include any supplemental
(Form 1040). security income (SSI) payments.iii. The name and address of the organ-
ization to receive the prize or award, Scholarships and fellowships. A candidate Form SSA-1099. If you received social se-
for a degree can exclude amounts received as a curity benefits during the year, you will receiveiv. Your name, address, and taxpayer qualified scholarship or fellowship. A qualified Form SSA-1099, Social Security Benefit State-identification number, and scholarship or fellowship is any amount you re- ment. An IRS Notice 703 will be enclosed withv. Your signature and the date signed. ceive that is for: your Form SSA-1099. This notice includes a
worksheet you can use to figure whether any of• Tuition and fees to enroll at or attend anc. In the case of an unexpected presenta- your benefits are taxable.educational institution, ortion, you must return the prize or award For an explanation of the information foundbefore using it (or spending, depositing, • Fees, books, supplies, and equipment re- on your Form SSA-1099, see Publication 915.investing it, etc., in the case of money) quired for courses at the educational insti-
and then prepare the statement as de- Form RRB-1099. If you received equivalenttution.
scribed in (b). railroad retirement or special guaranty benefitsAmounts used for room and board do not qualify during the year, you will receive Formd. After the transfer, you should receive for the exclusion. See Publication 970 for more RRB-1099, Payments by the Railroad Retire-from the payer a written response stat- information on qualified scholarships and fellow- ment Board.ing when and to whom the designated ship grants. For an explanation of the information foundamounts were transferred. Payment for services. Generally, you must on your Form RRB-1099, see Publication 915.
include in income the part of any scholarship or If you received other railroad retirement ben-These rules do not apply to scholarship or fellowship that represents payment for past, efits, see Railroad retirement annuities, earlier.fellowship awards. See Scholarships and fellow- present, or future teaching, research, or otherships, later. Joint return. If you are married and file aservices. This applies even if all candidates for a
joint return, you and your spouse must combinedegree must perform the services to receive theQualified tuition program (QTP). A qualified your incomes and your social security anddegree.tuition program (also known as a 529 program) equivalent railroad retirement benefits when fig-Do not include in income the part of anyis a program set up to allow you to either prepay uring whether any of your combined benefits arescholarship or fellowship representing paymentor contribute to an account established for pay- taxable. Even if your spouse did not receive anyfor teaching, research, or other services if youing a student’s qualified higher education ex- benefits, you must add your spouse’s income toreceive the amount under the National Healthpenses at an eligible educational institution. A yours when figuring if any of your benefits areService Corps Scholarship Program or theprogram can be established and maintained by taxable.Armed Forces Health Professions Scholarshipa state, an agency or instrumentality of a state,
and Financial Assistance Program.or an eligible educational institution. Taxable amount. Use the worksheet in theFor information about the rules that apply toThe part of a distribution representing the Form 1040 or Form 1040A instruction packagea tax-free qualified tuition reduction provided toamount paid or contributed to a QTP is not to determine the amount of your benefits toemployees and their families by an educationalincluded in income. This is a return of the invest- include in your income. Publication 915 also hasinstitution, see Publication 970.ment in the program. worksheets you can use. However, you must
use the worksheets in Publication 915 if any ofThe beneficiary generally does not include in VA payments. Allowances paid by the De-
the following situations apply.income any earnings distributed from a QTP if partment of Veterans Affairs are not included in
Page 32 Publication 525 (2007)

Page 33 of 40 of Publication 525 8:27 -  2-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• You received a lump-sum benefit payment traveling away from home to attend the conven- Method 2. Figure your tax for 2007 claiming
tion. You cannot deduct the reimbursed ex-during the year that is for one or more a credit for the repaid amount. Follow these
penses, even if you are reimbursed in a laterearlier years. steps.
year. If you are reimbursed for lost salary, you• You exclude employer-provided adoption 1. Figure your tax for 2007 without deductingmust include that reimbursement in your in-benefits or interest from qualified U.S. sav- the repaid amount.come.ings bonds.
2. Refigure your tax from the earlier yearUtility rebates. If you are a customer of an• You take the foreign earned income exclu- without including in income the amountelectric utility company and you participate in thesion, the foreign housing exclusion or de- utility’s energy conservation program, you may you repaid in 2007.duction, the exclusion of income from receive on your monthly electric bill either: 3. Subtract the tax in (2) from the tax shownAmerican Samoa, or the exclusion of in-
• A reduction in the purchase price of elec- on your return for the earlier year. This iscome from Puerto Rico by bona fide re-
tricity furnished to you (rate reduction), orsidents of Puerto Rico. the credit.
• A nonrefundable credit against the 4. Subtract the answer in (3) from the tax forBenefits may affect your IRA deduction. purchase price of the electricity. 2007 figured without the deduction (stepYou must use the special worksheets in appen- 1).The amount of the rate reduction or nonrefund-dix B of Publication 590 to figure your taxable
able credit is not included in your income.benefits and your IRA deduction if all of the If method 1 results in less tax, deduct the
following conditions apply. amount repaid. If method 2 results in less tax,
claim the credit figured in (3) above on Form• You receive social security or equivalent
1040, line 70, and enter “I.R.C. 1341” in therailroad retirement benefits. Repayments column to the right of line 70.• You have taxable compensation.
If you had to repay an amount that you included Example. For 2006 you filed a return and• You contribute to your IRA. in your income in an earlier year, you may be reported your income on the cash method. In• You or your spouse is covered by a retire- able to deduct the amount repaid from your 2007 you repaid $5,000 included in your 2006ment plan at work. income for the year in which you repaid it. Or, if income under a claim of right. Your filing statusthe amount you repaid is more than $3,000, you in 2007 and 2006 is single. Your income and taxHow to report. If any of your benefits are may be able to take a credit against your tax for for both years are as follows:taxable, you must use either Form 1040 or Form the year in which you repaid it. Generally, you
20061040A to report the taxable part. You cannot use can claim a deduction or credit only if the repay-
 With Income  Without IncomeForm 1040EZ. Report your net benefits (the ment qualifies as an expense or loss incurred in
Taxableamount in box 5 of your Forms SSA-1099 and your trade or business or in a for-profit transac-
Income $15,000 $10,000RRB-1099) on line 20a of Form 1040 or line 14a tion.
of Form 1040A. Report the taxable part (from the Tax $ 1,876 $ 1,126Type of deduction. The type of deduction youlast line of the worksheet) on line 20b of Form are allowed in the year of repayment depends1040 or on line 14b of Form 1040A. 2007on the type of income you included in the earlier Without Deduction With Deductionyear. You generally deduct the repayment onStolen property. If you steal property, you Taxablethe same form or schedule on which you previ-must report its fair market value in your income Income $49,950 $44,950ously reported it as income. For example, if youin the year you steal it unless in the same year, Tax $ 8,918 $ 7,668reported it as self-employment income, deduct ityou return it to its rightful owner. as a business expense on Schedule C or Sched- Your tax under method 1 is $7,668. Your taxule C-EZ (Form 1040) or Schedule F (FormTransporting school children. Do not in- under method 2 is $8,168, figured as follows:1040). If you reported it as a capital gain, deductclude in your income a school board mileage it as a capital loss on Schedule D (Form 1040). Ifallowance for taking children to and from school Tax previously determined for 2006 $1,876you reported it as wages, unemployment com-if you are not in the business of taking children to Less: Tax as refigured .......... − 1,126pensation, or other nonbusiness income, deductschool. You cannot deduct expenses for provid- Decrease in 2006 tax $ 750it as a miscellaneous itemized deduction oning this transportation. Schedule A (Form 1040). Regular tax liability for 2007 ....... $8,918If you repaid social security or equivalent Less: Decrease in 2006 tax ....... − 750Union benefits and dues. Amounts deducted
railroad retirement benefits, see Publication Refigured tax for 2007 $8,168from your pay for union dues, assessments, 915.contributions, or other payments to a union can- You pay less tax using method 1, so you shouldnot be excluded from your income. Repayment of $3,000 or less. If the amount take a deduction for the repayment in 2007.You may be able to deduct some of these you repaid was $3,000 or less, deduct it from
payments as a miscellaneous deduction subject your income in the year you repaid it. If you must Repayment rules do not apply. This discus-to the 2% of AGI limit if they are related to your deduct it as a miscellaneous itemized deduction, sion does not apply to:job and if you itemize deductions on Schedule A enter it on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 23.
(Form 1040). For more information, get Publica- • Deductions for bad debts,Repayment over $3,000. If the amount yoution 529, Miscellaneous Deductions. repaid was more than $3,000, you can deduct • Deductions from sales to customers, such
the repayment (as explained earlier under TypeStrike and lockout benefits. Benefits paid as returns and allowances, and similar
of deduction). However, you can choose insteadto you by a union as strike or lockout benefits, items, or
to take a tax credit for the year of repayment ifincluding both cash and the fair market value of
• Deductions for legal and other expensesyou included the income under a claim of right.other property, usually are included in your in-
of contesting the repayment.This means that at the time you included thecome as compensation. You can exclude these
income, it appeared that you had an unrestrictedbenefits from your income only when the facts
right to it. If you qualify for this choice, figure yourclearly show that the union intended them as Year of deduction (or credit). If you use the
tax under both methods and compare the re-gifts to you. cash method, you can take the deduction (or
sults. Use the method (deduction or credit) that credit, if applicable) for the tax year in which youReimbursed union convention expenses. results in less tax. actually make the repayment. If you use anyIf you are a delegate of your local union chapter
other accounting method, you can deduct theand you attend the annual convention of the Method 1. Figure your tax for 2007 claiming
repayment or claim a credit for it only for the taxinternational union, do not include in your in- a deduction for the repaid amount. If you must
year in which it is a proper deduction under yourcome amounts you receive from the interna- deduct it as a miscellaneous itemized deduction,
tional union to reimburse you for expenses of accounting method. For example, if you use anenter it on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 28.
Publication 525 (2007) Page 33

Page 34 of 40 of Publication 525 8:27 -  2-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
accrual method, you are entitled to the deduc- • Check the status of your 2007 refund. status, and the exact whole dollar amount
Click on Where’s My Refund. Wait at leasttion or credit in the tax year in which the obliga- of your refund.
6 weeks from the date you filed your re-tion for the repayment accrues.
turn (3 weeks if you filed electronically). Evaluating the quality of our telephone
Have your 2007 tax return available be- services. To ensure IRS representatives give
cause you will need to know your social accurate, courteous, and professional answers,
security number, your filing status, and the we use several methods to evaluate the qualityHow To Get Tax Help
exact whole dollar amount of your refund. of our telephone services. One method is for a
second IRS representative to listen in on orYou can get help with unresolved tax issues, • Download forms, instructions, and publica-
order free publications and forms, ask tax ques- record random telephone calls. Another is to asktions.
tions, and get information from the IRS in sev- some callers to complete a short survey at the• Order IRS products online.eral ways. By selecting the method that is best end of the call.
for you, you will have quick and easy access to • Research your tax questions online. Walk-in. Many products and servicestax help. • Search publications online by topic or are available on a walk-in basis.
keyword.Contacting your Taxpayer Advocate. The
Taxpayer Advocate Service (TAS) is an inde- • View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs) • Products. You can walk in to many postpendent organization within the IRS whose em- published in the last few years. offices, libraries, and IRS offices to pick upployees assist taxpayers who are experiencing certain forms, instructions, and publica-• Figure your withholding allowances usingeconomic harm, who are seeking help in resolv- tions. Some IRS offices, libraries, grocerythe withholding calculator online ating tax problems that have not been resolved stores, copy centers, city and county gov-www.irs.gov/individuals.through normal channels, or who believe that an ernment offices, credit unions, and officeIRS system or procedure is not working as it • Determine if Form 6251 must be filed us- supply stores have a collection of productsshould. ing our Alternative Minimum Tax (AMT) available to print from a CD or photocopyYou can contact the TAS by calling the TAS Assistant. from reproducible proofs. Also, some IRStoll-free case intake line at 1-877-777-4778 or • Sign up to receive local and national tax offices and libraries have the Internal Rev-TTY/TDD 1-800-829-4059 to see if you are eligi- news by email. enue Code, regulations, Internal Revenueble for assistance. You can also call or write to Bulletins, and Cumulative Bulletins avail-your local taxpayer advocate, whose phone • Get information on starting and operating able for research purposes.number and address are listed in your local a small business.
telephone directory and in Publication 1546, • Services. You can walk in to your local
Taxpayer Advocate Service – Your Voice at the Taxpayer Assistance Center every busi-
IRS. You can file Form 911, Request for Tax- ness day for personal, face-to-face taxPhone. Many services are available by
payer Advocate Service Assistance (And Appli- phone. help. An employee can explain IRS letters,
cation for Taxpayer Assistance Order), or ask an request adjustments to your tax account,
IRS employee to complete it on your behalf. For or help you set up a payment plan. If you• Ordering forms, instructions, and publica-more information, go to www.irs.gov/advocate. need to resolve a tax problem, have ques-tions. Call 1-800-829-3676 to order cur- tions about how the tax law applies to yourTaxpayer Advocacy Panel (TAP). The rent-year forms, instructions, and individual tax return, or you’re more com-TAP listens to taxpayers, identifies taxpayer is- publications, and prior-year forms and in-
fortable talking with someone in person,sues, and makes suggestions for improving IRS structions. You should receive your order
visit your local Taxpayer Assistanceservices and customer satisfaction. If you have within 10 days.
Center where you can spread out yoursuggestions for improvements, contact the TAP, • Asking tax questions. Call the IRS with records and talk with an IRS representa-toll free at 1-888-912-1227 or go to your tax questions at 1-800-829-1040. tive face-to-face. No appointment is nec-www.improveirs.org.
essary, but if you prefer, you can call your• Solving problems. You can getLow Income Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs). local Center and leave a message re-face-to-face help solving tax problemsLITCs are independent organizations that pro- questing an appointment to resolve a taxevery business day in IRS Taxpayer As-vide low income taxpayers with representation account issue. A representative will callsistance Centers. An employee can ex-in federal tax controversies with the IRS for free plain IRS letters, request adjustments to you back within 2 business days to sched-or for a nominal charge. The clinics also provide your account, or help you set up a pay- ule an in-person appointment at your con-tax education and outreach for taxpayers with ment plan. Call your local Taxpayer Assis- venience. To find the number, go to www.limited English proficiency or who speak English tance Center for an appointment. To find irs.gov/localcontacts or look in the phoneas a second language. Publication 4134, Low the number, go to www.irs.gov/localcon- book under United States Government, In-Income Taxpayer Clinic List, provides informa- tacts or look in the phone book under ternal Revenue Service.tion on clinics in your area. It is available at www. United States Government, Internal Reve-irs.gov or at your local IRS office. nue Service. Mail. You can send your order for
Free tax services. To find out what services forms, instructions, and publications to• TTY/TDD equipment. If you have access
are available, get Publication 910, IRS Guide to the address below. You should receiveto TTY/TDD equipment, call
Free Tax Services. It contains a list of free tax a response within 10 days after your request is1-800-829-4059 to ask tax questions or to
publications and describes other free tax infor- received.order forms and publications.
mation services, including tax education and • TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 to lis-assistance programs and a list of TeleTax top- National Distribution Centerten to pre-recorded messages coveringics. P.O. Box 8903various tax topics.Accessible versions of IRS published prod- Bloomington, IL 61702-8903
ucts are available on request in a variety of • Refund information. To check the status of
CD/DVD for tax products. You canalternative formats for people with disabilities. your 2007 refund, call 1-800-829-4477
order Publication 1796, IRS Tax Prod-and press 1 for automated refund informa-Internet. You can access the IRS web- ucts CD/DVD, and obtain:tion or call 1-800-829-1954. Be sure tosite at www.irs.gov 24 hours a day, 7 wait at least 6 weeks from the date you • Current-year forms, instructions, and pub-days a week to: filed your return (3 weeks if you filed elec- lications.• E-file your return. Find out about commer- tronically). Have your 2007 tax return
cial tax preparation and e-file services • Prior-year forms, instructions, and publica-available because you will need to know
available free to eligible taxpayers. your social security number, your filing tions.
Page 34 Publication 525 (2007)

Page 35 of 40 of Publication 525 8:27 -  2-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Bonus: Historical Tax Products DVD - Purchase the CD/DVD from National Techni- • Tax Map: an electronic research tool and
Ships with the final release. cal Information Service (NTIS) at www.irs.gov/ finding aid.
cdorders for $35 (no handling fee) or call• Tax Map: an electronic research tool and • Web links to various government agen-1-877-CDFORMS (1-877-233-6767) toll free tofinding aid. cies, business associations, and IRS orga-buy the CD/DVD for $35 (plus a $5 handling nizations.• Tax law frequently asked questions. fee). Price is subject to change.
• “Rate the Product” survey—your opportu-• Tax Topics from the IRS telephone re- CD for small businesses. Publication nity to suggest changes for future editions.sponse system. 3207, The Small Business Resource
• A site map of the CD to help you navigateGuide CD for 2007, is a must for every• Fill-in, print, and save features for most tax the pages of the CD with ease.small business owner or any taxpayer about toforms.
start a business. This year’s CD includes: • An interactive “Teens in Biz” module that• Internal Revenue Bulletins. gives practical tips for teens about starting• Helpful information, such as how to pre-• Toll-free and email technical support. their own business, creating a businesspare a business plan, find financing for
plan, and filing taxes.your business, and much more.• The CD which is released twice during the
year. • All the business tax forms, instructions, An updated version of this CD is available– The first release will ship the beginning and publications needed to successfully each year in early April. You can get a free copyof January 2008. manage a business. by calling 1-800-829-3676 or by visiting www.irs.– The final release will ship the beginning
gov/smallbiz.of March 2008. • Tax law changes for 2007.
Publication 525 (2007) Page 35

Page 36 of 40 of Publication 525 8:27 -  2-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Athletic facilities, Civil Rights Act of 1964, Title Deferred compensation:
employer-provided ......... 5 VII: Nonqualified plans ........... 383(b) election ................ 1 3
Back pay and damages forAutomobile  (See Vehicle, Dependent care benefits ..... 5401(k) plans .................. 8
emotional distressemployer-provided) Depletion allowance ......... 1 5Excess contributions ........ 1 0
under .................... 2 9Awards  (See Damages from Directors’ fees .............. 3 0403(b) plans .................. 8
Clergy ....................... 1 3lawsuits) Disability:Limit for ..................... 9
Coal ......................... 1 5 Military .................... 1 4457 plans ..................... 8
Colleges and universities: Pensions .................. 1 6Limit for deferrals under ...... 9 B Workers’Faculty lodging .............. 7501(c)(18)(D) plans ........... 8 Babysitting ................... 3 compensation .......... 1 7Scholarships andContributions ................ 9 Back pay, award for .......... 3 Person with ................ 2 7fellowships ............... 3 2501(c)(3) organizations ...... 1 9 Backup withholding: Unemployment compensation,Comments on publication .... 2529 program ................ 3 2 paid as substitute for ..... 2 7Barter exchange Commissions:1231 property sale .......... 1 5 transactions ............. 1 8 Disaster mitigationAdvance .................... 3
payments ................. 2 8Bankruptcy: Commuter highwayCanceled debt not deemed to Disaster relief:vehicles .................... 7A be income ............... 1 9 Disaster Relief and EmergencyCompensation:Academic health centers: Assistance Act:Barter income ............... 1 8 Employee ................... 3Meals and lodging when Grants ................... 2 8Below-market loans ......... 2 8 Miscellaneous ............... 3teaching and research UnemploymentBequest for services ........ 3 1 Unemployment ............. 2 7organization .............. 7 benefits ............... 2 7Black lung benefit Workers’................... 1 7Accelerated death Payments .................. 2 8payments ................. 1 7 Compensatory damages ... 1 8 ,benefits ................... 2 0 Discounts:Bonuses ..................3 ,  3 1 29Accident insurance ........... 4 Employee discounts ......... 5Breach of contract: Constructive receipt ofAccidental death benefits .... 6 Employee stock purchaseDamages as income ........ 2 9 income ..................... 2Accrual method taxpayers ... 2 plans .................... 1 2Bribes ....................... 2 8 Copyrights: Mortgage loan for earlyAccrued leave payment: Business expenses: Infringement damages ...... 2 9 payment ................. 1 8At time of retirement or Reimbursements ............ 3 Royalties .................. 1 5 Dividends:resignation ................ 4
Business income ......... 15-16 Corporate directors ......... 3 0 Restricted stock ............ 1 3Disability retirement and .... 1 6
Cost-of-living allowances .... 3 Divorced taxpayers:Activity not for profit ........ 2 8
Stock options exercised incidentCourt awards  (See alsoAdoption: C to divorce ................ 1 1Damages from lawsuits) .... 2 9Employer assistance ........ 5 Cafeteria plans .............. 1 6 Down paymentCredit card Insurance ....... 2 9Advance commissions ....... 3 Campaign contributions ..... 2 8 assistance ................ 2 9Credits:Aircraft ....................... 8 Campus lodging .............. 7 Recoveries, refiguring ofAirlines: Cancellation of debt ......... 1 8 unused credits ....... 24, 26 ENo-additional-cost Cancellation of sales Currency transactions,services .................. 7 Educational assistance:contracts .................. 2 9 foreign .................... 3 0Valuation of flights on Employer-provided .......... 5Capital gains or losses:employer-provided Scholarships andEmployee stock option plansaircraft .................... 8 fellowships ............... 3 2(ESOPs) ................. 1 2 DAlaska Permanent Fund Educational institutions:Incentive stock options Damages from lawsuits ..... 2 9dividend .................. 2 8 Faculty lodging .............. 7(ISOs) ................... 1 1 Back pay awards ............ 3Alien status, waiver of ....... 1 4 Elderly persons:Sale of personal Breach of contract .......... 2 9 Nutrition Program for theAlimony ..................... 2 8 property ................. 3 2 Compensatory Elderly ................... 2 8Alternative minimum tax (AMT): Car  (See Vehicle, damages ............ 18, 29 Tax Counseling for theRecoveries, refiguring of .... 2 5 employer-provided) Emotional distress under Title Elderly ................... 1 5Stock options .............. 1 1 Car pools ................... 2 9 VII, Civil Rights Act of Election precinctAnnuities: Cash or deferred arrangements 1964 .................... 2 9 officials ................... 3 0Charitable gift .............. 2 9 (CODAs) ................... 8 Punitive damages .......... 2 9 Elective deferrals ............. 8Railroad retirement ......... 3 2 Cash rebates ................ 2 9 Daycare providers  (See also Catch-up contributions .....8 ,  9Tax-sheltered ............... 9 Childcare providers) ......... 3Casualty insurance: Excess annual additions .... 1 0Archer MSAs ..............4 ,  3 1 Reimbursements from ...... 2 9 Food program payments Excess contributions ........ 1 0t o ....................... 3 0Armed forces ................ 1 4 Catch-up contributions .....8 ,  9 Excess deferrals ............ 9
De minimis benefits ........5 ,  7Disability ................... 1 4 Charitable gift annuities ..... 2 9 Increased limit for last 3 years
Disability pensions ......... 1 6 Death benefits  (See also LifeChild and Adult Care Food prior to retirement age ..... 9
insurance) ................. 1 9Military action as cause of Program: Limit on ..................... 8
Accelerated ................ 2 0disability injuries ......... 1 7 Payments to daycare Reporting by employer ....... 9
providers ................ 3 0Rehabilitative program Debts: Emotional distress
payments ................ 1 4 Child support payments ..... 2 9 Canceled .................. 1 8 damages .................. 2 9
Retirement pay ............. 1 4 Excluded debt .............. 1 9Childcare providers .......3 ,  3 0 Employee achievement
Veterans’ benefits.......... 1 4 Nonrecourse debts ......... 1 9 awards ..................... 3Chronic illness .............. 1 7
Armed Forces Health Recourse .................. 1 9Accelerated death benefits paid Employee awards or
Professions Stockholder’s .............. 1 9t o ....................... 2 0 bonuses .................. 3 1
Scholarship ................ 8 Deduction:Citizens outside U.S.: Employee
Assistance  (See Tax help) Exclusion of foreign Costs of discrimination compensation ........... 3-13
Astronauts ................... 2 income ................... 2 suits ..................... 2 9 Fringe benefits ............ 4 - 8
Page 36 Publication 525 (2007)

Page 37 of 40 of Publication 525 8:27 -  2-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Employee compensation (Cont.) Flights: Form 1041, Schedule K-1: Form W-2:
Restricted property ...... 12-13 501(c)(18)(D)Employer-provided Beneficiary’s share of income,
contributions .............. 9Retirement plan aircraft .................... 8 deductions, credits,
Accrued leave payment at timecontributions ........... 8-10 etc. ...................... 2 9No-additional-cost
of retirement orStock options ........... 10-12 services .................. 7 Form 1065:
resignation ................ 4Employee discounts ......... 5 Food benefits: Partnership return .......... 1 5
Back pay awards ............ 3Employee stock purchase Daycare providers, food Form 1065, Schedule K-1: Bonuses or awards .......... 3plans .................. 11, 12 program payments to ..... 3 0 Partner’s share of Elective deferrals, reporting byNutrition Program for theEmployer, foreign ........... 1 4 income .................. 1 6 employer ................. 9Elderly ................... 2 8Employer-owned life Form 1098: Failure to receive fromForeign:insurance ................. 2 0 Mortgage interest employer ................. 3Currency transactions ...... 3 0Employer-provided educational statement ................ 2 1 Fringe benefits reportedassistance ................. 5 Employment ............... 1 4 Form 1099-B: o n........................ 4Employer-provided Governments, employees Barter exchange Stock options fromvehicles .................... 8 o f ....................... 1 4 transactions ............. 1 8 employers ............... 1 1
Employment: Income ..................... 2 Form 1099-C: Wage and tax statement ..... 3
Abroad .................... 1 4 Service .................... 1 6 Cancellation of debt ........ 1 8 Form W-2G:
Agency fees ............... 2 9 Form 1040: Form 1099-DIV: Gambling winnings ......... 3 0
Contracts: Excess contributions to elective Restricted stock Form W-4V:
Severance pay for deferrals ................. 1 0 dividends ................ 1 3 Unemployment compensation,
cancellation of .......... 4 Recoveries ................ 2 2 voluntary withholdingForm 1099-G:
Endowment proceeds ....... 2 0 request .................. 2 7Unemployment State tax refunds ........... 2 0
compensation ............ 2 7Energy: Form W-9:Unemployment
Assistance ................. 2 8 Wages from Form W-2 ...... 3 Request for taxpayercompensation ............ 2 7
identification number ..... 1 8Conservation: Form 1040, Schedule A: Form 1099-MISC:
Foster care .................. 3 0Subsidies ................ 2 9 Outplacement services, Services totaling $600 or
deduction for .............. 4 Foster GrandparentUtility rebates ............ 3 3 more .................... 3 0
Program .................. 1 5Repayment of commissionsEstate income ............... 2 9 Stock options exercised incident
paid in advance ........... 3 Found property ............. 3 0to divorce ................ 1 1Estimated tax:
Form 1040, Schedule B: Free tax services ............ 3 4Form 1099-R:Unemployment
Restricted stock Fringe benefits ............. 4 - 8compensation ............ 2 7 Charitable gift annuities ..... 2 9
dividends ................ 1 3 Accident and healthExcess: Excess annual additions .... 1 0
insurance ................. 4Form 1040, Schedule C:Annual additions ........... 1 0 Excess contribution
Adoption, employerBartering ................... 1 8 amounts ................. 1 0Contributions ............... 1 0
assistance ................ 5Childcare providers to Excess deferralDeferrals .................... 9
Athletic facilities ............. 5u s e....................... 3 amounts ................. 1 0Expected inheritance ........ 3 1 Commuter highwayPersonal property rental, Surrender of life insuranceExpenses paid by vehicles .................. 7reporting income from .... 1 5 policy for cash ........... 2 0another ................... 3 0 De minimis benefits .......5 ,  7Royalties .................. 1 5 Form 1120-POL: Dependent care benefits ..... 5Form 1040, Schedule C-EZ: Political organizations ...... 2 8 Educational assistance ...... 5F Bartering ................... 1 8 Form 1120S: Employee discounts ......... 5Faculty lodging .............. 7 Childcare providers to S corporation return ........ 1 6 Faculty lodging .............. 7Fair market value (FMV) ...... 8 u s e....................... 3 Form 1120S, Schedule K-1: Financial counseling fees .... 5Stock options .............. 1 0 Personal property rental, Shareholder’s share of income, Holiday gifts ................. 5reporting income from .... 1 5Farming: credits, deductions, Meals and lodging ........... 7Royalties .................. 1 5Qualified farm debt, cancellation etc. ...................... 1 6 Moving expenses (See Moving
o f ....................... 1 9 Form 1040, Schedule D: Form 2441: expenses)
Federal employees: Stock options .............. 1 1 Child and dependent care No-additional-cost
Accrued leave payment ...... 4 Stock options reported expenses ................. 5 services .................. 7
o n....................... 1 1Compensation Act (FECA) Parking ..................... 7Form 4255:
payments ................ 1 7 Retirement planning (SeeForm 1040, Schedule E: Recapture of investment
Retirement planning services)Cost-of-living allowances .... 3 Partner’s return ............ 1 6 credit .................... 2 6
Transit pass ................. 7Disability pensions ......... 1 6 Royalties .................. 1 5 Form 6251:
Tuition reduction ............ 8Thrift Savings Plan for ....... 8 Form 1040A: Alternative minimum tax .... 1 1 Valuation of ................. 8Federal income tax: Recoveries ................ 2 2 Form 8839: Working conditionRefunds ................... 2 0 Unemployment Adoption assistance ......... 5 benefits ................... 8compensation ............ 2 7Fees for services ............ 3 0 Form 8853: Frozen deposits:Wages from Form W-2 ...... 3Financial counseling fees .... 5 Accelerated death Interest on ................. 3 1Form 1040A, Schedule 1:Fellowships ................. 3 2 benefits .................. 2 0
Restricted stockFICA withholding: Archer MSAs and long-term
dividends ................ 1 3 care insuranceForeign employers, U.S. G
Form 1040A, Schedule 2: contracts ................. 4citizens working for in Gambling winnings and
U.S. ..................... 1 4 Child and dependent care Form 8919: losses ..................... 3 0
expenses ................. 5Paid by employer ............ 4 Uncollected social security and Gas:
Form 1040EZ: Medicare tax on wages .... 3Fiduciaries: Royalties from ............. 1 5
Recoveries ................ 2 2Fees for services ........... 3 0 Form RRB-1099: Gifts ........................ 3 1
Unemployment Railroad retirement boardFinancial counseling fees  (See Holiday gifts from
compensation ............ 2 7 payments ................ 3 2also Retirement planning employer ................. 5
services) .................... 5 Wages from Form W-2 ...... 3 Form SSA-1099: Government employees  (See
Fitness programs: Form 1041: Social security benefit Federal employees; State
Employer-provided .......... 5 Estates and trusts .......... 2 9 statement ................ 3 2 employees)
Publication 525 (2007) Page 37

Page 38 of 40 of Publication 525 8:27 -  2-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Grantor trusts ............... 3 0 Life (See Life insurance) Long-term care Old-age, survivors, and
Long-term care (See Long-term insurance ...............4 ,  1 7 disability insurance benefitsGroup-term life insurance:
care insurance) (OASDI) ................... 2 8Worksheets ................. 6 Lotteries and raffles ......... 3 0
Interest: Options, stock .......... 10, 12Lump-sum distributions:
Canceled debt including .... 1 8 Survivor benefits ........... 2 7 Outplacement services ....... 4H Frozen deposits ............ 3 1 Overseas work ............... 2Health: Mortgage refunds .......... 2 1 MFlexible spending Option on insurance ........ 2 0
Manufacturer incentivearrangement .............. 4 Recovery amounts ......... 2 1 Ppayments ................. 3 1Insurance ................... 4 Savings bond .............. 3 1 Parking fees:Reimbursement Meals:State and local government Employer-paid orarrangement .............. 4 Employer-paid orobligations ............... 3 1 reimbursed ............... 7Savings account ............ 4 reimbursed ............... 7Interference with business Partner and partnershipNutrition Program for theHelp  (See Tax help) operations: income .................... 1 5Elderly ................... 2 8Highly compensated Damages as income ........ 2 9 Patents:Medical:employees: International organizations, Infringement damages ...... 2 9Care reimbursements ....... 1 8Excess contributions to elective employees of ............. 1 4 Royalties .................. 1 5Savings accounts .......... 3 1deferrals ................. 1 0 Interview expenses .......... 3 1 Peace Corps ................ 1 4Medicare:Historic preservation Investment counseling fees Pensions:Advantage MSAs ........... 3 1grants ..................... 3 1 (See also Retirement planning Clergy ..................... 1 3Benefits ................... 2 8Hobby losses ............... 3 1 services) .................... 5 Disability pensions ......... 1 6Tax paid by employer ........ 4Holding period Investment income ...... 15, 16 Inherited pensions .......... 3 1Medicare tax  (See Socialrequirement ............... 1 1 IRAs  (See Individual retirement Military .................... 1 4security and Medicare taxes)Holiday gifts ................. 5 arrangements (IRAs)) Personal property:Military  (See Armed forces)Holocaust victims Iron ore ..................... 1 5 Rental income andMinerals:restitution ................. 3 1 Itemized deductions: expense ................. 1 5Royalties from ............. 1 5Home, sale of ............... 3 2 Limited .................... 2 2 Sale of ..................... 3 2Miscellaneous:Host or hostess ............. 1 9 Recoveries ............ 20, 21 Personal representatives  (SeeCompensation .............. 3Hotels: Fiduciaries)Income .................... 1 8No-additional-cost Prepaid income .............. 2J Missing children, photographsservices .................. 7 Price reduced afterJob interview expenses ..... 3 1 of .......................... 2Housing  (See Lodging) purchase .................. 1 9Joint returns: More information  (See Tax help) Prizes and awards .........3 ,  3 1Social security benefits or Mortgage: Achievement awards ........ 3railroad retirementI Assistance payment ........ 2 8 Employee awards orpayments ................ 3 2 Discounted loan ............ 1 8Illegal income ............... 3 1 bonuses ................. 3 1Jury duty pay ............... 3 1 Interest refund ............. 2 1Important changes and Length-of-service awards .... 3Relief ...................... 1 9reminders: Pulitzer, Nobel, and similarMotor vehicle,Astronauts .................. 2 K prizes ................... 3 2employer-provided ......... 8Deferred compensation: Kickbacks ................... 3 1 Safety achievement ......... 3Nonqualified plans ........ 2 Moving expenses: Scholarship prizes .......... 3 2Disaster mitigation ........... 2 Reimbursements .........3 ,  3 1 Profit-sharing plan .......... 1 6LForeign income, reporting MSAs (Medical savings Public assistanceo f ........................ 2 Labor unions: accounts) ................. 3 1 benefits ................... 2 7Terrorist attacks, assistance or Convention expenses,
Public Health Service ........ 1 6payments due to .......... 2 reimbursed .............. 3 3
N Public safety officers killed inDues ...................... 3 3Incentive stock options
National Health Service Corps line of duty ................ 2 7Strike and lockout(ISOs) ..................... 1 1
Scholarship Program ...... 8benefits .................. 3 3 Public transportation passes,Income:
National Oceanic andUnemployment benefits paid employer-provided ......... 7Assigned ................... 2
Atmosphericfrom ..................... 2 7 Publications  (See Tax help)Business and
Administration ............ 1 6Last day of tax year, incomeinvestment ........... 15, 16 Pulitzer prize ................ 3 2
National Senior Servicereceived on ................ 2Constructive receipt of ....... 2 Punitive damages ........... 2 9
Corps ..................... 1 5Estate and trust ............ 2 9 Leave  (See Accrued leave
No-additional-costForeign employers ......... 1 4 payment)
services .................... 7 QIllegal ...................... 3 1 Length-of-service awards .... 3
Miscellaneous .............. 1 8 Nobel prize .................. 3 2 Qualified tuition programLife insurance:
Other ...................... 2 8 (QTP) ..................... 3 2No-fault car insurance:Employer-owned ........... 2 0
Partnership ................ 1 5 Disability benefits under .... 1 8Proceeds .................. 1 9
Prepaid ..................... 2 Surrender of policy for Nonrecourse debt ........... 1 9
RS corporation .............. 1 6 cash ..................... 2 0 Nonstatutory stock
Raffles ...................... 3 0Indian fishing rights ......... 3 1 Loans  (See also options ................... 1 0
Railroads:Individual retirement Mortgage) ................. 1 8 Nontaxable income ........... 2
Retirement annuities ........ 3 2arrangements (IRAs): Below-market .............. 2 8 Notary fees .................. 3 0Deduction .................. 3 3 Retirement benefits ......... 3 2Student .................... 1 9 Notes received forInherited IRA ............... 3 1 Sick pay ................... 1 7Lockout benefits ............ 3 3 services .................... 3 Unemployment compensationInheritance .................. 3 1 Lodging: Not-for-profit activities ...... 2 8 benefits .................. 2 7I R A........................ 3 1 Campus lodging ............. 7 Nutrition Program for theProperty not substantially Real estate:Clergy ..................... 1 3 Elderly .................... 2 8vested ................... 1 3 Qualified real property businessEmployer-paid or
debt, cancellation of ...... 1 9Injury benefits ............ 16-18 reimbursed ............... 7
O Rebates:Insurance: Faculty lodging .............. 7
Cash ...................... 2 9Credit card ................. 2 9 Replacement housing Oil:
Health ...................... 4 payments ................ 2 8 Royalties from ............. 1 5 Utility ...................... 3 3
Page 38 Publication 525 (2007)

Page 39 of 40 of Publication 525 8:27 -  2-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Recovery of amounts Savings incentive match plans Substantially vested Trusts:
previously deducted ...... 2 0 for employees  (See SIMPLE property ................... 1 2 Grantor trusts .............. 3 0
Itemized deductions .... 20, 21 plans) Income .................... 2 9Suggestions for
Non-itemized Scholarships and publication ................. 2 TTY/TDD information ........ 3 4
deductions ............... 2 5 fellowships ................ 3 2 Supplemental security income Tuition program, qualified
Unused tax credits, refiguring Self-employed persons: (SSI) payments ............ 3 2 (QTP) ..................... 3 2
o f ................... 24, 26 U.S. citizens working for foreign Supplemental unemployment Tuition reduction ............. 8Worksheet of itemized employers in U.S. treated benefits ................... 2 7deductions ............... 2 2 a s....................... 1 4 Surviving spouse: URefunds: Senior Companion Life insurance proceeds paid UnemploymentFederal income tax ......... 2 0 Program .................. 1 5 t o ....................... 2 0 compensation ............. 2 7Mortgage interest .......... 2 1 Service Corps of Retired Survivor benefits ............ 2 6 Unions  (See Labor unions)State tax ................... 2 0 Executives (SCORE) ...... 1 5 Unlawful discrimination suits:Rehabilitative program Severance pay ............... 4 T Deduction for costs ......... 2 9payments ................. 1 4 Outplacement services ...... 4 Tables and figures:Reimbursements: Sick pay ...................... 4 Group-term life insuranceBusiness expenses .......... 3 VSickness and injury (Table 1) ................. 6Casualty losses ............ 2 9 VA payments ................ 3 2benefits ............... 16, 18 Standard deduction (TablesMeals and lodging ........... 7 Valuation:SIMPLE plans ................ 8 2-4) ..................... 2 2Medical expenses .......... 1 8 Fringe benefits .............. 8Limit for deferrals under ...... 9 Tax benefit rule ............. 2 0Moving expenses ........3 ,  3 1 Stock options .............. 1 0Smallpox vaccine Tax Counseling for theRelated party transactions: Vehicle:injuries .................... 3 2 Elderly .................... 1 5Stock option transfer ........ 1 1 Commuter highway .......... 7Social security and Medicare Tax help ..................... 3 4Religious order Employer-provided .......... 8taxes: Taxpayer Advocate .......... 3 4members .................. 1 3 Veterans’ benefits........... 1 4Foreign employers, U.S. Tax-sheltered annuity plansRental income and expenses: Disability compensation ..... 1 7citizens working for in (403(b) plans) .............. 8Personal property rental .... 1 5 U.S. ..................... 1 4 Viatical settlements ......... 2 0Limit for ..................... 9Reporting of ................ 1 5 Paid by employer ............ 4 Volunteer work .............. 1 4Terminal illness ............. 2 0Repayments ................. 3 3 Social security benefits ..... 3 2 Tax counseling (VolunteerTerrorist attacks:Repossession ............... 2 9 Income Tax AssistanceStandard deduction: Disability payments for injuriesRestricted property ...... 12, 13 Program) ................ 1 5Recoveries and ............ 2 2 from ..................... 1 7Retired Senior Volunteer Tables (2006-2004) ...... 2 2 Volunteers in Service toVictims of, tax relief .......... 2Program (RSVP) ........... 1 5 America (VISTA) .......... 1 5State employees: Thrift Savings Plan ........... 8Retirement planning Unemployment benefits paid Title VII, Civil Rights Act ofservices ..................5 ,  7 t o ....................... 2 7 W1964:Retirement plans  (See also State or local governments: W-2 form  (See Form W-2)Back pay and damages forPensions) .................. 1 4 Interest on obligations of .... 3 1 Welfare benefits ............. 2 7emotional distressContributions .............8 ,  1 0 State or local taxes: under .................... 2 9 Winter energy payments .... 2 8Elective deferrals (See Elective Refunds ................... 2 0 Tour guides, free tours Withholding:deferrals) Statutory stock option holding for ........................ 3 0 Barter exchangeRewards .................... 3 2 period ..................... 1 1 transactions ............. 1 8Trade Act of 1974:Roth contributions ........... 9 Stock appreciation rights ..... 4 UnemploymentTrade readjustment allowancesRoyalties .................... 1 5 Stock options ........... 10, 12 compensation ............ 2 7under .................... 2 7
Stock options, nonstatutory: Workers’ compensation..... 1 7Transferable property ....... 1 2Exercise or transfer ......... 1 1S Working conditionTransit passes ............... 7Grant ...................... 1 0S corporations .............. 1 6 benefits .................... 8Travel agencies:Sale ....................... 1 1Safety achievement Worksheets:Free tour to organizer of groupStock options, statutory:awards ..................... 3 Group-term life insuranceof tourists ................ 3 0Exercise ................... 1 1Salary reduction simplified (Worksheet 1) ............. 6Travel and transportationGrant ...................... 1 1employee pension plans  (See Recoveries of itemizedexpenses:Sale ....................... 1 1SARSEPs) deductions (WorksheetFree tours from travelStockholder debts ........... 1 9Sale of home ................ 3 2 2 ) ....................... 2 2agencies ................ 3 0Stolen property ............. 3 3Sales contracts: Work-training programs ..... 2 7Fringe benefits .............. 7
Strike benefits ............... 3 3Cancellation of ............. 2 9 Reimbursements ............ 3 ■Student loans:SARSEPs .................... 8 School children, transporting
Cancellation of debt ........ 1 9Excess contributions ........ 1 0 o f ....................... 3 3
Substantial risk ofSavings bonds .............. 3 1
forfeiture .................. 1 2
Publication 525 (2007) Page 39

Page 40 of 40 of Publication 525 8:27 -  2-NOV-2007
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tax Publications for Individual Taxpayers
General Guides
Your Rights as a Taxpayer
Your Federal Income Tax (For
Individuals)
Farmer’s Tax Guide
Tax Guide for Small Business (For
Individuals Who Use Schedule C or
C-EZ)
Tax Calendars for 2008
Highlights of 2007 Tax Changes
IRS Guide to Free Tax Services
Specialized Publications
Armed Forces’ Tax Guide
Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Expenses
Exemptions, Standard Deduction, and
Filing Information
Medical and Dental Expenses (Including
the Health Coverage Tax Credit)
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Divorced or Separated Individuals
Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax
Foreign Tax Credit for Individuals
U.S. Government Civilian Employees
Stationed Abroad
Social Security and Other Information
for Members of the Clergy and
Religious Workers
U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens
Moving Expenses
Selling Your Home
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Taxable and Nontaxable Income
Charitable Contributions
Residential Rental Property (Including
Rental of Vacation Homes)
Commonly Used Tax Forms
Miscellaneous Deductions
Tax Information for First-Time
Homeowners
Reporting Tip Income
Installment Sales
Partnerships
Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets
Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
Investment Income and Expenses
(Including Capital Gains and Losses)
Basis of Assets
Recordkeeping for Individuals
Tax Guide for Seniors
Community Property
Examination of Returns, Appeal Rights,
and Claims for Refund
Survivors, Executors, and
Administrators
Determining the Value of Donated
Property
Mutual Fund Distributions
Tax Guide for Individuals With Income
From U.S. Possessions
Pension and Annuity Income
Casualty, Disaster, and Theft Loss
Workbook (Personal-Use Property)
Business Use of Your Home (Including
Use by Daycare Providers)
Individual Retirement Arrangements
(IRAs)
Tax Highlights for U.S. Citizens and
Residents Going Abroad
The IRS Collection Process
Earned Income Credit (EIC)
Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service
Retirement Benefits
Tax Highlights for Persons with
Disabilities
Bankruptcy Tax Guide
Social Security and Equivalent
Railroad Retirement Benefits
How Do I Adjust My Tax Withholding?
Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
Household Employer’s Tax Guide For
Wages Paid in 2008
Tax Rules for Children and
Dependents
Home Mortgage Interest Deduction
How To Depreciate Property
Practice Before the IRS and
Power of Attorney
Introduction to Estate and Gift Taxes
The IRS Will Figure Your Tax
Per Diem Rates (For Travel Within the
Continental United States)
Reporting Cash Payments of Over
$10,000 (Received in a Trade or
Business)
Taxpayer Advocate Service – Your
Voice at the IRS
Derechos del Contribuyente
Cómo Preparar la Declaración de
Impuesto Federal
Crédito por Ingreso del Trabajo
English-Spanish Glossary of Words
and Phrases Used in Publications
Issued by the Internal Revenue
ServiceU.S. Tax Treaties
Spanish Language Publications
910
553
509
334
225
17
1
3
463
501
502
503
504
505
514
516
517
519
521
523
524
525
526
527
529
530
531
537
544
547
550
551
552
554
541
555
556
559
561
564
570
575
584
587
590
593
594
596
721
901
907
908
915
919
925
926
929
946
936
950
1542
967
1544
1546
596SP
1SP
850
579SP
Que es lo que Debemos Saber sobre
el Proceso de Cobro del IRS
594SP
947
Informe de Pagos en Efectivo en
Exceso de $10,000 (Recibidos en
una Ocupación o Negocio)
1544SP
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get forms, including by computer, phone, and mail.
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Itemized Deductions & Interest and
Ordinary Dividends
Profit or Loss From Business
Net Profit From Business
Capital Gains and Losses
Supplemental Income and Loss
Earned Income Credit
Profit or Loss From Farming
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Income Tax Return for Single and 
Joint Filers With No Dependents
Self-Employment Tax
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Interest and Ordinary Dividends for
Form 1040A Filers
Child and Dependent Care
Expenses for Form 1040A Filers
Credit for the Elderly or the 
Disabled for Form 1040A Filers
Estimated Tax for Individuals
Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Unreimbursed Employee Business
Expenses
Underpayment of Estimated Tax by
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
Power of Attorney and Declaration of
Representative
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Moving Expenses
Depreciation and Amortization
Application for Automatic Extension of Time
To File U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Investment Interest Expense Deduction
Additional Taxes on Qualified Plans (Including
IRAs) and Other Tax-Favored Accounts
Alternative Minimum Tax—Individuals
Noncash Charitable Contributions
Change of Address
Expenses for Business Use of Your Home
Nondeductible IRAs
Passive Activity Loss Limitations
1040
Sch A&B
Sch C
Sch C-EZ
Sch D
Sch E
Sch EIC
Sch F
Sch H Household Employment Taxes 
Sch R
Sch SE
1040EZ
1040A
Sch 1
Sch 2
Sch 3
1040-ES
1040X
2106 Employee Business Expenses
2106-EZ
2210
2441
2848
3903
4562
4868
4952
5329
6251
8283
8582
8606
8822
8829
Form Number and Title
Sch J Income Averaging for Farmers and Fishermen
Additional Child Tax Credit8812
Education Credits (Hope and Lifetime Learning
Credits)
8863
Form Number and Title
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get publications, including
by computer, phone, and mail.
970 Tax Benefits for Education
971 Innocent Spouse Relief
Sch D-1 Continuation Sheet for Schedule D
972 Child Tax Credit
Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and
Resident Aliens Abroad
54
Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
536
Tax-Sheltered Annuity Plans (403(b)
Plans) For Employees of Public
Schools and Certain Tax-Exempt
Organizations
571
Health Savings Accounts and Other
Tax-Favored Health Plans
969
Installment Agreement Request9465
Page 40 Publication 525 (2007)