Userid: SD_03NBB DTD tipx Leadpct: -2% Pt. size: 10 ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: ...\03nbb\documents\epicfiles\2009 Epic files\P502 2009 w_links 8-11.xml (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 34 of Publication 502 11:49 - 10-NOV-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ContentsDepartment of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
 What's New .............................. . 1
Reminder ................................ . 2
Publication 502 Introduction ............................. . 2Cat. No. 15002Q
What Are Medical Expenses? ............... . 3
What Expenses Can You Include ThisMedical and Year? ................................ . 3
How Much of the Expenses Can You
Dental Deduct? ............................. . 3
Whose Medical Expenses Can You
Include? ............................. . 3Expenses
What Medical Expenses Are Includible? ....... . 5
(Including the Health What Expenses Are Not Includible? .......... . 15
Coverage Tax Credit) How Do You Treat Reimbursements? ......... . 17
How Do You Figure and Report the
For use in preparing Deduction on Your Tax Return? .......... . 19
Sale of Medical Equipment or Property ........ . 202009 Returns
Damages for Personal Injuries ............... . 22
Impairment-Related Work Expenses .......... . 23
Health Insurance Costs for Self-Employed
Persons .............................. . 23
COBRA Premium Assistance ................ . 24
Health Coverage Tax Credit ................. . 25
How To Get Tax Help ...................... . 28
Index ................................... . 31
What's New
Standard mileage rate. The standard mileage rate al-
lowed for operating expenses for a car when you use it for
medical reasons is 24 cents per mile for 2009. See Trans-
portation under What Medical Expenses Are Includible.
COBRA continuation coverage. If you involuntarily lost
your job between September 1, 2008, and December 31,
2009, you may qualify for a 65% reduction in premiums for
COBRA continuation coverage for up to nine months. The
premium reduction is not included in your gross income.
You cannot claim the health coverage tax credit for any
month that you receive this premium. Also, certain
TAA-eligible and PBGC recipients qualify for an extension
of COBRA benefits.
For more information, see COBRA Premium Assis-
Get forms and other information tance, later.
faster and easier by:
Health coverage tax credit. The health coverage taxInternet www.irs.gov credit (HCTC) is increased to 80% of your premium for
qualified health insurance for eligible coverage months
Nov 10, 2009

Page 2 of 34 of Publication 502 11:49 - 10-NOV-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
beginning after April 30, 2009, and before 2011. The in- This publication also explains how to treat impair-
ment-related work expenses, health insurance premiums ifcrease also applies to the advance payment of credit for
you are self-employed, and the health coverage tax credithealth insurance costs under the advance payment pro-
that is available to certain individuals.gram.
Pub. 502 covers many common medical expenses butFor eligible coverage months beginning in 2010, the
not every possible medical expense. If you cannot find theHCTC will continue to apply to family members after cer-
expense you are looking for, refer to the definition oftain events.
medical expenses under What Are Medical Expenses.Eligibility for Medicare. Once you, the eligible individ-
See How To Get Tax Help near the end of this publica-ual, qualify for Medicare, the HCTC will be determined for
tion for information about getting publications and forms.your qualifying family members for 24 months from the
month you first qualify for Medicare. Comments and suggestions. We welcome your com-Divorce. If you, the eligible individual, and your spouse ments about this publication and your suggestions forare divorced, your spouse will continue to be an eligible future editions.individual for 24 months from the date the divorce is final- You can write to us at the following address:ized. Only family members who were qualifying family
members immediately before the divorce was final qualify
Internal Revenue Servicefor this extension.
Individual Forms and Publications BranchDeath. In the case of the death of the eligible individual,
SE:W:CAR:MP:T:Ithe spouse and other qualifying family members who quali-
1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6526fied immediately before the death of the qualifying individ-
Washington, DC 20224ual will be treated as an eligible individual for 24 months
from the date of death.
We respond to many letters by telephone. Therefore, itThe HCTC does not apply to months beginning would be helpful if you would include your daytime phoneafter December 31, 2010. number, including the area code, in your correspondence.
CAUTION
!
You can email us at *taxforms@irs.gov. (The asterisk
must be included in the address.) Please put ªPublications
For more information, see Health Coverage Tax Credit, Commentº on the subject line. Although we cannot re-
later. spond individually to each email, we do appreciate your
feedback and will consider your comments as we revise
our tax products.
Reminder Ordering forms and publications. Visit www.irs.gov/
formspubs to download forms and publications, call
1-800-829-3676, or write to the address below and receivePhotographs of missing children. The Internal Reve-
a response within 10 days after your request is received.nue Service is a proud partner with the National Center for
Missing and Exploited Children. Photographs of missing
children selected by the Center may appear in this publica- Internal Revenue Service
tion on pages that would otherwise be blank. You can help 1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorway
bring these children home by looking at the photographs Bloomington, IL 61705-6613
and calling 1-800-THE-LOST (1-800-843-5678) if you rec-
ognize a child. Tax questions. If you have a tax question, check the
information available on www.irs.gov  or call
1-800-829-1040. We cannot answer tax questions sent to
Introduction either of the above addresses.
This publication explains the itemized deduction for medi-
Useful Itemscal and dental expenses that you claim on Schedule A
You may want to see:(Form 1040). It discusses what expenses, and whose
expenses, you can and cannot include in figuring the
Publicationdeduction. It explains how to treat reimbursements and
how to figure the deduction. It also tells you how to report ❏ 969 Health Savings Accounts and Otherthe deduction on your tax return and what to do if you sell Tax-Favored Health Plansmedical property or receive damages for a personal injury.
Medical expenses include dental expenses, and in this Forms (and Instructions)
publication the term ªmedical expensesº is often used to
❏ 1040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Returnrefer to medical and dental expenses.
You can deduct on Schedule A (Form 1040) only the ❏ Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized Deductions
part of your medical and dental expenses that is more than ❏ 8853 Archer MSAs and Long-Term Care Insurance7.5% of your adjusted gross income (AGI). If your medical Contractsand dental expenses are not more than 7.5% of your AGI,
you cannot claim a deduction. ❏ 8885 Health Coverage Tax Credit
Page 2 Publication 502 (2009)

Page 3 of 34 of Publication 502 11:49 - 10-NOV-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
are divided equally. Each of you should include half the
expenses. If medical expenses are paid out of the separateWhat Are Medical Expenses?
funds of one spouse, only the spouse who paid the medical
Medical expenses are the costs of diagnosis, cure, mitiga- expenses can include them. If you live in a community
tion, treatment, or prevention of disease, and the costs for property state, are married, and file a separate return, see
treatments affecting any part or function of the body. These Publication 555, Community Property. 
expenses include payments for legal medical services
rendered by physicians, surgeons, dentists, and other
medical practitioners. They include the costs of equipment, How Much of the Expensessupplies, and diagnostic devices needed for these pur-
poses. Can You Deduct?Medical care expenses must be primarily to alleviate or
prevent a physical or mental defect or illness. They do not You can deduct on Schedule A (Form 1040) only theinclude expenses that are merely beneficial to general amount of your medical and dental expenses that is morehealth, such as vitamins or a vacation. than 7.5% of your AGI(Form 1040, line 38).Medical expenses include the premiums you pay for In this publication, the term ª7.5% limitº is used to referinsurance that covers the expenses of medical care, and to 7.5% of your AGI. The phrase ªsubject to the 7.5% limitºthe amounts you pay for transportation to get medical care. is also used. This phrase means that you must subtractMedical expenses also include amounts paid for qualified 7.5% (.075) of your AGI from your medical expenses tolong-term care services and limited amounts paid for any
figure your medical expense deduction.qualified long-term care insurance contract.
Example. Your AGI is $40,000, 7.5% of which is
$3,000. You paid medical expenses of $2,500. You cannotWhat Expenses Can You deduct any of your medical expenses because they are not
more than 7.5% of your AGI.Include This Year?
You can include only the medical and dental expenses you
paid this year, regardless of when the services were pro- Whose Medical Expenses 
vided. (But see Decedent under Whose Medical Expenses
Can You Include , for an exception.) If you pay medical Can You Include?
expenses by check, the day you mail or deliver the check
generally is the date of payment. If you use a You can generally include medical expenses you pay for
ªpay-by-phoneº or ªonlineº account to pay your medical yourself, as well as those you pay for someone who was
expenses, the date reported on the statement of the finan- your spouse or your dependent either when the services
cial institution showing when payment was made is the were provided or when you paid for them. There are
date of payment. If you use a credit card, include medical different rules for decedents and for individuals who are
expenses you charge to your credit card in the year the the subject of multiple support agreements. See Support
charge is made, not when you actually pay the amount claimed under a multiple support agreement , later under
charged. Qualifying Relative.
If you did not claim a medical or dental expense that
would have been deductible in an earlier year, you can file YourselfForm 1040X, Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Re-
turn, for the year in which you overlooked the expense. Do You can include medical expenses that you paid for your-not claim the expense on this year's return. Generally, an self.amended return must be filed within 3 years from the date
the original return was filed or within 2 years from the time
Spousethe tax was paid, whichever is later.
You cannot include medical expenses that were paid by You can include medical expenses you paid for yourinsurance companies or other sources. This is true spouse. To include these expenses, you must have beenwhether the payments were made directly to you, to the married either at the time your spouse received the medi-patient, or to the provider of the medical services.
cal services or at the time you paid the medical expenses.
Separate returns. If you and your spouse live in a non-
community property state and file separate returns, each of Example 1. Mary received medical treatment before
you can include only the medical expenses each actually she married Bill. Bill paid for the treatment after they
paid. Any medical expenses paid out of a joint checking married. Bill can include these expenses in figuring his
account in which you and your spouse have the same medical expense deduction even if Bill and Mary file sepa-
interest are considered to have been paid equally by each rate returns.
of you, unless you can show otherwise. If Mary had paid the expenses, Bill could not include
Mary's expenses in his separate return. Mary would in-Community property states. If you and your spouse
clude the amounts she paid during the year in her separatelive in a community property state and file separate re-
return. If they filed a joint return, the medical expensesturns, any medical expenses paid out of community funds
Publication 502 (2009) Page 3

Page 4 of 34 of Publication 502 11:49 - 10-NOV-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
both paid during the year would be used to figure their 4. Did not provide over half of his or her own support for
2009, andmedical expense deduction.
5. Did not file a joint return, other than to claim a refund.Example 2. This year, John paid medical expenses for
his wife Louise, who died last year. John married Belle this
Adopted child. A legally adopted child is treated as youryear and they file a joint return. Because John was married
own child. This child includes a child lawfully placed withto Louise when she received the medical services, he can
you for legal adoption.include those expenses in figuring his medical expense You can include medical expenses that you paid for adeduction for this year. child before adoption if the child qualified as your depen-
dent when the medical services were provided or when theDependent expenses were paid.
If you pay back an adoption agency or other persons forYou can include medical expenses you paid for your de- medical expenses they paid under an agreement with you,pendent. For you to include these expenses, the person you are treated as having paid those expenses providedmust have been your dependent either at the time the you clearly substantiate that the payment is directly attribu-medical services were provided or at the time you paid the table to the medical care of the child.expenses. A person generally qualifies as your dependent But if you pay the agency or other person for medicalfor purposes of the medical expense deduction if both of care that was provided and paid for before adoption negoti-the following requirements are met. ations began, you cannot include them as medical ex-
penses.1. The person was a qualifying child (defined later) or a
qualifying relative (defined later), and You may be able to take a credit for other ex-
penses related to an adoption. See the Instruc-2. The person was a U.S. citizen or national or a resi- tions for Form 8839, Qualified Adoption
TIPdent of the United States, Canada, or Mexico. If your Expenses, for more information.qualifying child was adopted, see Exception for
adopted child, below. Child of divorced or separated parents. For purposes
You can include medical expenses you paid for an individ- of the medical and dental expenses deduction, a child of
ual that would have been your dependent except that: divorced or separated parents can be treated as a depen-
dent of both parents. Each parent can include the medical1. He or she received gross income of $3,650 or more expenses he or she pays for the child, even if the otherin 2009, parent claims the child's dependency exemption, if:
2. He or she filed a joint return for 2009, or 1. The child is in the custody of one or both parents for
3. You, or your spouse if filing jointly, could be claimed more than half the year,
as a dependent on someone else's 2009 return. 2. The child receives over half of his or her support
during the year from his or her parents, and
Exception for adopted child. If you are a U.S. citizen or 3. The child's parents:national and your adopted child lived with you as a mem-
ber of your household for 2009, that child does not have to a. Are divorced or legally separated under a decree
be a U.S. citizen or national, or a resident of the United of divorce or separate maintenance,
States, Canada, or Mexico. b. Are separated under a written separation agree-
ment, or
Qualifying Child c. Live apart at all times during the last 6 months of
the year.A qualifying child is a child who:
This does not apply if the child's exemption is being1. Is your son, daughter, stepchild, foster child, brother,
claimed under a multiple support agreement (discussedsister, stepbrother, stepsister, or a descendant of any
later).of them (for example, your grandchild, niece, or
nephew),
2. Was: Qualifying Relative
a. Under age 19 at the end of 2009 and younger A qualifying relative is a person:
than you (or your spouse, if filing jointly),
1. Who is your:b. Under age 24 at the end of 2009, a full-time stu-
dent, and younger than you (or your spouse, if a. Son, daughter, stepchild, or foster child, or a de-
filing jointly), or scendant of any of them (for example, your
grandchild),c. Any age and permanently and totally disabled,
b. Brother or sister, or a son or daughter of either of
3. Lived with you for more than half of 2009, them,
Page 4 Publication 502 (2009)

Page 5 of 34 of Publication 502 11:49 - 10-NOV-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
c. Father or mother, or an ancestor or sibling of beginning with the day after the date of death. If you are the
either of them (for example, your grandmother, survivor or personal representative making this choice,
grandfather, aunt, or uncle), you must attach a statement to the decedent's Form 1040
(or the decedent's amended return, Form 1040X) sayingd. Stepbrother, stepsister, stepfather, stepmother, that the expenses have not been and will not be claimed onson-in-law, daughter-in-law, father-in-law, the estate tax return.mother-in-law, brother-in-law, or sister-in-law, or
 Qualified medical expenses paid before death bye. Any other person (other than your spouse) who the decedent are not deductible if paid with alived with you all year as a member of your tax-free distribution from any Archer MSA, Medi-
CAUTION
!household if your relationship did not violate local care Advantage MSA, or health savings account.law,
2. Who was not a qualifying child (see Qualifying Child What if the decedent's return had been filed and theearlier) of any taxpayer for 2009, and medical expenses were not included? Form 1040X can
be filed for the year or years the expenses are treated as3. For whom you provided over half of the support in
paid, unless the period for filing an amended return for that2009. But see Child of divorced or separated par-
year has passed. Generally, an amended return must beents, earlier, Support claimed under a multiple sup-
filed within 3 years of the date the original return was filed,port agreement, next, and Kidnapped child under
or within 2 years from the time the tax was paid, whicheverQualifying Relative in Publication 501, Exemptions,
date is later.Standard Deduction, and Filing Information.
Example. John properly filed his 2008 income tax re-Support claimed under a multiple support agreement. turn. He died in 2009 with unpaid medical expenses ofIf you are considered to have provided more than half of a $1,500 from 2008 and $1,800 in 2009. If the expenses arequalifying relative's support under a multiple support paid within the 1-year period, his survivor or personalagreement, you can include medical expenses you pay for representative can file an amended return for 2008 claim-that person. A multiple support agreement is used when ing a deduction based on the $1,500 medical expenses.two or more people provide more than half of a person's The $1,800 of medical expenses from 2009 can be in-support, but no one alone provides more than half. cluded on the decedent's final return for 2009.
For rules regarding what expenses you can include this
year, see What Expenses Can You Include This Year , What if you pay medical expenses of a deceasedearlier. spouse or dependent? If you paid medical expenses for
Any medical expenses paid by others who joined you in your deceased spouse or dependent, include them as
the agreement cannot be included as medical expenses by medical expenses on your Form 1040 in the year paid,
anyone. However, you can include the entire un- whether they are paid before or after the decedent's death.
reimbursed amount you paid for medical expenses. The expenses can be included if the person was your
spouse or dependent either at the time the medical serv-Example. You and your three brothers each provide ices were provided or at the time you paid the expenses.one-fourth of your mother's total support. Under a multiple
support agreement, you treat your mother as your depen-
dent. You paid all of her medical expenses. Your brothers
What Medical Expenses Arerepaid you for three-fourths of these expenses. In figuring
your medical expense deduction, you can include only
Includible?one-fourth of your mother's medical expenses. Your broth-
ers cannot include any part of the expenses. However, if
Following is a list of items that you can include in figuringyou and your brothers share the nonmedical support items
your medical expense deduction. The items are listed inand you separately pay all of your mother's medical ex-
alphabetical order.penses, you can include the unreimbursed amount you
paid for her medical expenses in your medical expenses. This list does not include all possible medical expenses.
To determine if an expense not listed can be included in
figuring your medical expense deduction, see What AreDecedent
Medical Expenses, earlier.
Medical expenses paid before death by the decedent are
included in figuring any deduction for medical and dental Abortionexpenses on the decedent's final income tax return. This
includes expenses for the decedent's spouse and depen- You can include in medical expenses the amount you pay
dents as well as for the decedent. for a legal abortion.
The survivor or personal representative of a decedent
can choose to treat certain expenses paid by the dece- Acupuncture
dent's estate for the decedent's medical care as paid by
You can include in medical expenses the amount you paythe decedent at the time the medical services were pro-
for acupuncture.vided. The expenses must be paid within the 1-year period
Publication 502 (2009) Page 5

Page 6 of 34 of Publication 502 11:49 - 10-NOV-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Alcoholism Breast Reconstruction Surgery
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for You can include in medical expenses the amounts you pay
an inpatient's treatment at a therapeutic center for alcohol for breast reconstruction surgery following a mastectomy
addiction. This includes meals and lodging provided by the for cancer.
center during treatment.
You can also include in medical expenses amounts you Capital Expensespay for transportation to and from Alcoholics Anonymous
meetings in your community if the attendance is pursuant You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for
to medical advice that membership in Alcoholics Anony- special equipment installed in a home, or for improve-
mous is necessary for the treatment of a disease involving ments, if their main purpose is medical care for you, your
the excessive use of alcoholic liquors. spouse, or your dependent. The cost of permanent im-
provements that increase the value of your property may
be partly included as a medical expense. The cost of theAmbulance
improvement is reduced by the increase in the value of
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for your property. The difference is a medical expense. If the
ambulance service. value of your property is not increased by the improve-
ment, the entire cost is included as a medical expense.
Certain improvements made to accommodate a homeAnnual Physical Examination to your disabled condition, or that of your spouse or your
dependents who live with you, do not usually increase theSee Physical Examination, later.
value of the home and the cost can be included in full as
medical expenses. These improvements include, but areArtificial Limb not limited to, the following items.
You can include in medical expenses the amount you pay • Constructing entrance or exit ramps for your home.
for an artificial limb. • Widening doorways at entrances or exits to your
home.
Artificial Teeth • Widening or otherwise modifying hallways and inte-
rior doorways.You can include in medical expenses the amount you pay
for artificial teeth. • Installing railings, support bars, or other modifica-
tions to bathrooms.
Autoette • Lowering or modifying kitchen cabinets and equip-
ment.See Wheelchair, later.
• Moving or modifying electrical outlets and fixtures.
Bandages • Installing porch lifts and other forms of lifts (but ele-
vators generally add value to the house).You can include in medical expenses the cost of medical
supplies such as bandages. • Modifying fire alarms, smoke detectors, and other
warning systems.
Birth Control Pills • Modifying stairways.
• Adding handrails or grab bars anywhere (whether orYou can include in medical expenses the amount you pay
not in bathrooms).for birth control pills prescribed by a doctor.
• Modifying hardware on doors.
Body Scan • Modifying areas in front of entrance and exit door-
ways.You can include in medical expenses the cost of an elec-
tronic body scan. • Grading the ground to provide access to the resi-
dence.
Braille Books and Magazines
Only reasonable costs to accommodate a home to a
You can include in medical expenses the part of the cost of disabled condition are considered medical care. Additional
Braille books and magazines for use by a visually impaired costs for personal motives, such as for architectural or
person that is more than the cost of regular printed edi- aesthetic reasons, are not medical expenses.
tions. Capital expense worksheet. Use Worksheet A to figure
the amount of your capital expense to include in your
medical expenses.
Page 6 Publication 502 (2009)

Page 7 of 34 of Publication 502 11:49 - 10-NOV-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet A. Capital Expense
Operation and upkeep. Amounts you pay for operationWorksheet
and upkeep of a capital asset qualify as medical expenses,Keep for Your Records
as long as the main reason for them is medical care. This
Instructions: Use this worksheet to figure the amount, if any, of rule applies even if none or only part of the original cost of
your medical expenses due to a home improvement. the capital asset qualified as a medical care expense.
1. Enter the amount you paid for the home Example. If, in the previous example, the elevator in-improvement ..................... . 1. creased the value of your home by $8,000, you would have
2. Enter the value of your home no medical expense for the cost of the elevator. However,
immediately after the the cost of electricity to operate the elevator and any costs
improvement ........... . 2. to maintain it are medical expenses as long as the medical
reason for the elevator exists.3. Enter the value of your home
immediately before the
improvement ........... . 3. Improvements to property rented by a person with a
disability. Amounts paid to buy and install special plumb-4. Subtract line 3 from line 2. This is the ing fixtures for a person with a disability, mainly for medicalincrease in the value of your home due to
reasons, in a rented house are medical expenses.the improvement. .................. . 4.
• If line 4 is more than or equal to line 1, you Example. John has arthritis and a heart condition. Hehave no medical expenses due to the home cannot climb stairs or get into a bathtub. On his doctor'simprovement; stop here. advice, he installs a bathroom with a shower stall on the
• If line 4 is less than line 1, go to line 5. first floor of his two-story rented house. The landlord did
not pay any of the cost of buying and installing the special5. Subtract line 4 from line 1. These are your
plumbing and did not lower the rent. John can include inmedical expenses due to the home
medical expenses the entire amount he paid.improvement ..................... . 5.
Car
You can include in medical expenses the cost of specialExample. You have a heart ailment. On your doctor's
hand controls and other special equipment installed in aadvice, you install an elevator in your home so that you will
car for the use of a person with a disability.not have to climb stairs. The elevator costs $8,000. An
appraisal shows that the elevator increases the value of
Special design. You can include in medical expenses theyour home by $4,400. You figure your medical expense as
difference between the cost of a regular car and a carshown in the filled-in example of Worksheet A.
specially designed to hold a wheelchair.
Worksheet A.  Capital Expense
Cost of operation. The includible costs of using a car forWorksheetÐIllustrated
medical reasons are explained under Transportation, later.Keep for Your Records
Instructions: Use this worksheet to figure the amount, if any, of Chiropractoryour medical expenses due to a home improvement.
You can include in medical expenses fees you pay to a1. Enter the amount you paid for the home chiropractor for medical care.improvement ..................... . 1. 8,000
2. Enter the value of your home Christian Science Practitionerimmediately after the
improvement ........... . 2. 124,400 You can include in medical expenses fees you pay to
3. Enter the value of your home Christian Science practitioners for medical care.
immediately before the
improvement ........... . 3. 120,000
Contact Lenses
4. Subtract line 3 from line 2. This is the
increase in the value of your home due to You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for
the improvement. .................. . 4. 4,400 contact lenses needed for medical reasons. You can also
include the cost of equipment and materials required for• If line 4 is more than or equal to line 1, you
using contact lenses, such as saline solution and enzymehave no medical expenses due to the home
improvement; stop here. cleaner. See Eyeglasses and Eye Surgery, later.
• If line 4 is less than line 1, go to line 5.
Crutches5. Subtract line 4 from line 1. These are your
medical expenses due to the home You can include in medical expenses the amount you payimprovement ..................... . 5. 3,600 to buy or rent crutches.
Publication 502 (2009) Page 7

Page 8 of 34 of Publication 502 11:49 - 10-NOV-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Dental Treatment Fertility Enhancement
You can include in medical expenses the amounts you pay You can include in medical expenses the cost of the
following procedures to overcome an inability to have chil-for the prevention and alleviation of dental disease. Pre-
dren.ventive treatment includes the services of a dental hygien-
ist or dentist for such procedures as teeth cleaning, the • Procedures such as in vitro fertilization (including
application of sealants, and fluoride treatments to prevent temporary storage of eggs or sperm).
tooth decay. Treatment to alleviate dental disease include • Surgery, including an operation to reverse prior sur-services of a dentist for procedures such as X-rays, fillings, gery that prevented the person operated on frombraces, extractions, dentures, and other dental ailments. having children.But see Teeth Whitening under What Expenses Are Not
Includible, later.
Founder's FeeDiagnostic Devices
See Lifetime CareÐAdvance Payments, later.You can include in medical expenses the cost of devices
used in diagnosing and treating illness and disease. Guide Dog or Other Service Animal
Example. You have diabetes and use a blood sugar You can include in medical expenses the costs of buying,test kit to monitor your blood sugar level. You can include training, and maintaining a guide dog or other servicethe cost of the blood sugar test kit in your medical ex- animal to assist a visually-impaired or hearing-impaired
penses. person, or a person with other physical disabilities.
Disabled Dependent Care Expenses Health Institute
Some disabled dependent care expenses may qualify as You can include in medical expenses fees you pay for
either: treatment at a health institute only if the treatment is pre-
scribed by a physician and the physician issues a state-• Medical expenses, or ment that the treatment is necessary to alleviate a physical
• Work-related expenses for purposes of taking a or mental defect or illness of the individual receiving the
credit for dependent care. treatment.
You can choose to apply them either way as long as you do
Health Maintenancenot use the same expenses to claim both a credit and a
medical expense deduction. Organization (HMO)
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay to
Drug Addiction entitle you, your spouse, or a dependent to receive medical
care from a health maintenance organization. TheseYou can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for amounts are treated as medical insurance premiums. See
an inpatient's treatment at a therapeutic center for drug Insurance Premiums, later.
addiction. This includes meals and lodging at the center
during treatment. Hearing Aids
You can include in medical expenses the cost of a hearingDrugs
aid and the batteries you buy to operate it.
See Medicines, later.
Home CareEyeglasses
See Nursing Services, later.
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for
eyeglasses and contact lenses needed for medical rea- Home Improvementssons. See Contact Lenses , earlier for more information.
You can also include fees paid for eye examinations. See Capital Expenses, earlier.
Eye Surgery Hospital Services
You can include in medical expenses the amount you pay You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for
for eye surgery to treat defective vision, such as laser eye the cost of inpatient care at a hospital or similar institution if
surgery or radial keratotomy. a principal reason for being there is to receive medical
Page 8 Publication 502 (2009)

Page 9 of 34 of Publication 502 11:49 - 10-NOV-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
care. This includes amounts paid for meals and lodging. Health reimbursement arrangement (HRA). If you have
medical expenses that are reimbursed by a health reim-Also see Lodging, later.
bursement arrangement, you cannot include those ex-
penses in your medical expenses. This is because an HRAInsurance Premiums is funded solely by the employer.
You can include in medical expenses insurance premiums
you pay for policies that cover medical care. Medical care Medicare Apolicies can provide payment for treatment that includes:
If you are covered under social security (or if you are a• Hospitalization, surgical services, X-rays,
government employee who paid Medicare tax), you are• Prescription drugs and insulin, enrolled in Medicare A. The payroll tax paid for Medicare A
is not a medical expense.• Dental care,
If you are not covered under social security (or were not• Replacement of lost or damaged contact lenses, and a government employee who paid Medicare tax), you can
voluntarily enroll in Medicare A. In this situation you can• Long-term care (subject to additional limitations).
include the premiums you paid for Medicare A as a medicalSee Qualified Long-Term Care Insurance Contracts
expense.under Long-Term Care, later.
If you have a policy that provides payments for other Medicare Bthan medical care, you can include the premiums for the
medical care part of the policy if the charge for the medical Medicare B is a supplemental medical insurance. Premi-part is reasonable. The cost of the medical part must be ums you pay for Medicare B are a medical expense. If youseparately stated in the insurance contract or given to you applied for it at age 65 or after you became disabled, youin a separate statement. can include in medical expenses the monthly premiums
you paid. If you were over age 65 or disabled when you firstNote. When figuring the amount of insurance premiums enrolled, check the information you received from the So-you can include in medical expenses on Schedule A, do cial Security Administration to find out your premium.not include any health coverage tax credit advance pay-
ments shown in box 1 of Form 1099-H, Health Coverage
Tax Credit (HCTC) Advance Payments. Medicare D
Medicare D is a voluntary prescription drug insurance
Employer-Sponsored Health Insurance Plan program for persons with Medicare A or B. You can include
as a medical expense premiums you pay for Medicare D.Do not include in your medical and dental expenses any
insurance premiums paid by an employer-sponsored
health insurance plan unless the premiums are included in Prepaid Insurance Premiums
box 1 of your Form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement. Also,
Premiums you pay before you are age 65 for insurance fordo not include any other medical and dental expenses paid
medical care for yourself, your spouse, or your dependentsby the plan unless the amount paid is included in box 1 of
after you reach age 65 are medical care expenses in theyour Form W-2.
year paid if they are:
Example. You are a federal employee participating in 1. Payable in equal yearly installments or more often,the premium conversion plan of the Federal Employee andHealth Benefits (FEHB) program. Your share of the FEHB
premium is paid by making a pre-tax reduction in your 2. Payable for at least 10 years, or until you reach age
salary. Because you are an employee whose insurance 65 (but not for less than 5 years).
premiums are paid with money that is never included in
your gross income, you cannot deduct the premiums paid
with that money. Unused Sick Leave Used To Pay Premiums
You must include in gross income cash payments youLong-term care services. Contributions made by your
receive at the time of retirement for unused sick leave. Youemployer to provide coverage for qualified long-term care
also must include in gross income the value of unused sickservices under a flexible spending or similar arrangement
leave that, at your option, your employer applies to the costmust be included in your income. This amount will be
of your continuing participation in your employer's healthreported as wages in box 1 of your Form W-2.
plan after you retire. You can include this cost of continuing
participation in the health plan as a medical expense.Retired public safety officers. If you are a retired public
safety officer, do not include as medical expenses any If you participate in a health plan where your employer
health or long-term care insurance premiums that you automatically applies the value of unused sick leave to the
elected to have paid with tax-free distributions from a cost of your continuing participation in the health plan (and
retirement plan. This applies only to distributions that you do not have the option to receive cash), do not include
would otherwise be included in income. the value of the unused sick leave in gross income. You
Publication 502 (2009) Page 9

Page 10 of 34 of Publication 502 11:49 - 10-NOV-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
cannot include this cost of continuing participation in that Learning Disabilityhealth plan as a medical expense.
See Special Education, later.
Insurance Premiums You Cannot Include Legal Fees
You cannot include premiums you pay for:
You can include in medical expenses legal fees you paid• Life insurance policies, that are necessary to authorize treatment for mental ill-
ness. However, you cannot include in medical expenses• Policies providing payment for loss of earnings,
fees for the management of a guardianship estate, fees for• Policies for loss of life, limb, sight, etc., conducting the affairs of the person being treated, or other
fees that are not necessary for medical care.• Policies that pay you a guaranteed amount each
week for a stated number of weeks if you are hospi-
talized for sickness or injury, Lifetime CareÐAdvance Payments
• The part of your car insurance that provides medical You can include in medical expenses a part of a life-careinsurance coverage for all persons injured in or by fee or ªfounder's feeº you pay either monthly or as a lumpyour car because the part of the premium providing sum under an agreement with a retirement home. The partinsurance for you, your spouse, and your depen- of the payment you include is the amount properly alloca-dents is not stated separately from the part of the ble to medical care. The agreement must require that youpremium providing insurance for medical care for pay a specific fee as a condition for the home's promise toothers, or provide lifetime care that includes medical care. You can
• Health or long-term care insurance if you elected to use a statement from the retirement home to prove the
pay these premiums with tax-free distributions from amount properly allocable to medical care. The statement
a retirement plan made directly to the insurance pro- must be based either on the home's prior experience or on
vider and these distributions would otherwise have information from a comparable home.
been included in income.
Dependents with disabilities. You can include in medi-Taxes imposed by any governmental unit, such as Medi-
cal expenses advance payments to a private institution forcare taxes, are not insurance premiums.
lifetime care, treatment, and training of your physically or
mentally impaired child upon your death or when you
Intellectually and Developmentally become unable to provide care. The payments must be a
condition for the institution's future acceptance of yourDisabled, Special Home for
child and must not be refundable.
You can include in medical expenses the cost of keeping a
person who is intellectually and developmentally disabled Payments for future medical care. Generally, you can-(mentally retarded) in a special home, not the home of a not include in medical expenses current payments forrelative, on the recommendation of a psychiatrist to help medical care (including medical insurance) to be providedthe person adjust from life in a mental hospital to commu- substantially beyond the end of the year. This rule does notnity living. apply in situations where the future care is purchased in
connection with obtaining lifetime care of the type de-
scribed earlier.Laboratory Fees
You can include in medical expenses the amounts you pay Lodgingfor laboratory fees that are part of medical care.
You can include in medical expenses the cost of meals and
lodging at a hospital or similar institution if a principalLead-Based Paint Removal
reason for being there is to receive medical care. See
You can include in medical expenses the cost of removing Nursing Home, later.
lead-based paints from surfaces in your home to prevent a You may be able to include in medical expenses thechild who has or had lead poisoning from eating the paint. cost of lodging not provided in a hospital or similar institu-These surfaces must be in poor repair (peeling or cracking) tion. You can include the cost of such lodging while awayor within the child's reach. The cost of repainting the from home if all of the following requirements are met.scraped area is not a medical expense.
If, instead of removing the paint, you cover the area with 1. The lodging is primarily for and essential to medical
wallboard or paneling, treat these items as capital ex- care.
penses. See Capital Expenses, earlier. Do not include the 2. The medical care is provided by a doctor in a li-cost of painting the wallboard as a medical expense. censed hospital or in a medical care facility related
to, or the equivalent of, a licensed hospital.
3. The lodging is not lavish or extravagant under the
circumstances.
Page 10 Publication 502 (2009)

Page 11 of 34 of Publication 502 11:49 - 10-NOV-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
4. There is no significant element of personal pleasure, 1. Be guaranteed renewable,
recreation, or vacation in the travel away from home. 2. Not provide for a cash surrender value or other
The amount you include in medical expenses for lodg- money that can be paid, assigned, pledged, or bor-
ing cannot be more than $50 for each night for each rowed,
person. You can include lodging for a person traveling with 3. Provide that refunds, other than refunds on the deaththe person receiving the medical care. For example, if a of the insured or complete surrender or cancellationparent is traveling with a sick child, up to $100 per night of the contract, and dividends under the contractcan be included as a medical expense for lodging. Meals must be used only to reduce future premiums orare not included. increase future benefits, andDo not include the cost of lodging while away from home
4. Generally not pay or reimburse expenses incurredfor medical treatment if that treatment is not received from
for services or items that would be reimbursed undera doctor in a licensed hospital or in a medical care facility
Medicare, except where Medicare is a secondaryrelated to, or the equivalent of, a licensed hospital or if that
payer, or the contract makes per diem or other peri-lodging is not primarily for or essential to the medical care
odic payments without regard to expenses.received.
The amount of qualified long-term care premiums you
Long-Term Care can include is limited. You can include the following as
medical expenses on Schedule A (Form 1040).You can include in medical expenses amounts paid for
qualified long-term care services and premiums paid for 1. Qualified long-term care premiums up to the
qualified long-term care insurance contracts. amounts shown below.
a. Age 40 or under ± $320.
Qualified Long-Term Care Services b. Age 41 to 50 ± $600.
Qualified long-term care services are necessary diagnos- c. Age 51 to 60 ± $1,190.tic, preventive, therapeutic, curing, treating, mitigating, re-
d. Age 61 to 70 ± $3,180.habilitative services, and maintenance and personal care
services (defined later) that are: e. Age 71 or over ± $3,980.
1. Required by a chronically ill individual, and 2. Unreimbursed expenses for qualified long-term care
2. Provided pursuant to a plan of care prescribed by a services.
licensed health care practitioner. Note. The limit on premiums is for each person.
Also, if you are an eligible retired public safety officer,Chronically ill individual. An individual is chronically ill if, you cannot include premiums for long-term care insurancewithin the previous 12 months, a licensed health care if you elected to pay these premiums with tax-free distribu-practitioner has certified that the individual meets either of tions from a qualified retirement plan made directly to thethe following descriptions. insurance provider and these distributions would otherwise
have been included in your income.1. He or she is unable to perform at least two activities
of daily living without substantial assistance from an-
other individual for at least 90 days, due to a loss of Meals
functional capacity. Activities of daily living are eat-
ing, toileting, transferring, bathing, dressing, and con- You can include in medical expenses the cost of meals at a
tinence. hospital or similar institution if a principal reason for being
there is to get medical care.2. He or she requires substantial supervision to be pro-
You cannot include in medical expenses the cost oftected from threats to health and safety due to se-
meals that are not part of inpatient care.vere cognitive impairment.
Maintenance and personal care services.  Mainte- Medical Conferences
nance or personal care services is care which has as its
You can include in medical expenses amounts paid forprimary purpose the providing of a chronically ill individual
admission and transportation to a medical conference ifwith needed assistance with his or her disabilities (includ-
the medical conference concerns the chronic illness ofing protection from threats to health and safety due to
yourself, your spouse, or your dependent. The costs of thesevere cognitive impairment).
medical conference must be primarily for and necessary to
the medical care of you, your spouse, or your dependent.
Qualified Long-Term Care Insurance The majority of the time spent at the conference must be
Contracts spent attending sessions on medical information.
The cost of meals and lodging while attending theA qualified long-term care insurance contract is an insur-
conference is not deductible as a medical ex-ance contract that provides only coverage of qualified
pense.long-term care services. The contract must:
CAUTION
!
Publication 502 (2009) Page 11

Page 12 of 34 of Publication 502 11:49 - 10-NOV-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
manner as in the preceding paragraph. If you had to payMedical Information Plan additional amounts for household upkeep because of the
attendant, you can include the extra amounts with yourYou can include in medical expenses amounts paid to a
medical expenses. This includes extra rent or utilities youplan that keeps medical information in a computer data
pay because you moved to a larger apartment to providebank and retrieves and furnishes the information upon
space for the attendant.request to an attending physician.
Employment taxes. You can include as a medical ex-Medicines pense social security tax, FUTA, Medicare tax, and state
employment taxes you pay for an attendant who providesYou can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for medical care. If the attendant also provides personal andprescribed medicines and drugs. A prescribed drug is one household services, you can include as a medical expensethat requires a prescription by a doctor for its use by an only the amount of employment taxes paid for medicalindividual. You can also include amounts you pay for services as explained earlier. For information on employ-insulin. Except for insulin, you cannot include in medical ment tax responsibilities of household employers, seeexpenses amounts you pay for a drug that is not pre- Publication 926, Household Employer's Tax Guide.scribed.
Imported medicines and drugs. If you imported Operationsmedicines or drugs from other countries, see Medicines
and Drugs From Other Countries , under What Expenses You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay forAre Not Includible, later. legal operations that are not for unnecessary cosmetic
surgery. See Cosmetic Surgery under What Expenses Are
Not Includible, later.Nursing Home
You can include in medical expenses the cost of medical Optometristcare in a nursing home, home for the aged, or similar
institution, for yourself, your spouse, or your dependents. See Eyeglasses, earlier.This includes the cost of meals and lodging in the home if a
principal reason for being there is to get medical care. Organ DonorsDo not include the cost of meals and lodging if the
reason for being in the home is personal. You can, how- See Transplants, later.ever, include in medical expenses the part of the cost that
is for medical or nursing care.
Osteopath
Nursing Services You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay to
an osteopath for medical care.You can include in medical expenses wages and other
amounts you pay for nursing services. The services need
Oxygennot be performed by a nurse as long as the services are of
a kind generally performed by a nurse. This includes serv- You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay forices connected with caring for the patient's condition, such oxygen and oxygen equipment to relieve breathingas giving medication or changing dressings, as well as problems caused by a medical condition.bathing and grooming the patient. These services can be
provided in your home or another care facility.
Generally, only the amount spent for nursing services is Physical Examination
a medical expense. If the attendant also provides personal
You can include in medical expenses the amount you payand household services, amounts paid to the attendant
for an annual physical examination and diagnostic tests bymust be divided between the time spent performing house-
a physician. You do not have to be ill at the time of thehold and personal services and the time spent for nursing
examination.services. However, certain maintenance or personal care
services provided for qualified long-term care can be in-
Example. Beth goes to see Dr. Hayes for her annualcluded in medical expenses. See Maintenance and per-
check-up. Dr. Hayes does a physical examination and hassonal care services  under Long-Term Care , earlier.
some lab tests done. Beth can include the cost of the examAdditionally, certain expenses for household services or
and lab tests in her medical expenses, if her insurancefor the care of a qualifying individual incurred to allow you
does not cover the cost.to work may qualify for the child and dependent care credit.
See Publication 503, Child and Dependent Care Ex-
penses. Pregnancy Test Kit
You can also include in medical expenses part of the
You can include in medical expenses the amount you payamount you pay for that attendant's meals. Divide the food
to purchase a pregnancy test kit to determine if you areexpense among the household members to find the cost of
pregnant.the attendant's food. Then divide that cost in the same
Page 12 Publication 502 (2009)

Page 13 of 34 of Publication 502 11:49 - 10-NOV-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Prosthesis Stop-Smoking Programs
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay forSee Artificial Limb, earlier.
a program to stop smoking. However, you cannot include
in medical expenses amounts you pay for drugs that do notPsychiatric Care require a prescription, such as nicotine gum or patches,
that are designed to help stop smoking.You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for
psychiatric care. This includes the cost of supporting a
mentally ill dependent at a specially equipped medical Surgery
center where the dependent receives medical care. See
See Operations, earlier.Psychoanalysis, next, and Transportation, later.
TelephonePsychoanalysis
You can include in medical expenses the cost of specialYou can include in medical expenses payments for psy-
telephone equipment that lets a hearing-impaired personchoanalysis. However, you cannot include payments for
communicate over a regular telephone. This includes tele-psychoanalysis that is part of required training to be a
typewriter (TTY) and telecommunications device for thepsychoanalyst.
deaf (TDD) equipment. You can also include the cost of
repairing the equipment.Psychologist
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay to Television
a psychologist for medical care.
You can include in medical expenses the cost of equip-
ment that displays the audio part of television programs asSpecial Education subtitles for hearing-impaired persons. This may be the
cost of an adapter that attaches to a regular set. It also mayYou can include in medical expenses fees you pay on a be the part of the cost of a specially equipped televisiondoctor's recommendation for a child's tutoring by a teacher that exceeds the cost of the same model regular televisionwho is specially trained and qualified to work with children set.who have learning disabilities caused by mental or physi-
cal impairments, including nervous system disorders.
TherapyYou can include in medical expenses the cost (tuition,
meals, and lodging) of attending a school that furnishes You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay forspecial education to help a child to overcome learning therapy received as medical treatment.disabilities. A doctor must recommend that the child attend
the school. Overcoming the learning disabilities must be a
Transplantsprincipal reason for attending the school, and any ordinary
education received must be incidental to the special edu- You can include any expenses you pay for medical carecation provided. Special education includes: you receive because you are a donor or a possible donor of
• Teaching Braille to a visually impaired person, a kidney or other organ. This includes transportation.
You can include any expenses you pay for the medical• Teaching lip reading to a hearing-impaired person, care of a donor in connection with the donating of an organ.or This includes transportation.
• Giving remedial language training to correct a condi-
tion caused by a birth defect. Transportation
You cannot include in medical expenses the cost of You can include in medical expenses amounts paid forsending a problem child to a school where the course of transportation primarily for, and essential to, medical care.study and the disciplinary methods have a beneficial effect
You can include:on the child's attitude if the availability of medical care in
the school is not a principal reason for sending the student • Bus, taxi, train, or plane fares or ambulance service,
there. • Transportation expenses of a parent who must go
with a child who needs medical care,Sterilization • Transportation expenses of a nurse or other person
You can include in medical expenses the cost of a legal who can give injections, medications, or other treat-
sterilization (a legally performed operation to make a per- ment required by a patient who is traveling to get
son unable to have children). medical care and is unable to travel alone, and
Publication 502 (2009) Page 13

Page 14 of 34 of Publication 502 11:49 - 10-NOV-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Transportation expenses for regular visits to see a Tuitionmentally ill dependent, if these visits are recom-
mended as a part of treatment. Under special circumstances, you can include charges for
tuition in medical expenses. See Special Education, ear-
lier.Car expenses. You can include out-of-pocket expenses, You can include charges for a health plan included in asuch as the cost of gas and oil, when you use a car for lump-sum tuition fee if the charges are separately stated ormedical reasons. You cannot include depreciation, insur- can easily be obtained from the school.ance, general repair, or maintenance expenses.
If you do not want to use your actual expenses, for 2009 Vasectomyyou can use the standard medical mileage rate of 24 cents
a mile. You can include in medical expenses the amount you pay
 You can also include parking fees and tolls. You can for a vasectomy.
add these fees and tolls to your medical expenses whether
you use actual expenses or use the standard mileage rate. Vision Correction Surgery
Example. Bill Jones drove 2,800 miles for medical rea- See Eye Surgery, earlier.
sons during the year. He spent $400 for gas, $30 for oil,
and $100 for tolls and parking. He wants to figure the Weight-Loss Programamount he can include in medical expenses both ways to
see which gives him the greater deduction. You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay to
He figures the actual expenses first. He adds the $400 lose weight if it is a treatment for a specific disease diag-
for gas, the $30 for oil, and the $100 for tolls and parking for nosed by a physician (such as obesity, hypertension, or
a total of $530. heart disease). This includes fees you pay for membership
in a weight reduction group as well as fees for attendanceHe then figures the standard mileage amount. He multi-
at periodic meetings. You cannot include membershipplies the 2,800 miles by 24 cents a mile for a total of $672.
dues in a gym, health club, or spa as medical expenses,He then adds the $100 tolls and parking for a total of $772.
but you can include separate fees charged there for weightBill includes the $772 of car expenses with his other loss activities.medical expenses for the year because the $772 is more You cannot include the cost of diet food or beverages inthan the $530 he figured using actual expenses. medical expenses because the diet food and beverages
substitute for what is normally consumed to satisfy nutri-
Transportation expenses you cannot include. You tional needs. You can include the cost of special food in
cannot include in medical expenses the cost of transporta- medical expenses only if:
tion in the following situations.
1. The food does not satisfy normal nutritional needs,• Going to and from work, even if your condition re-
2. The food alleviates or treats an illness, andquires an unusual means of transportation.
3. The need for the food is substantiated by a physi-• Travel for purely personal reasons to another city for
cian.an operation or other medical care.
The amount you can include in medical expenses is limited• Travel that is merely for the general improvement of
to the amount by which the cost of the special food ex-one's health.
ceeds the cost of a normal diet. See also Weight-Loss
• The costs of operating a specially equipped car for Program under What Expenses Are Not Includible, later.
other than medical reasons.
Wheelchair
Trips You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for
an autoette or a wheelchair used mainly for the relief of
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for sickness or disability, and not just to provide transportation
transportation to another city if the trip is primarily for, and to and from work. The cost of operating and maintaining
essential to, receiving medical services. You may be able the autoette or wheelchair is also a medical expense.
to include up to $50 per night for lodging. See Lodging,
earlier. Wig
You cannot include in medical expenses a trip or vaca-
tion taken merely for a change in environment, improve- You can include in medical expenses the cost of a wig
ment of morale, or general improvement of health, even if purchased upon the advice of a physician for the mental
the trip is made on the advice of a doctor. However, see health of a patient who has lost all of his or her hair from
Medical Conferences, earlier. disease.
Page 14 Publication 502 (2009)

Page 15 of 34 of Publication 502 11:49 - 10-NOV-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
X-ray Diaper Service
You can include in medical expenses amounts you pay for You cannot include in medical expenses the amount you
pay for diapers or diaper services, unless they are neededX-rays for medical reasons.
to relieve the effects of a particular disease.
Electrolysis or Hair RemovalWhat Expenses Are Not
See Cosmetic Surgery, earlier.Includible?
Following is a list of some items that you cannot include in Flexible Spending Account
figuring your medical expense deduction. The items are
You cannot include in medical expenses amounts forlisted in alphabetical order. which you are fully reimbursed by your flexible spending
account if you contribute a part of your income on a pre-taxBaby Sitting, Childcare, and Nursing basis to pay for the qualified benefit.
Services for a Normal, Healthy Baby
Funeral ExpensesYou cannot include in medical expenses amounts you pay
for the care of children, even if the expenses enable you, You cannot include in medical expenses amounts you pay
your spouse, or your dependent to get medical or dental for funerals.
treatment. Also, any expense allowed as a childcare credit
cannot be treated as an expense paid for medical care. Future Medical Care
Generally, you cannot include in medical expenses currentControlled Substances
payments for medical care (including medical insurance)
You cannot include in medical expenses amounts you pay to be provided substantially beyond the end of the year.
for controlled substances (such as marijuana, laetrile, This rule does not apply in situations where the future care
is purchased in connection with obtaining lifetime care oretc.), in violation of federal law.
long-term care of the type described at Lifetime Care Ð
Advance Payments or Long-Term Care earlier under WhatCosmetic Surgery Medical Expenses Are Includible.
Generally, you cannot include in medical expenses the
amount you pay for unnecessary cosmetic surgery. This Hair Transplant
includes any procedure that is directed at improving the
See Cosmetic Surgery, earlier.patient's appearance and does not meaningfully promote
the proper function of the body or prevent or treat illness or
disease. You generally cannot include in medical ex- Health Club Dues
penses the amount you pay for procedures such as face
You cannot include in medical expenses health club dueslifts, hair transplants, hair removal (electrolysis), and li-
or amounts paid to improve one's general health or toposuction. relieve physical or mental discomfort not related to a partic-You can include in medical expenses the amount you ular medical condition.pay for cosmetic surgery if it is necessary to improve a You cannot include in medical expenses the cost ofdeformity arising from, or directly related to, a congenital membership in any club organized for business, pleasure,
abnormality, a personal injury resulting from an accident or recreation, or other social purpose.
trauma, or a disfiguring disease.
Health Coverage Tax CreditExample. An individual undergoes surgery that
removes a breast as part of treatment for cancer. She pays You cannot include in medical expenses amounts you pay
a surgeon to reconstruct the breast. The surgery to recon- for health insurance that you use in figuring your health
struct the breast corrects a deformity directly related to the coverage tax credit. For more information, see Health
disease. The cost of the surgery is includible in her medical Coverage Tax Credit, later.
expenses.
Health Savings AccountsDancing Lessons
You cannot include in medical expenses any payment or
You cannot include the cost of dancing lessons, swimming distribution for medical expenses out of a health savings
lessons, etc., even if they are recommended by a doctor, if account. Contributions to health savings accounts are de-
they are only for the improvement of general health. ducted separately. See Publication 969.
Publication 502 (2009) Page 15

Page 16 of 34 of Publication 502 11:49 - 10-NOV-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
physician's prescription, you cannot include its cost in yourHousehold Help medical expenses.
You cannot include in medical expenses the cost of house-
hold help, even if such help is recommended by a doctor. Nutritional Supplements
This is a personal expense that is not deductible. However,
You cannot include in medical expenses the cost of nutri-you may be able to include certain expenses paid to a
tional supplements, vitamins, herbal supplements, ªnaturalperson providing nursing-type services. For more informa-
medicines,º etc. unless they are recommended by a medi-tion, see Nursing Services , earlier under What Medical
cal practitioner as treatment for a specific medical condi-Expenses Are Includible . Also, certain maintenance or
tion diagnosed by a physician. Otherwise, these items arepersonal care services provided for qualified long-term
taken to maintain your ordinary good health, and are notcare can be included in medical expenses. For more infor-
for medical care.mation, see Long-Term Care, earlier under What Medical
Expenses Are Includible.
Personal Use Items
Illegal Operations and Treatments You cannot include in medical expenses the cost of an
item ordinarily used for personal, living, or family purposesYou cannot include in medical expenses amounts you pay
unless it is used primarily to prevent or alleviate a physicalfor illegal operations, treatments, or controlled substances
or mental defect or illness. For example, the cost of awhether rendered or prescribed by licensed or unlicensed
toothbrush and toothpaste is a nondeductible personalpractitioners. expense.
In order to accommodate an individual with a physicalInsurance Premiums defect, you may have to purchase an item ordinarily used
as a personal, living, or family item in a special form. YouSee Insurance Premiums under What Medical Expenses can include the excess of the cost of the item in a specialAre Includible, earlier. form over the cost of the item in normal form as a medical
expense. See Braille Books and Magazines  under What
Maternity Clothes Medical Expenses Are Includible, earlier).
You cannot include in medical expenses amounts you pay
Swimming Lessonsfor maternity clothes.
See Dancing Lessons, earlier.
Medical Savings Account (MSA)
Teeth WhiteningYou cannot include in medical expenses amounts you
contribute to an Archer MSA. You cannot include ex- You cannot include in medical expenses amounts paid topenses you pay for with a tax-free distribution from your whiten teeth. See Cosmetic Surgery, earlier.Archer MSA. You also cannot use other funds equal to the
amount of the distribution and include the expenses. For
Veterinary Feesmore information on Archer MSAs, see Publication 969.
You generally cannot include veterinary fees in your medi-Medicines and Drugs From Other cal expenses, but see Guide Dog or Other Service Animal
under What Medical Expenses Are Includible, earlier.Countries
In general, you cannot include in your medical expenses Weight-Loss Programthe cost of a prescribed drug brought in (or ordered
shipped) from another country. You can only include the You cannot include in medical expenses the cost of acost of a drug that was imported legally. For example, you weight-loss program if the purpose of the weight loss is the
can include the cost of a prescribed drug the Food and improvement of appearance, general health, or sense of
Drug Administration announces can be legally imported by well-being. You cannot include amounts you pay to lose
individuals. weight unless the weight loss is a treatment for a specific
You can include the cost of a prescribed drug you disease diagnosed by a physician (such as obesity, hyper-
purchase and consume in another country if the drug is tension, or heart disease). If the weight-loss treatment is
legal in both the other country and the United States. not for a specific disease diagnosed by a physician, you
cannot include either the fees you pay for membership in a
weight reduction group or fees for attendance at periodicNonprescription Drugs and Medicines meetings. Also, you cannot include membership dues in a
gym, health club, or spa.Except for insulin, you cannot include in medical expenses
amounts you pay for a drug that is not prescribed. You cannot include the cost of diet food or beverages in
medical expenses because the diet food and beverages
Example. Your doctor recommends that you take aspi- substitute for what is normally consumed to satisfy nutri-
rin. Because aspirin is a drug that does not require a tional needs.
Page 16 Publication 502 (2009)

Page 17 of 34 of Publication 502 11:49 - 10-NOV-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
See Weight-Loss Program  under What Medical Ex- want to use Figure 1 to help you decide if any of your
penses Are Includable, earlier reimbursement is taxable.
How Do You Treat
Reimbursements?
You can include in medical expenses only those amounts
paid during the tax year for which you received no insur-
ance or other reimbursement.
Insurance Reimbursement
You must reduce your total medical expenses for the year
by all reimbursements for medical expenses that you re-
ceive from insurance or other sources during the year. This
includes payments from Medicare.
Even if a policy provides reimbursement only for certain
specific medical expenses, you must use amounts you
receive from that policy to reduce your total medical ex-
penses, including those it does not provide reimbursement
for.
Example. You have insurance policies that cover your
hospital and doctors' bills but not your nursing bills. The
insurance you receive for the hospital and doctors' bills is
more than their charges. In figuring your medical deduc-
tion, you must reduce the total amount you spent for
medical care by the total amount of insurance you re-
ceived, even if the policies do not cover some of your
medical expenses.
Health reimbursement arrangement (HRA). A health
reimbursement arrangement is an employer-funded plan
that reimburses employees for medical care expenses and
allows unused amounts to be carried forward. An HRA is
funded solely by the employer and the reimbursements for
medical expenses, up to a maximum dollar amount for a
EPS File Name: 15002q02 Size: Width = 20.6 picas Depth = 34.3 picas
Figure 1.
*See Premiums paid by you and your employer.
Was any part of
your premiums
paid by your
employer?
Were your
employer’s
contributions to
your premiums
included in your
income?
Did you pay any
part of the
premiums?
NONE of the
excess
reimbursement is
taxable.
ALL of the excess
reimbursement is
taxable.
PART of the
excess
reimbursement is
taxable.*
No
/H17076
/H17075
/H17074
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
/H17074
/H17074
/H17075
Is Your Excess Medical
Reimbursement Taxable?
coverage period, are not included in your income.
Other reimbursements. Generally, you do not reduce Premiums paid by you. If you pay either the entire pre-medical expenses by payments you receive for: mium for your medical insurance or all the costs of a plan
similar to medical insurance and your insurance payments• Permanent loss or loss of use of a member or func-
tion of the body (loss of limb, sight, hearing, etc.) or or other reimbursements are more than your total medical
disfigurement to the extent the payment is based on expenses for the year, you have excess reimbursement.
the nature of the injury without regard to the amount Generally, you do not include the excess reimbursement in
of time lost from work, or your gross income. However, gross income does include
total payments in excess of $280 a day ($102,200 for• Loss of earnings. 2009) for qualified long-term care services.
You must, however, reduce your medical expenses by
any part of these payments that is designated for medical Premiums paid by you and your employer. If both you
costs. See How Do You Figure and Report the Deduction and your employer contribute to your medical insurance
on Your Tax Return, later. plan and your employer's contributions are not included in
For how to treat damages received for personal injury or your gross income, you must include in your gross income
sickness, see Damages for Personal Injuries, later. the part of your excess reimbursement that is from your
employer's contribution.
If you are not covered by more than one policy, you canWhat If Your Insurance Reimbursement Is
figure the amount of the excess reimbursement you mustMore Than Your Medical Expenses? include in gross income using Worksheet B. If you are
covered under more than one policy, see More than oneIf you are reimbursed more than your medical expenses,
policy, later.you may have to include the excess in income. You may
Publication 502 (2009) Page 17

Page 18 of 34 of Publication 502 11:49 - 10-NOV-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
included in your income, you must report all of your excessWorksheet B. Excess Reimbursement
reimbursement as other income.Includible in Income
When You Have Only One More than one policy. If you are covered under morePolicy than one policy, the cost of at least one of which is paid by
Keep for Your Records
 both you and your employer, you must first divide the
medical expenses among the policies to figure the excessInstructions: Use this worksheet to figure the amount of excess
reimbursement from each policy. Then divide the policyreimbursement you must include in income when both you and your
employer contributed to your medical insurance and your employer's costs to figure the part of any excess reimbursement that is
contributions are not included in your gross income. from your employer's contribution. Any excess reimburse-
ment that is due to your employer's contributions is includi-1. Enter the amount contributed to your ble in your income.medical insurance for the year by your You can figure the part of the excess reimbursementemployer ...................... . 1.
that is from your employer's contribution by using Work-2. Enter the total annual cost of the policy 2. sheet C. Use Worksheet C only if both you and your
employer paid part of the cost of at least one policy. If you3. Divide line 1 by line 2 ............. . 3.
had more than one policy, but you did not share in the cost4. Enter the amount of excess of at least one policy, do not use Worksheet C.reimbursement ................. . 4.
5. Multiply line 3 by line 4. This is the Worksheet C. Excess Reimbursementamount of the excess reimburse- Includible in Incomement you must include as other income
on Form 1040, line 21 ............ . 5. When You Have More
Than One Policy
Keep for Your Records
Example. You are covered by your employer's medical
insurance policy. The annual premium is $2,000. Your Instructions: Use this worksheet to figure the amount of excess
employer pays $600 of that amount, which is not included reimbursement you must include as income on your tax return when
a) you are reimbursed under two or more health insurance policies, b)in your gross income, and the balance of $1,400 is taken
at least one of which is paid for by both you and your employer, andout of your wages. You receive $500 excess reimburse- c) your employer's contributions are not included in your grossment for your medical expenses. The part of the excess income. If you and your employer did not share in the cost of at least
reimbursement you receive under the policy that is from one policy, do not use this worksheet.
your employer's contributions is figured as follows.
1. Enter the reimbursement from your
employer's policy ................. . 1.Worksheet B. Excess Reimbursement
2. Enter the reimbursement from your ownIncludible in Income
policy .......................... . 2.When You Have Only One
3. Add lines 1 and 2 ................. . 3.PolicyÐIllustrated
Keep for Your Records
 4. Divide line 1 by line 3. .............. . 4.
Instructions: Use this worksheet to figure the amount of excess 5. Enter the total medical expenses you paid
reimbursement you must include in income when both you and your during the year. If this amount is at least as
employer contributed to your medical insurance and your employer's much as the amount on line 3, stop herecontributions are not included in your gross income. because there is no excess reimbursement. 5.
6. Multiply line 4 by line 5 ............. . 6.1. Enter the amount contributed to your
medical insurance for the year by your 7. Subtract line 6 from line 1 ........... . 7.employer ...................... . 1. 600
8. Enter employer's contribution to the annual2. Enter the total annual cost of the policy 2. 2,000 cost of the employer's policy ......... . 8.
3. Divide line 1 by line 2 ............. . 3. .30
4. Enter the amount of excess 9. Enter total annual cost of the employer'sreimbursement .................. . 4. 500 policy .......................... . 9.
5. Multiply line 3 by line 4. This is the 10. Divide line 8 by line 9. This is theamount of the excess reimbursement percentage of your total excessyou must include as other income on reimbursement you must report as otherForm 1040, line 21 ............... . 5. 150 income ........................ . 10.
11. Multiply line 7 by line 10. This is the amountYou must include in your gross income 30% (.30) of of your total excess $500, or $150, of the excess reimbursement you received reimbursement you must report as otherfor medical expenses under the policy. income on Form 1040, line 21 ........ . 11.
Premiums paid by your employer. If your employer or
your former employer pays the total cost of your medical Example. You are covered by your employer's health
insurance plan and your employer's contributions are not insurance policy. The annual premium is $1,200. Your
Page 18 Publication 502 (2009)

Page 19 of 34 of Publication 502 11:49 - 10-NOV-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
employer pays $300 and the balance of $900 is deducted year, see Recoveries in Publication 525, Taxable and
Nontaxable Income.from your wages. You also paid the entire premium ($250)
for a personal health insurance policy.
During the year, you paid medical expenses of $3,600. What If You Are Reimbursed for MedicalIn the same year, you were reimbursed $2,400 under your Expenses You Did Not Deduct?employer's policy and $1,600 under your own personal
policy. The amount you must report as other income is If you did not deduct a medical expense in the year youfigured as follows. paid it because your medical expenses were not more than
7.5% of your AGI, or because you did not itemize deduc-Worksheet C. Excess Reimbursement tions, do not include the reimbursement, up to the amount
Includible in Income When You of the expense, in income. However, if the reimbursement
Have More Than One PolicyÐ is more than the expense, see What If Your Insurance
Reimbursement Is More Than Your Medical Expenses ,Illustrated
earlier.
Instructions: Use this worksheet to figure the amount of excess
reimbursement you must include as income on your tax return when Example. Last year, you had $500 of medical ex-a) you are reimbursed under two or more health insurance policies, b)
penses. You cannot deduct the $500 because it is lessat least one of which is paid for by both you and your employer, and
c) your employer's contributions are not included in your gross than 7.5% of your AGI. If, in a later year, you are reim-
income. If you and your employer did not share in the cost of at least bursed for any of the $500 of medical expenses, you do notone policy, do not use this worksheet. include that amount in your gross income. 
1. Enter the reimbursement from your
employer's policy .................. . 1. 2,400
How Do You Figure and Report2. Enter the reimbursement from your own
policy ........................... . 2. 1,600
the Deduction on Your Tax3. Add lines 1 and 2 .................. . 3. 4,000
Return?4. Divide line 1 by line 3 ............... . 4. .60
5. Enter the total medical expenses you paid Once you have determined which medical expenses youduring the year. If this amount is at least as can include, figure and report the deduction on your taxmuch as the amount on line 3, stop here return.because there is no excess reimbursement. 5. 3,600
6. Multiply line 4 by line 5 .............. . 6. 2,160
What Tax Form Do You Use?
7. Subtract line 6 from line 1 ............ . 7. 240
You report your medical expense deduction on Schedule8. Enter employer's contribution to the annual
A, Form 1040. You cannot claim medical expenses oncost of the employer's policy .......... . 8. 300
Form 1040A, U.S. Individual Income Tax Return, or Form9. Enter total annual cost of the employer's 1040EZ, Income Tax Return for Single and Joint Filerspolicy ........................... . 9. 1,200 With No Dependents. An example of a filled-in medical and
10. Divide line 8 by line 9. This is the dental expense part of Schedule A is shown.percentage of your total excess
reimbursement you must report as other
How Do You Figure Your Deduction?income ......................... . 10. .25
11. Multiply line 7 by line 10. This is the amount To figure your medical and dental expense deduction,of your total excess reimbursement you complete lines 1 through 4 of Schedule A, Form 1040, asmust report as other income on Form 1040, follows:line 21 .......................... . 11. 60
Line 1. Enter the amount you paid for medical expenses
after reducing the amount by payments you received from
insurance and other sources.What If You Receive Insurance
Reimbursement in a Later Year? Line 2. Enter your AGI from Form 1040, line 38.
Line 3. Multiply the amount on line 2 (AGI) by 7.5% (.075)If you are reimbursed in a later year for medical expenses
and enter the result.you deducted in an earlier year, you generally must report
the reimbursement as income up to the amount you previ- Line 4. If line 3 is more than line 1, enter -0-. Otherwise,ously deducted as medical expenses. subtract the amount on line 3 from the amount on line 1.
However, you do not report as income the amount of This is your deduction for medical and dental expenses.
reimbursement you received up to the amount of your
medical deductions that did not reduce your tax for the Example. Bill and Helen Jones belong to a group medi-
earlier year. cal plan and part of their insurance is paid by Bill's em-
For more information about the recovery of an amount ployer. They file a joint return, and their AGI is $33,004.
that you claimed as an itemized deduction in an earlier The following list shows the net amounts, after insurance
Publication 502 (2009) Page 19

Page 20 of 34 of Publication 502 11:49 - 10-NOV-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
SCHEDULE A  
(Form 1040) 
Department of the Treasury  
Internal Revenue Service (99) 
Itemized Deductions
/H17075 Attach to Form 1040. /H17075 See Instructions for Schedule A (Form 1040). 
OMB No. 1545-0074
2009
Attachment   
Sequence No. 07 
Name(s) shown on Form 1040 Your social security number
Medical 
and 
Dental  
Expenses 
Caution.  Do not include expenses reimbursed or paid by others. 
1 Medical and dental expenses (see page A-1) ..... 1 
2 Enter amount from Form 1040, line 38 2 
3 Multiply line 2 by 7.5% (.075) ..........  3 
4 Subtract line 3 from line 1. If line 3 is more than line 1, enter -0- ......... 4 
Bill and Helen Jones 000-00-0000
3,434
33,004
2,475
959
reimbursements, that Bill and Helen paid this year for Bill and Helen add all their medical and dental expenses
together ($1,859 + $775 + $800 = $3,434). They figuremedical expenses.
their deduction on the medical and dental expenses part of
1. For themselves, Bill and Helen paid $375 for pre- Schedule A, Form 1040, as shown.
scription medicines and drugs, $337 for hospital bills,
 Recordkeeping. For each medical expense, you$439 for doctor bills, $295 for hospitalization insur-
should keep a record of:ance, $380 for medical and surgical insurance, and
RECORDS
$33 for transportation for medical treatment, which
totals $1,859. • The name and address of each person you paid,
2. For Grace Taylor (Helen's dependent mother), they and
paid $300 for doctors, $300 for insulin, and $175 for • The amount and date of each payment.eyeglasses, which totals $775.
3. For Betty Jones (Bill's dependent sister), they paid
$450 for doctors and $350 for prescription medicines
and drugs, which totals $800. You can keep a record like the following.
Record of medical expenses
Name of Address of Transportation
person paid person paid Amount paid Date paid (mileage, taxi, etc.)
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
You should also keep a statement or itemized invoice
showing the following. Sale of Medical Equipment or
• What medical care was received. Property
• Who received the care.
If you deduct the cost of medical equipment or property in• The nature and purpose of any other medical ex- one year and sell it in a later year, you may have a taxablepenses. gain. The taxable gain is the amount of the selling price
that is more than the adjusted basis of the equipment or• Who the other medical expenses were for.
property.• The amount of the other medical expenses and the The adjusted basis is the portion of the cost of thedate of payment. equipment or property that you could not deduct because
Do not send these records with your return. of the 7.5% limit used to compute the medical deduction.
Page 20 Publication 502 (2009)

Page 21 of 34 of Publication 502 11:49 - 10-NOV-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Use Worksheet D, later, to figure the adjusted basis of the Worksheet E. Gain or Loss On the Sale
equipment or property. of Medical Equipment or
PropertyWorksheet D. Adjusted Basis of Medical Keep for Your Records
Equipment or Property
Instructions: Use the following worksheet to figure total gain orSold
loss on the sale of medical equipment or property that youKeep for Your Records
 deducted in an earlier year.
Instructions: Use this worksheet if you deducted the cost of medical
1. Enter the amount that the medicalequipment or property in one year and sold the equipment or property
in a later year. This worksheet will give you the adjusted basis of the equipment or property sold for ..... . 1.
equipment or property you sold.
2. Enter your selling expenses ....... . 2.
1. Enter the cost of the equipment or 3. Subtract line 2 from line 1 ........ . 3.property. ................... . 1.
4. Enter the adjusted basis of the2. Enter your total includible medical equipment or property from Worksheetexpenses for the year you included D, line 5, or line 12, if applicable .... . 4.the cost in your medical expenses . . 2.
5. Subtract line 4 from line 3. This is the3. Divide line 1 by line 2 .......... . 3. total gain or loss from the sale of the
4. Enter 7.5% of your AGI for the year medical equipment or property. .... . 5.
the cost was included in your medical
expenses ................... . 4. If you have a loss, it is not deductible. If you have a gain,
it is includible in your income. The part of the gain that is a5. Multiply line 3 by line 4. If your
allowable itemized deductions for the recovery of an amount you previously deducted is taxable
year you purchased the equipment or as ordinary income. Enter it on Form 1040, line 21. Any
property were not more than your part of the gain that is more than the recovery of an amountAGI for that year, stop here. This is you previously deducted is taxable as a capital gain. Enterthe adjusted basis of the equipment it on Schedule D (Form 1040), Capital Gains and Losses.or property. If your allowable itemized For more information about the recovery of an amountdeductions for the year you
that you claimed as an itemized deduction in an earlierpurchased the equipment or property
were more than your AGI for that year, see Recoveries in Publication 525.
year, complete lines 6 through 11 .. . 5.
Example. You have a heart condition and difficulty6. Subtract line 5 from line 1 ....... . 6.
breathing. Your doctor prescribed oxygen equipment to
7. Enter your total allowable itemized help you breathe. Last year, you bought the oxygen equip-deductions for the year the cost was ment for $3,000. You itemized deductions and included itincluded in your medical expenses . . 7. in your medical expense deduction.
8. Divide line 6 by line 7 .......... . 8. Last year you also paid $10,750 for deductible medical
services and $6,400 for other itemized deductions. Your9. Enter your AGI for the year the cost
AGI was $15,000.was included in your medical
expenses ................... . 9. Taking into account the 7.5% limit on medical expenses,
your allowable itemized deductions totaled $19,025, fig-10. Subtract line 9 from line 7 ....... . 10.
ured as follows:
11. Multiply line 8 by line 10. ........ . 11.
Oxygen equipment .................... . 3,00012. Add line 5 to line 11. If your allowable
Medical services ...................... . 10,750itemized deductions for the year you
purchased the equipment or property Total medical expenses ................ . 13,750
were more than your AGI for that 7.5% of AGI (.075 ×  $15,000) ............ . −1,125
year, this is the adjusted basis of the Allowable medical expense deduction ...... . 12,625
equipment or property .......... . 12. Other itemized deductions .............. . 6,400
Next, use Worksheet E to figure the total gain or loss on Allowable itemized deductions ........... . 19,025
the sale of the medical equipment or property.
You figure your adjusted basis as shown on the filled-in
Worksheet D.
Publication 502 (2009) Page 21

Page 22 of 34 of Publication 502 11:49 - 10-NOV-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet D. Adjusted Basis of Medical
Worksheet E. Gain or Loss On theEquipment or Property
Sale of MedicalSoldÐIllustrated
Equipment orKeep for Your Records
PropertyÐIllustrated
Instructions: Use this worksheet if you deducted the cost of Keep for Your Records
medical equipment or property in one year and sold the
equipment or property in a later year. This worksheet will give Instructions: Use the following worksheet to figure gain or lossyou the adjusted basis of the equipment or property you sold. on the sale of medical equipment or property that you deducted
in an earlier year.
1. Enter the cost of the equipment or
property. .................. . 1. 3,000 1. Enter the amount that the medical
equipment or property sold for ..... . 1. 2,0252. Enter your total includible medical
expenses for the year you included 2. Enter your selling expenses ....... . 2. 25the cost in your medical expenses 2. 13,750
3. Subtract line 2 from line 1 ........ . 3. 2,0003. Divide line 1 by line 2 ......... . 3. .218
4. Enter the adjusted basis of the4. Enter 7.5% of your AGI for the year equipment or property from Worksheetthe cost was included in your D, line 5, or line 12, if applicable .... . 4. 829medical expenses ............ . 4. 1,125
5. Subtract line 4 from line 3. This is the5. Multiply line 3 by line 4. If your total gain or loss from the sale of theallowable itemized deductions for medical equipment or property. .... . 5. 1,171the year you purchased the
equipment or property were not
more than your AGI for that year,
stop here. This is the adjusted
basis of the equipment or property. Damages for Personal Injuries
If your allowable itemized
deductions for the year you If you receive an amount in settlement of a personal injury
purchased the equipment or suit, part of that award may be for medical expenses thatproperty were more than your AGI you deducted in an earlier year. If it is, you must includefor that year, complete lines 6 that part in your income in the year you receive it to thethrough 11 ................. . 5. 245 extent it reduced your taxable income in the earlier year.
6. Subtract line 5 from line 1 ...... . 6. 2,755 See What If You Receive Insurance Reimbursement in a
Later Year , discussed earlier under How Do You Treat7. Enter your total allowable itemized
Reimbursements.deductions for the year the cost
was included in your medical
Example. You sued this year for injuries you suffered inexpenses .................. . 7. 19,025
an accident last year. You sought $10,000 for your injuries8. Divide line 6 by line 7 ......... . 8. .145 and did not itemize your damages. Last year, you paid
9. Enter your AGI for the year the $500 for medical expenses for your injuries. You deducted
cost was included in your medical those expenses on last year's tax return. This year you
expenses .................. . 9. 15,000 settled your lawsuit for $2,000. Your settlement did not
itemize or allocate the damages. The $2,000 is first pre-10. Subtract line 9 from line 7 ...... . 10. 4,025
sumed to be for the medical expenses that you deducted.11. Multiply line 8 by line 10. ....... . 11. 584 The $500 is includible in your income this year because
you deducted the entire $500 as a medical expense de-12. Add line 5 to line 11. If your
allowable itemized deductions for duction last year.
the year you purchased the Future medical expenses. If you receive an amount inequipment or property were more
settlement of a damage suit for personal injuries, part ofthan your AGI for that year, this is
that award may be for future medical expenses. If it is, youthe adjusted basis of the
equipment or property. ........ . 12. 829 must reduce any future medical expenses for these injuries
until the amount you received has been completely used.
This year you sold the oxygen equipment for $2,025 and
you had selling expenses of $25. You must report on this Example. You were injured in an accident. You sued
year's tax return part of the $2,000 as ordinary income. To and sought a judgment of $50,000 for your injuries. You
compute the part of the sales price that is taxable, you settled the suit for $45,000. The settlement provided that
must determine the gain by subtracting the total adjusted $10,000 of the $45,000 was for future medical expenses
basis from the selling price. for your injuries. You cannot include the first $10,000 that
you pay for medical expenses for those injuries.
Workers' compensation. If you received workers' com-
pensation and you deducted medical expenses related to
that injury, you must include the workers' compensation in
Page 22 Publication 502 (2009)

Page 23 of 34 of Publication 502 11:49 - 10-NOV-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
income up to the amount you deducted. If you received reader's services are only for your work. You can deduct
workers' compensation, but did not deduct medical ex- your expenses for the reader as business expenses.
penses related to that injury, do not include the workers'
compensation in your income.
Health Insurance Costs for
Impairment-Related Work Self-Employed Persons
Expenses If you were self-employed and had a net profit for the year,
you may be able to deduct, as an adjustment to income,If you are disabled, you can take a business deduction for amounts paid for medical and qualified long-term careexpenses that are necessary for you to be able to work. If insurance on behalf of yourself, your spouse, and youryou take a business deduction for these impair- dependents. For this purpose, you were self-employed ifment-related work expenses, they are not subject to the you were a general partner (or a limited partner receiving7.5% limit that applies to medical expenses. guaranteed payments) or you received wages from an SYou are disabled if you have: corporation in which you were more than a 2% share-
holder. The insurance plan must be established under your• A physical or mental disability (for example, blind-
trade or business and the deduction cannot be more thanness or deafness) that functionally limits your being
your earned income from that trade or business.employed, or
You cannot deduct payments for medical insurance for• A physical or mental impairment (for example, a any month in which you were eligible to participate in asight or hearing impairment) that substantially limits health plan subsidized by your employer or your spouse'sone or more of your major life activities, such as employer. You cannot deduct payments for a qualifiedperforming manual tasks, walking, speaking, breath- long-term care insurance contract for any month in whiching, learning, or working. you were eligible to participate in a long-term care insur-
ance plan subsidized by your employer or your spouse's
Impairment-related expenses defined. Impair- employer.
ment-related expenses are those ordinary and necessary If you qualify to take the deduction, use thebusiness expenses that are: Self-Employed Health Insurance Deduction Worksheet in
• Necessary for you to do your work satisfactorily, the Form 1040 instructions to figure the amount you can
deduct. But if any of the following applies, do not use the• For goods and services not required or used, other worksheet.than incidentally, in your personal activities, and
• You had more than one source of income subject to• Not specifically covered under other income tax self-employment tax.laws.
• You file Form 2555, Foreign Earned Income, or
Form 2555-EZ, Foreign Earned Income Exclusion.Where to report. If you are self-employed, deduct the
business expenses on the appropriate form (Schedule C, • You are using amounts paid for qualified long-term
C-EZ, E, or F) used to report your business income and care insurance to figure the deduction.
expenses. If you cannot use the worksheet in the Form 1040 instruc-If you are an employee, complete Form 2106, Employee tions, use the worksheet in Publication 535, BusinessBusiness Expenses, or Form 2106-EZ, Unreimbursed Em- Expenses, to figure your deduction.ployee Business Expenses. Enter on Schedule A (Form
1040), line 28, that part of the amount on Form 2106, line
10, or Form 2106-EZ, line 6, that is related to your impair-
ment. Enter the amount that is unrelated to your impair- Note. When figuring the amount you can deduct for
ment on Schedule A (Form 1040), line 21. Your insurance premiums, do not include any advance pay-
impairment-related work expenses are not subject to the ments shown in box 1 of Form 1099-H. Also, if you are
2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit that applies to other claiming the health coverage tax credit, subtract the
employee business expenses. amount shown on Form 8885, line 4 from the total insur-
ance premiums you paid.
Example. You are blind. You must use a reader to do Also, do not include amounts paid for health insuranceyour work. You use the reader both during your regular coverage with retirement plan distributions that wereworking hours at your place of work and outside your tax-free because you are a retired public safety officer.regular working hours away from your place of work. The
Where to report. You take this deduction on Form 1040,
line 29. If you itemize your deductions and do not claim
100% of your self-employed health insurance on line 29,
include any remaining premiums with all other medical
care expenses on Schedule A (Form 1040), subject to the
7.5% limit.
Publication 502 (2009) Page 23

Page 24 of 34 of Publication 502 11:49 - 10-NOV-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Worksheet F. Recapture of COBRACOBRA Premium Assistance
Premium Assistance for
The Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of Higher Income
1985 (COBRA) provides that if you were covered under a Taxpayersgroup health plan and you would lose coverage because of Keep for Your Records
a qualifying event, you should be allowed an opportunity to
elect COBRA continuation health coverage under the plan. Instructions: Use the following worksheet to figure the taxable
portion of your COBRA premium if your modified AGI (line 3If there was no available election, your employer or the
below) is more than $125,000 ($250,000 if married filing jointly)plan was subject to an excise tax. You can be required to
but less than $145,000 ($290,000 if married filing jointly).pay the full premium for the COBRA continuation cover-
age. 1. Enter your AGI (Form 1040, line 38 or If you are an assistance eligible individual, you pay 35% Form 1040NR, line 35) .......... . 1.of the premium otherwise payable for this coverage and
2. Enter the total of any amounts fromare treated as having paid the full premium. You are an
Form 2555, lines 45 and 50; Formassistance eligible individual if:
2555-EZ, line 18; and Form 4563, line
• You are a qualified beneficiary as a result of an 15, and any exclusion of income from
involuntarily termination that occurred during the pe- American Samoa and Puerto Rico .. . 2.
riod beginning on September 1, 2008, and ending on 3. Modified AGI. Add lines 1 and 2 .... . 3.December 31, 2009,
4. Enter $125,000 ($250,000 if married• You are eligible for COBRA continuation coverage at filing jointly) ................... . 4.
any time during that period, and
5. Subtract line 4 from line 3 ........ . 5.
• You elect the coverage. 6. Enter $20,000 ($40,000 if married filing
jointly) ....................... . 6.A qualified beneficiary is generally any individual who is
covered under a group health plan on the day before the 7. Divide line 5 by line 6. Enter the result
as a decimal (rounded to at least 3involuntary termination. This includes the covered em-
places) ...................... . 7. .ployee, the employee's spouse, and the employee's de-
pendent. 8. Enter the amount of the COBRA
The premium assistance (the 65% reduction of the premium assistance* you received in
premium) applies to the first period of coverage beginning 2009 ........................ . 8.
after February 16, 2009. The reduction applies until the 9. Multiply line 8 by line 7. Enter resultearliest of: here and include it on Form 1040, line
60 or Form 1040NR, line 57. On the1. The first date the assistance eligible individual be- dotted line next to that line, enter thecomes eligible for other group health plan coverage amount shown on line 9 and identify itor Medicare coverage, as ªCOBRA.º .................. . 9.
2. The date that is 9 months after the first day of the *Contact your former employer or health insurance plan to
first month for which the reduced premium applies to obtain the total premium assistance, if unknown.
the individual, or
3. The date the individual ceases to be eligible for CO- You may elect to permanently waive the right to the
BRA continuation coverage. premium assistance. You will not receive the premium
assistance and you will not have to include the assistanceThe premium assistance is not included in your gross
in your income tax if your modified AGI is more thanincome. However, if your modified adjusted gross income
$125,000 ($250,000 if married filing jointly). To make this(AGI) is more than $125,000 ($250,000 if married filing
election, give a signed and dated notification (include ajointly) but not more than $145,000 ($290,000 if married
reference to ªpermanent waiverº) to the person to whomfiling jointly), your income tax for the year is increased by a
premiums are payable.percentage of the premium assistance. Use Worksheet F
to figure the amount you must include as tax on your You will not qualify for the health coverage tax credit
return. If your modified AGI is more than $145,000 (discussed next) for any month for which you receive($290,000 if married filing jointly), your income tax for the premium assistance.tax year is increased by the total premium assistance. For more information see Notice 2009-27, available atInclude the increase in your income tax on Form 1040, line
www.irs.gov/irb/2009-16_irb/ar09.60 or Form 1040NR, line 57. On the dotted line next to that
line, enter the amount of the tax and identify it as ªCOBRA.º
Page 24 Publication 502 (2009)

Page 25 of 34 of Publication 502 11:49 - 10-NOV-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Your spouse (but see Both spouses eligible below),
orHealth Coverage Tax Credit
• Anyone whom you can claim as a dependent onIf you paid the premiums for qualified health insurance your tax return. (For children whose parents are di-coverage, you may be able to claim the health coverage vorced, see Children of divorced or separated par-tax credit (HCTC). If you are eligible, you can get monthly ents, later.)HCTC (advance payments), a yearly HCTC, or a combina-
However, anyone who has other specified coverage (de-tion of these methods (see How To Take the Credit, later).
fined later), is not a qualifying family member.For 2009, the HCTC is 65% of the premiums paid for
coverage in January through April, and 80% of the premi-
Both spouses eligible.  Your spouse is not treated as aums paid for coverage in May through December. For
qualifying family member if:2010, the HCTC is 80% of the premiums paid for coverage
in each month. • You are married at the end of the year,
More information.  For a complete discussion of the • You and your spouse are both eligible recipientsHCTC, visit our website www.irs.gov and enter ªhctcº in the during the year, andsearch box. Also, see Form 8885.
• You file separate tax returns.
Who Can Take This Credit? Married and living apart. For purposes of this credit,
you are not considered married on the last day of the year ifYou can take this credit for any month in which all of the all of the following apply.following were true on the first day of the month.
• You file a separate return.1. You were an eligible:
• Your home is the home for more than half the year
a. Trade adjustment assistance (TAA) recipient, of a dependent under age 13 or a dependent who is
physically or mentally not able to care for himself orb. Alternative TAA recipient, Reemployment TAA re- herself.cipient, or
• You pay more than half the cost of keeping up yourc. Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (PBGC) home for the year.pension recipient.
• Your spouse does not live in your home for the last 6
2. You paid the premium for qualified health insurance months of the year.
coverage for yourself or a qualifying family member.
See Qualified Health Insurance, later. Legally separated. You are not considered married if
you are legally separated from your spouse under a decree3. You were not imprisoned under federal, state, or
of divorce or separate maintenance.local authority.
4. You did not have other specified coverage. See Children of divorced or separated parents. Under the
Other Specified Coverage, later. rules for medical expenses, a child of divorced or sepa-
rated parents can be treated as a dependent of bothIf you were an eligible recipient described in (1), your
parents if certain requirements are met. See Qualifyingstate's workforce agency (unemployment office) or the
Child under Whose Medical Expenses Can You Include ,PBGC will notify the HCTC Program that you may be
earlier. However, for purposes of the HCTC, only theeligible for the credit. When notified, the HCTC Program
custodial parent can treat the child as a qualifying familywill mail you an HCTC Program Kit. If you have not
member, even if the other parent can claim the child as areceived the Program Kit, you probably are not an eligible
dependent. The custodial parent is the parent having cus-recipient and do not qualify for the credit.
tody for the greater portion of the tax year.It can take the state or PBGC time to notify the
HCTC Program about the event. You should
Qualified Health Insurancemake the full premium payments to your health
CAUTION
!
plan until you are enrolled in the HCTC Program. You may The following health insurance qualifies for the credit.be able to claim the yearly HCTC for these premiums when
you file your tax return. • COBRA continuation coverage. (This is coverage
that employers with 20 or more employees must
No credit if exemption claimed by another taxpayer. offer to employees or former employees and their
You cannot take this credit if you can be claimed as an beneficiaries who have lost coverage because of
exemption on someone else's tax return. certain events.) See the caution on page 26.
• Coverage under a group health plan that is availableQualifying Family Member through the employment of your spouse. (But see
Other Specified Coverage, later.)You can include the premiums you pay for qualified health
• Coverage under an individual health insurance pol-insurance for qualifying family members in figuring your
icy if you were covered during the entire 30-daycredit. A qualifying family member is:
Publication 502 (2009) Page 25

Page 26 of 34 of Publication 502 11:49 - 10-NOV-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
period that ends on the date you separated from the yourself and your qualifying family member(s), (defined
employment which qualified you for the allowance or earlier), you may not be able to take into account all of your
benefit as an eligible individual (defined earlier). For payments. You cannot treat an amount as paid for insur-
this purpose, coverage under an individual health ance for yourself and qualifying family members unless all
insurance policy includes medical insurance offered of the following requirements are met.
to individuals and their families, but does not include • The charge for insurance for yourself and qualifyingcoverage under a federal, state, or other group family members is either separately stated in thehealth insurance policy.
contract or furnished to you by the insurance com-
pany in a separate statement.COBRA continuation coverage allows individuals
• The amount you paid for insurance for yourself andwho had lost their jobs to receive a reduction in
qualifying family members is not more than thehealth insurance premiums. You do  not qualify
CAUTION
!
charge that is stated in the contract or furnished byfor the HCTC for any month that you received a reduction
the insurance company.in premium.
• The amount stated in the contract or furnished byState-qualified health insurance. Certain state qualified the insurance company is not unreasonably large inhealth insurance can qualify for a credit. To find out which
relation to the total charges under the contract.plans are qualified for your state, you can:
• Visit the website, www.irs.gov, type ªhctcº in the
search box, and then, click on HCTC: List of Eligible Coverage MonthState-Qualified Health Plans, or
Eligibility for the credit is determined on a monthly basis.• You can call 1-866-628-4282 (tollfree) (or TDD/TTY
1-866-626-4282). An eligible coverage month is any month in which, as of the
first day of the month, you:
1. Are an eligible recipient,Nonqualified Health Insurance
2. Are covered by qualified health insurance (defined
The following health insurance does not qualify for the earlier) that you pay for,
credit. 3. Do not have other specified coverage (defined later),
and1. Medicare supplemental (Medigap) insurance, Tricare
supplemental insurance, or similar supplemental in- 4. Are not imprisoned under federal, state, or local au-surance to an employer-sponsored group health thority.plan.
If you file a joint return, only one spouse has to satisfy2. Any insurance if substantially all of the coverage is: the requirements.
a. Coverage for on-site medical clinics, An individual who receives COBRA premium assis-
tance (discussed earlier) for a month is disqualified fromb. Hospital indemnity or other fixed indemnity insur- receiving the HCTC for that month.ance,
c. Accident or disability income insurance (or a com-
Other Specified Coveragebination of the two),
d. Liability insurance, Even if you are otherwise eligible, you are not eligible for
the credit for a month if, as of the first day of the month, youe. A supplement to liability insurance, have other specified coverage. Other specified coverage is
f. Workers' compensation or similar insurance, coverage under the following.
g. Automobile medical payment insurance, 1. Any insurance which constitutes medical care (un-
h. Credit-only insurance, less substantially all of that insurance is for benefits
listed earlier under (1) or (2) under Nonqualifiedi. Limited scope dental or vision benefits, Health Insurance) if at least 50% of the cost of the
j. Benefits for long-term care, nursing home care, coverage is paid by an employer (or former em-
home health care, community-based care (or any ployer) of you or your spouse.
combination), or 2. Any of the following government health programs:
k. Coverage for only a specified disease or illness.
a. Medicare Part A or Part B,
3. Coverage under a flexible spending or similar ar- b. Medicaid, or the State Children's Health Insur-rangement. ance Program (SCHIP),
c. The Federal Employees Health Benefit PlanInsurance that covers other individuals. If you have
qualified health insurance that covers anyone besides (FEHBP), or
Page 26 Publication 502 (2009)

Page 27 of 34 of Publication 502 11:49 - 10-NOV-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
d. Tricare, the medical and dental care program for Required documents. You must attach to your tax return
the documents listed in the Form 8885 instructions.members and certain former members of the uni-
formed services and their dependents.  If you e-file, you must attach a copy of Form 8885 and
the required documents to Form 8453, U.S. Individual
Income Tax Transmittal for an IRS e-file Return. Mail Form
Benefits from the Veterans Administration. Entitle- 8453 and the attachments to the address shown in the
Form 8453 instructions.ment to or receipt of benefits from the Veterans Adminis-
tration is not other specified coverage.
Refundable credit. The HCTC is refundable. You can
claim the full credit even if you do not owe any taxes orHow To Take the Credit earn any income. To get the credit, you must:
If you claim this credit, you cannot take the same expenses 1. Qualify for the credit, andthat you use to figure your HCTC into account in determin-
2. File a tax return, even if you:ing your:
• Medical and dental expenses on Schedule A (Form a. Do not owe any tax,
1040), or b. Did not earn enough money to file a return, or
• Self-employed health insurance deduction. c. Did not have income taxes withheld from your
pay.You cannot use payments out of the following distribu-
tions to figure the credit:
• Health Savings Accounts (HSAs), or
Monthly HCTC• Archer Medical Savings Accounts (MSAs).
Under monthly HCTC (advance payments), you only pay
part of the premium for health insurance and the HCTCYearly HCTC Program pays the rest of the premium. The part paid by the
HCTC Program is your monthly HCTC. For JanuaryTo claim the yearly HCTC, complete Form 8885, and through April of 2009, you had to pay 35% of the premiumattach it to your Form 1040, Form 1040NR, U.S. Nonresi- and the HCTC Program paid 65% of the premium. For Maydent Alien Income Tax Return; Form 1040-SS, U.S. through December of 2009, you had to pay 20% of theSelf-Employment Tax Return; or Form 1040-PR, Planilla premium and the HCTC Program paid 80% of the pre-para la Declaraci Âon de la Contribuci Âon Federal sobre al mium. For 2010, you will have to pay 20% and the HCTCTrabajo por Cuenta Propia. You cannot claim the credit on Program will pay 80% of the premium.Form 1040A, Form 1040EZ, or Form 1040NR-EZ, U.S. You pay your part of the premium to the HCTC Program.Income Tax Return for Certain Nonresident Aliens With No The program adds the advance payment and pays the totalDependents. premium to your health plan.You may claim the yearly HCTC if you were an eligible  If you were an eligible recipient, your state's workforcerecipient and: agency (unemployment office) or the PBGC will notify the
HCTC Program that you may be eligible for the credit.• Did not receive monthly HCTC (advanced pay-
When notified, the HCTC Program will mail you an HCTCments), or
Program Kit. If you have not received the Program Kit, you• Received advanced payments and also made eligi- probably are not an eligible recipient and do not qualify forble payments directly to your health plan. the credit.
It can take the state or PBGC time to notify theFor 2009, the yearly credit is 65% of the premium paid
HCTC Program about the event. You shouldfor coverage in January through April and 80% for cover-
make the full premium payment to your healthage in May through December. For 2010, the yearly credit
CAUTION
!
plan until you are enrolled in the HCTC Program. You mayis 80%. You cannot claim the credit for amounts you paid to
be able to claim the yearly HCTC for these premiums.the HCTC Program.
When you get the HCTC Program Kit, you must fill out
Example. You became eligible for the HCTC on June 1, the registration form and send it and any supporting docu-
2009. You enrolled in a state-qualified health plan and ments to the HCTC Program. Once you are enrolled in the
registered for advance payments in June. You paid the HCTC Program, you will receive a monthly invoice stating
premiums for the first 2 months to the health plan. You the amount you must pay to the program and the due date.
receive your first HCTC invoice for the amount due at the For 2009 and 2010, the HCTC Program may reimburse
end of July (for August coverage). You begin paying the HCTC participants for eligible coverage months for which
HCTC Program at that time. You may claim the yearly they made payments directly to their health plans during
HCTC for the payments you made directly to the health the enrollment process. This payment must be reduced by
plan during enrollment in the HCTC or request a reim- any payment you received for the purchase of health
bursement for the monthly HCTC (or advanced payment). insurance under a national emergency grant for the tax
The reimbursement for the monthly HCTC will appear as a year including these eligible coverage months and for any
credit on your monthly HCTC invoice. premium amount paid for non eligible benefits, such as
Publication 502 (2009) Page 27

Page 28 of 34 of Publication 502 11:49 - 10-NOV-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
dental and vision expenses. Please see www.irs.gov, type certain level. LITCs are independent from the IRS. Most
ªhctc reimbursement creditº in the search box for more LITCs can provide representation before the IRS or in
information. court on audits, tax collection disputes, and other issues
for free or a small fee. If an individual's native language isIf you receive a monthly HCTC, you will get Form
not English, some clinics can provide multilingual informa-1099-H, Health Coverage Tax Credit (HCTC) Advance
tion about taxpayer rights and responsibilities. For morePayments. The form shows you the total of your advance
information, see Publication 4134, Low Income Taxpayerpayments and for which months payments were made
Clinic List. This publication is available at www.irs.gov, by(including months for which retroactive payments were
calling 1-800-TAX-FORM (1-800-829-3676), or at your lo-made). You cannot claim the yearly HCTC for any month
cal IRS office.for which you received a monthly HCTC.
Free tax services. To find out what services are avail-
able, get Publication 910, IRS Guide to Free Tax Services.How To Get Tax Help It contains lists of free tax information sources, including
publications, services, and free tax education and assis-You can get help with unresolved tax issues, order free tance programs. It also has an index of over 100 TeleTaxpublications and forms, ask tax questions, and get informa- topics (recorded tax information) you can listen to on yourtion from the IRS in several ways. By selecting the method telephone.that is best for you, you will have quick and easy access to Accessible versions of IRS published products aretax help. available on request in a variety of alternative formats for
people with disabilities.Contacting your Taxpayer Advocate. The Taxpayer
Advocate Service (TAS) is an independent organization Free help with your return. Free help in preparing yourwithin the IRS whose employees assist taxpayers who are return is available nationwide from IRS-trained volunteers.experiencing economic harm, who are seeking help in The Volunteer Income Tax Assistance (VITA) program isresolving tax problems that have not been resolved designed to help low-income taxpayers and the Tax Coun-through normal channels, or who believe that an IRS seling for the Elderly (TCE) program is designed to assistsystem or procedure is not working as it should. Here are taxpayers age 60 and older with their tax returns. Manyseven things every taxpayer should know about TAS: VITA sites offer free electronic filing and all volunteers will
let you know about credits and deductions you may be• TAS is your voice at the IRS.
entitled to claim. To find the nearest VITA or TCE site, call• Our service is free, confidential, and tailored to meet 1-800-829-1040.your needs. As part of the TCE program, AARP offers the Tax-Aide
counseling program. To find the nearest AARP Tax-Aide• You may be eligible for TAS help if you have tried to
site, call 1-888-227-7669 or visit AARP's website atresolve your tax problem through normal IRS chan-
www.aarp.org/money/taxaide.nels and have gotten nowhere, or you believe an
IRS procedure just isn't working as it should. For more information on these programs, go to 
www.irs.gov and enter keyword ªVITAº in the upper• TAS helps taxpayers whose problems are causing right-hand corner.financial difficulty or significant cost, including the
cost of professional representation. This includes Internet. You can access the IRS website at
businesses as well as individuals. www.irs.gov 24 hours a day, 7 days a week to:
• TAS employees know the IRS and how to navigate
it. We will listen to your problem, help you under- • E-file your return. Find out about commercial taxstand what needs to be done to resolve it, and stay preparation and e-file services available free to eligi-with you every step of the way until your problem is ble taxpayers.resolved.
• Check the status of your 2009 refund. Go to • TAS has at least one local taxpayer advocate in www.irs.gov and click on Where's My Refund. Waitevery state, the District of Columbia, and Puerto at least 72 hours after the IRS acknowledges receiptRico. You can call your local advocate, whose num- of your e-filed return, or 3 to 4 weeks after mailing aber is in your phone book, in Pub. 1546, Taxpayer paper return. If you filed Form 8379 with your return,Advocate ServiceÐYour Voice at the IRS, and on wait 14 weeks (11 weeks if you filed electronically).our website at www.irs.gov/advocate. You can also Have your 2009 tax return available so you cancall our toll-free line at 1-877-777-4778 or TTY/TDD provide your social security number, your filing sta-1-800-829-4059. tus, and the exact whole dollar amount of your re-
• You can learn about your rights and responsibilities fund.
as a taxpayer by visiting our online tax toolkit at • Download forms, instructions, and publications.www.taxtoolkit.irs.gov.
• Order IRS products online.
Low Income Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs). The Low In- • Research your tax questions online.come Taxpayer Clinic program serves individuals who
have a problem with the IRS and whose income is below a • Search publications online by topic or keyword.
Page 28 Publication 502 (2009)

Page 29 of 34 of Publication 502 11:49 - 10-NOV-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Use the online Internal Revenue Code, Regulations, Evaluating the quality of our telephone services. To
ensure IRS representatives give accurate, courteous, andor other official guidance.
professional answers, we use several methods to evaluate• View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs) published in the quality of our telephone services. One method is for athe last few years. second IRS representative to listen in on or record random
telephone calls. Another is to ask some callers to complete• Figure your withholding allowances using the with-
a short survey at the end of the call.holding calculator online at www.irs.gov/individuals.
• Determine if Form 6251 must be filed by using our Walk-in. Many products and services are avail-
Alternative Minimum Tax (AMT) Assistant. able on a walk-in basis.
• Sign up to receive local and national tax news by
email. • Products. You can walk in to many post offices,
libraries, and IRS offices to pick up certain forms,• Get information on starting and operating a small instructions, and publications. Some IRS offices, li-business. braries, grocery stores, copy centers, city and county
government offices, credit unions, and office supply
stores have a collection of products available to printPhone. Many services are available by phone. from a CD or photocopy from reproducible proofs.
Also, some IRS offices and libraries have the Inter-
nal Revenue Code, regulations, Internal Revenue
Bulletins, and Cumulative Bulletins available for re-• Ordering forms, instructions, and publications. Call search purposes.1-800-TAX-FORM (1-800-829-3676) to order cur-
• Services. You can walk in to your local Taxpayerrent-year forms, instructions, and publications, and
Assistance Center every business day for personal,prior-year forms and instructions. You should receive
face-to-face tax help. An employee can explain IRSyour order within 10 days.
letters, request adjustments to your tax account, or• Asking tax questions. Call the IRS with your tax help you set up a payment plan. If you need toquestions at 1-800-829-1040. resolve a tax problem, have questions about how the
tax law applies to your individual tax return, or you• Solving problems. You can get face-to-face help
are more comfortable talking with someone in per-solving tax problems every business day in IRS Tax-
son, visit your local Taxpayer Assistance Centerpayer Assistance Centers. An employee can explain
where you can spread out your records and talk withIRS letters, request adjustments to your account, or
an IRS representative face-to-face. No appointmenthelp you set up a payment plan. Call your local
is necessaryÐjust walk in. If you prefer, you can callTaxpayer Assistance Center for an appointment. To your local Center and leave a message requestingfind the number, go to www.irs.gov/localcontacts or an appointment to resolve a tax account issue. Alook in the phone book under United States Govern- representative will call you back within 2 businessment, Internal Revenue Service. days to schedule an in-person appointment at your
• TTY/TDD equipment. If you have access to TTY/ convenience. If you have an ongoing, complex tax
TDD equipment, call 1-800-829-4059 to ask tax account problem or a special need, such as a disa-
questions or to order forms and publications. bility, an appointment can be requested. All other
issues will be handled without an appointment. To• TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 to listen to find the number of your local office, go to pre-recorded messages covering various tax topics. www.irs.gov/localcontacts or look in the phone book
• Refund information. To check the status of your under United States Government, Internal Revenue
2009 refund, call 1-800-829-1954 during business Service.
hours or 1-800-829-4477 (automated refund infor-
mation 24 hours a day, 7 days a week). Wait at least Mail. You can send your order for forms, instruc-72 hours after the IRS acknowledges receipt of your tions, and publications to the address below. Youe-filed return, or 3 to 4 weeks after mailing a paper should receive a response within 10 days after
return. If you filed Form 8379 with your return, wait your request is received.
14 weeks (11 weeks if you filed electronically). Have
your 2009 tax return available so you can provide Internal Revenue Serviceyour social security number, your filing status, and 1201 N. Mitsubishi Motorwaythe exact whole dollar amount of your refund. Re- Bloomington, IL 61705-6613funds are sent out weekly on Fridays. If you check
the status of your refund and are not given the date DVD for tax products. You can order Publication
it will be issued, please wait until the next week 1796, IRS Tax Products DVD, and obtain:
before checking back.
• Other refund information. To check the status of a • Current-year forms, instructions, and publications.prior year refund or amended return refund, call
1-800-829-1954. • Prior-year forms, instructions, and publications.
Publication 502 (2009) Page 29

Page 30 of 34 of Publication 502 11:49 - 10-NOV-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Tax Map: an electronic research tool and finding aid. • Two releases during the year.
± The first release will ship the beginning of January• Tax law frequently asked questions. 2010.
• Tax Topics from the IRS telephone response sys- ± The final release will ship the beginning of March
tem. 2010.
• Internal Revenue CodeÐTitle 26 of the U.S. Code. Purchase the DVD from National Technical Information
• Fill-in, print, and save features for most tax forms. Service (NTIS) at www.irs.gov/cdorders for $30 (no han-
dling fee) or call 1-877-233-6767 toll free to buy the DVD• Internal Revenue Bulletins. for $30 (plus a $6 handling fee).
• Toll-free and email technical support.
Page 30 Publication 502 (2009)

Page 31 of 34 of Publication 502 11:49 - 10-NOV-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.
Index
 See ªComments and Suggestionsº in the ªIntroductionº for the ways you can reach us.
COBRA assistance: Employer-sponsored healthA
insurance plans ............... . 9Premium assistance ........... . 24Abortion .......................... . 5
Employment taxes .............. . 12COBRA PremiumAcupuncture ..................... . 5
assistance .................... . 24 Equipment  (See Medical equipmentAdopted child's medical
or property)Community property states ..... . 3expenses ...................... . 4
Excluded expenses:Computer banks to track medicalAGI limitation .................. . 2, 3
Insurance premiums ........... . 10information ................... . 12Alcoholism ....................... . 6
Eye surgery ...................... . 8Contact lenses ................... . 7Ambulances ..................... . 6
Eyeglasses ....................... . 8Controlled substances ......... . 15Archer MSAs:
Cosmetic surgery ............... . 15Health coverage tax credit ..... . 27
Credit  (See Health coverage taxMedical expenses paid for F
credit)decedent from ................ . 5 Fertility enhancement:
Crutches ......................... . 7Artificial limbs ................... . 6 Eggs, temporary storage of ..... . 8
Fertility.......................... . 8Artificial teeth .................... . 6
In vitro fertilization .............. . 8Aspirin .......................... . 16 D Figuring the deduction ...... . 19-20Assistance  (See Tax help) Dancing lessons ................ . 15 Final return for decedent:Assisted living homes .......... . 12 Decedent's medical Medical expenses paid ......... . 5Athletic club dues .............. . 15 expenses ...................... . 5 Flexible spending account ..... . 15Autoette ......................... . 14 Deductible amount .............. . 3 Food  (See Weight-loss programs)Automobiles  (See Cars) Deductible expenses ......... . 3-15 Form 1040:Definition of medical expenses: Health coverage tax credit ..... . 27Doctor .......................... . 3B Self-employed persons, healthPhysician ....................... . 3Baby sitting ..................... . 15 insurance costs ............. . 23Dental treatment ................. . 8Bandages ........................ . 6 Form 1040, Schedule A:Artificial teeth ................... . 6Basis: Impairment-related workTeeth whitening ................ . 16Medical equipment or property expenses .................... . 23
Dentures ......................... . 6(Worksheet D) ............... . 21 Medical and dental
Dependent's medical expenses: expenses ................. . 2, 19Birth control pills ................ . 6
Adopted child ................... . 4 Self-employed persons, healthBody scan ........................ . 6
Multiple support agreement ..... . 5 insurance costs ............. . 23Braille books and magazines ... . 6
Qualifying child ................. . 4 Form 1040, Schedule C:Breast reconstruction Qualifying relative .............. . 4 Impairment-related worksurgery ........................ . 6
Dependents: expenses .................... . 23
Disabled dependent care ... . 8, 10 Form 1040, Schedule C-EZ:
C Diagnostic devices .............. . 8 Impairment-related work
Calculation of deduction ....... . 19 expenses .................... . 23Diaper services ................. . 15
Capital expenses ................ . 6 Form 1040, Schedule E:Disabilities, persons with:
Improvements to rented Impairment-related workDependent care expenses ...... . 8,
property ...................... . 7 expenses .................... . 2310
Operation and upkeep .......... . 7 Form 1040, Schedule F:Improvements to rented
Worksheet A .................... . 7 Impairment-related workproperty ...................... . 7
Cars .............................. . 7 expenses .................... . 23Special education .............. . 13
Out-of-pocket expenses ....... . 14 Form 1040NR:Divorced taxpayers:Standard medical mileage Health coverage tax credit ..... . 27Medical expenses of child ...... . 4rates......................... . 14 Form 1040X:Drug addiction ................... . 8Child care ....................... . 15 Amended return ................ . 3Drugs  (See Medicines)Children's medical expenses: Deceased taxpayer ............. . 5Dues:Adopted child ................... . 4 Form 1099-H:Health club .................... . 15Dependents .................... . 4 Self-employed persons, health
Chiropractor ..................... . 7 insurance costs ............. . 23
EChristian Scientist Form 2106:
Education, special .............. . 13practitioner .................... . 7 Impairment-related work
Electrolysis ..................... . 15Chronically ill persons ......... . 11 expenses .................... . 23
Publication 502 (2009) Page 31

Page 32 of 34 of Publication 502 11:49 - 10-NOV-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Form 2106-EZ: Yearly HCTC .................. . 27 Lessons, dancing and
Impairment-related work swimming ..................... . 15Health institutes ................. . 8
expenses .................... . 23 Lifetime care:Health insurance:
Form 2555: Advance payments for ......... . 10Credit (See Health coverage tax
Self-employed persons, health credit) Lodging  (See also Trips) ... . 10, 14
insurance costs ............. . 23 Employer-sponsored plan ...... . 9 Long-term care ................. . 11
Form 2555-EZ: Premiums: Chronically ill individuals ....... . 11
Self-employed persons, health Deductible .................... . 9 Maintenance and personal care
insurance costs ............. . 23 Nondeductible ............... . 10 services ..................... . 11
Paid by employer ............ . 18Form 8453: Qualified insurance
Paid by employer and you ... . 17Health coverage tax credit ..... . 27 contracts .................... . 11
Paid by you ................. . 17 Qualified services .............. . 11Form 8885:
Prepaid ....................... . 9Health coverage tax credit ..... . 27
Unused sick leave used toSelf-employed persons, health Mpay ......................... . 9insurance costs ............. . 23 Maintenance and personal careReimbursements (SeeFounder's fee  (See Lifetime care, services ....................... . 11Reimbursements)advance payments) Maternity clothes ............... . 16Self-employed persons ........ . 23Free tax services ............... . 28 Meals  (See also Weight-lossHealth maintenance organizationsFuneral expenses ............... . 15 programs) ................. . 11, 14(HMOs) ......................... . 8Future medical care ........ . 10, 15 Medical conferences ........... . 11Health reimbursement
Medical equipment or property:arrangements (HRAs) ........ . 17
Adjusted basis (WorksheetG Health Savings Accounts (HSAs): D) ........................... . 21Glasses .......................... . 8 Payments from ................ . 15 Gain or loss (Worksheet E) .... . 22Guide dog or other animal ...... . 8 Hearing aids ..................... . 8 Sale of ......................... . 20Hearing-impaired persons: Medical expense records ....... . 20Guide dog or other animal for ... . 8H Medical information plans ...... . 12Help  (See Tax help)Hair: Medical savings accountsHMOs (Health maintenanceRemoval ....................... . 15 (MSAs) ........................ . 16organizations) ................. . 8Transplants .................... . 15 Medicare:Home care  (See Nursing services)Wigs ........................... . 14 Medicare A, deductibleHome improvements  (See CapitalHealth club dues ................ . 15 expense ...................... . 9expenses:)Health coverage tax credit ..... . 15 Medicare B, deductibleHospital services ................ . 8Advanced payments ........... . 27 expense ...................... . 9Hotels ........................... . 10Alternative TAA recipient ...... . 25 Medicare D, deductible
Archer MSAs .................. . 27 Household help ................. . 16 expense ...................... . 9
Both spouses eligible .......... . 25 HRAs (Health reimbursement Medicines ....................... . 12Children of divorced parents ... . 25 arrangements) ................ . 17 Imported ................... . 12, 16Eligible coverage month ....... . 26 Nonprescription drugs andInsurance that covers other medicines ................... . 16Iindividuals ................... . 26 Missing childrenIllegal operations andLegally separated .............. . 25 photographs ................... . 2treatments .................... . 16Married persons filing separate More information  (See Tax help)Illegal substances .............. . 15returns ...................... . 25 Multiple support agreement ..... . 5Impairment-related workMonthly HCTC ................. . 27
expenses ..................... . 23Nonqualified health
Reporting of ................... . 23insurance .................... . 26 N
Insulin ........................... . 16Other specified coverage: Nondeductible expenses .... . 15-16
Benefits from the Veterans Insurance  (See Health insurance) Nonprescription drugs and
Administration ............. . 26 Intellectually and developmentally medicines ..................... . 16
PBGC pension recipient ....... . 25 disabled persons: Nursing homes ................. . 12Pension Benefit Guaranty Mentally retarded .............. . 10 Nursing services ............ . 12, 15Corporation (PBGC) Special homes for ............. . 10 Chronically ill individuals ....... . 11recipient ..................... . 25 Nutritional supplements:Qualified health insurance ..... . 25 Natural medicines ............. . 16LQualifying family member ...... . 25 Laboratory fees ................. . 10Reimbursement credit ......... . 27
Laser eye surgery ............... . 8 OReporting ...................... . 27
Lead-based paint removal ...... . 10State-qualified health Operations ...................... . 12
Learning disabilities ............ . 13insurance .................... . 26 Cosmetic surgery .............. . 15
TAA recipient .................. . 25 Legal fees ....................... . 10 Eye surgery ..................... . 8
Page 32 Publication 502 (2009)

Page 33 of 34 of Publication 502 11:49 - 10-NOV-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Operations (Cont.) Medical deduction (See Form Telephone ....................... . 13
Illegal operations and 1040, Schedule A) Television ....................... . 13
treatments ................... . 16 Self-employed persons, health Therapy ......................... . 13
insurance costs ............. . 23Optometrist ..................... . 12 Transplants ..................... . 13
Optometrist services ............ . 8 Travel and transportation
Organ donors ................... . 13 S expenses ..................... . 13
Osteopath ....................... . 12 Car expenses .................. . 14Sale of medical equipment or
Includible expenses........ . 13, 14property ....................... . 20Oxygen .......................... . 12
Parking fees and tolls .......... . 14Adjusted basis (Worksheet
D) ........................... . 21 Trips ............................. . 14P Gain or loss (Worksheet E) .... . 22 TTY/TDD information ........... . 28Paint removal, for Schedules  (See Form 1040) Tuition ........................... . 14lead-based .................... . 10
Seeing-eye dogs ................. . 8Parking fees and tolls .......... . 14
Self-employed persons: VPersonal injury damages ....... . 22 Health coverage tax credit ..... . 27 Vasectomy ...................... . 14Personal use items ............. . 16 Health insurance costs ........ . 23 Veterinary fees .................. . 16Physical examination ........... . 12 Senior housing ................. . 12 Vision correction surgery ....... . 8Physical therapy ................ . 13 Separate returns: Visually-impaired persons:Plastic surgery .................. . 15 Community property states ..... . 3 Guide dog or other animal for ... . 8Pregnancy test kit .............. . 12 Medical and dental expenses ... . 3 Vitamins or minerals ........... . 16Premiums  (See Health insurance) Separated taxpayers:Prepaid insurance premiums ... . 9 Health coverage tax credit ..... . 25
WProsthesis ....................... . 6 Medical expenses of child ...... . 4
Weight-loss programs ...... . 14, 16Psychiatric care ................ . 13 Service animals .................. . 8
What's new:Psychoanalysis ................. . 13 Sick leave:
COBRA continuous coverage ... . 1Psychologists ................... . 13 Used to pay health insurance
Health coverage tax credit ...... . 1Publications  (See Tax help) premiums .................... . 9
Standard medical mileageSpecial education............... . 13 rate ........................... . 1Spouse's medical expenses .... . 3R Wheelchairs ..................... . 14Deceased spouse .............. . 5Radial keratotomy ............... . 8 Wigs ............................. . 14Sterilization ..................... . 13Recordkeeping.................. . 20 Work expenses:Stop-smoking programs ....... . 13Rehabilitation facilities ......... . 12 Disabled dependent care ....... . 8Surgery  (See Operations)Reimbursements ............ . 17-19 Impairment-related ............ . 23Swimming lessons ............. . 15Excess includible in income: Workers' compensation ........ . 22More than one policy (Worksheet Worksheets:C) ......................... . 18 T Capital expenses (WorksheetOne policy (Worksheet B) ... . 18 Tables and figures: A) ............................ . 7Excess may be taxable (Figure Medical equipment or property: Medical equipment or property:1) ............................ . 17 Adjusted basis (Worksheet Adjusted basis (WorksheetHealth Reimbursement D) ......................... . 21 D) ......................... . 21Arrangement (HRA) ......... . 17 Gain or loss (Worksheet Gain or loss (WorksheetInsurance ...................... . 17 E) ......................... . 22 E) ......................... . 22Medical expenses not Reimbursements, excess includible Reimbursements, excess includiblededucted .................... . 19 in income: in income:More than one policy .......... . 18 More than one policy (Worksheet More than one policy (WorksheetReceived in later year ......... . 19 C) ......................... . 18 C) ......................... . 18Rental property: One policy (Worksheet B) ... . 18 One policy (Worksheet B) ... . 18Improvements to ................ . 7 Reimbursements, excess may be
Reporting: taxable (Figure 1) ........... . 17 XHealth coverage tax credit ..... . 27 Tax help ......................... . 28 X-rays ........................... . 15Impairment-related work Taxpayer Advocate ............. . 28expenses .................... . 23 Teeth: ■Medical and dental Artificial ......................... . 6expenses .................... . 19 Dental treatment ................ . 8
Whitening ...................... . 16
Publication 502 (2009) Page 33

Page 34 of 34 of Publication 502 11:49 - 10-NOV-2009
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
EPS File Name: NEWIND01 Size: Width = 44.0 picas, Depth = 58.0 picas
Tax Publications for Individual Taxpayers
General Guides
Your Rights as a Taxpayer
Your Federal Income Tax For
Individuals
Farmer’s Tax Guide
Tax Guide for Small Business (For
Individuals Who Use Schedule C or
C-EZ)
Tax Calendars for 2010
IRS Guide to Free Tax Services
Specialized Publications
Armed Forces’ Tax Guide
Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Expenses
Exemptions, Standard Deduction, and
Filing Information
Medical and Dental Expenses (Including
the Health Coverage Tax Credit)
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Divorced or Separated Individuals
Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax
Foreign Tax Credit for Individuals
U.S. Government Civilian Employees
Stationed Abroad
Social Security and Other Information
for Members of the Clergy and
Religious Workers
U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens
Moving Expenses
Selling Your Home
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Taxable and Nontaxable Income
Charitable Contributions
Residential Rental Property (Including
Rental of Vacation Homes)
Commonly Used Tax Forms
Miscellaneous Deductions
Tax Information for Homeowners
Reporting Tip Income
Installment Sales
Partnerships
Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets
Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
Investment Income and Expenses
(Including Capital Gains and Losses)
Basis of Assets
Recordkeeping for Individuals
Tax Guide for Seniors
Community Property
Examination of Returns, Appeal Rights,
and Claims for Refund
Survivors, Executors, and
Administrators
Determining the Value of Donated
Property
Mutual Fund Distributions
Tax Guide for Individuals With Income
From U.S. Possessions
Pension and Annuity Income
Casualty, Disaster, and Theft Loss
Workbook (Personal-Use Property)
Business Use of Your Home (Including
Use by Daycare Providers)
Individual Retirement Arrangements
(IRAs)
Tax Highlights for U.S. Citizens and
Residents Going Abroad
The IRS Collection Process
Earned Income Credit (EIC)
Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service
Retirement Benefits
Tax Highlights for Persons with
Disabilities
Bankruptcy Tax Guide
Social Security and Equivalent
Railroad Retirement Benefits
How Do I Adjust My Tax Withholding?
Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
Household Employer’s Tax Guide For
Wages Paid in 2010
Tax Rules for Children and
Dependents
Home Mortgage Interest Deduction
How To Depreciate Property
Practice Before the IRS and
Power of Attorney
Introduction to Estate and Gift Taxes
The IRS Will Figure Your Tax
Per Diem Rates (For Travel Within the
Continental United States)
Reporting Cash Payments of Over
$10,000 (Received in a Trade or
Business)
Taxpayer Advocate Service – Your
Voice at the IRS
Derechos del Contribuyente
El Impuesto Federal sobre los Ingresos
Para Personas Fisicas
Crédito por Ingreso del Trabajo
English-Spanish Glossary of Words
and Phrases Used in Publications
Issued by the Internal Revenue
Service
U.S. Tax Treaties
Spanish Language Publications
910
509
334
225
17
1
3
463
501
502
503
504
505
514
516
517
519
521
523
524
525
526
527
529
530
531
537
544
547
550
551
552
554
541
555
556
559
561
564
570
575
584
587
590
593
594
596
721
901
907
908
915
919
925
926
929
946
936
950
1542
967
1544
1546
596SP
1SP
850
17SP
El Proceso de Cobro del IRS594SP
947
Informe de Pagos en Efectivo en
Exceso de $10,000 (Recibidos en
una Ocupación o Negocio)
1544SP
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get forms, including by computer, phone, and mail.
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Itemized Deductions
Profit or Loss From Business
Net Profit From Business
Capital Gains and Losses
Supplemental Income and Loss
Earned Income Credit
Profit or Loss From Farming
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Income Tax Return for Single and 
Joint Filers With No Dependents
Self-Employment Tax
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Estimated Tax for Individuals
Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Unreimbursed Employee Business
Expenses
Underpayment of Estimated Tax by
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
Power of Attorney and Declaration of
Representative
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Moving Expenses
Depreciation and Amortization
Application for Automatic Extension of Time
To File U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Investment Interest Expense Deduction
Additional Taxes on Qualified Plans (Including
IRAs) and Other Tax-Favored Accounts
Alternative Minimum Tax—Individuals
Noncash Charitable Contributions
Change of Address
Expenses for Business Use of Your Home
Nondeductible IRAs
Passive Activity Loss Limitations
1040
Sch A
Sch C
Sch C-EZ
Sch D
Sch E
Sch EIC
Sch F
Sch H Household Employment Taxes 
Sch R
Sch SE
1040EZ
1040A
1040-ES
1040X
2106 Employee Business Expenses
2106-EZ
2210
2441
2848
3903
4562
4868
4952
5329
6251
8283
8582
8606
8822
8829
Form Number and Title
Sch J Income Averaging for Farmers and Fishermen
Additional Child Tax Credit8812
Education Credits (American Opportunity,
Hope, and Lifetime Learning Credits)
8863
Form Number and Title
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get publications, including
by computer, phone, and mail.
970 Tax Benefits for Education
971 Innocent Spouse Relief
Sch D-1 Continuation Sheet for Schedule D
972 Child Tax Credit
Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and
Resident Aliens Abroad
54
Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
536
Tax-Sheltered Annuity Plans (403(b)
Plans) For Employees of Public
Schools and Certain Tax-Exempt
Organizations
571
Health Savings Accounts and Other
Tax-Favored Health Plans
969
Installment Agreement Request9465
Business Expenses535
Sch B Interest and Ordinary Dividends
Sch L Standard Deduction for Certain Filers
Sch M Making Work Pay and Government Retiree Credits
Hechos Fortuitos Desastres y Robos547SP
Page 34 Publication 502 (2009)