Userid: CPM Schema: instrx Leadpct: 100% Pt. size: 8  Draft  Ok to Print
AH XSL/XML Fileid: … form-1040)/2025/a/xml/cycle05/source (Init. & Date) _______
Page 1 of 5  7:33 - 23-Oct-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2025
Instructions for Schedule SE 
(Form 1040)
Section references are to the Internal Revenue Code unless otherwise 
noted.
Future Developments
For the latest information about developments related to Schedule SE 
(Form 1040) and its instructions, such as legislation enacted after they 
were published, go to IRS.gov/ScheduleSE.
What’s New
Maximum income subject to social security tax. For 2025, the 
maximum amount of self-employment income subject to social security 
tax is $176,100.
Reminders
Form 1040-SS. Using Schedule SE (Form 1040) to report self-em-
ployment tax for residents of U.S. territories. Schedule SE (Form 
1040) must be filed with Form 1040-SS to report self-employment taxes 
by residents of the U.S. Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, the 
Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands (CNMI), and Puerto 
Rico. For additional information, see the Instructions for Form 1040-SS.
General Instructions
Use Schedule SE (Form 1040) to figure the tax due on net earnings from 
self-employment. The Social Security Administration (SSA) uses the 
information from Schedule SE to figure your benefits under the social 
security program. This tax applies no matter how old you are and even if 
you are already getting social security or Medicare benefits.
Additional information. See Pub. 225 or Pub. 334.
Who Must File Schedule SE
Y ou must file Schedule SE if:
• The amount on line 4c of Schedule SE is $400 or more, or
• Y ou had church employee income of $108.28 or more. (Income from 
services you performed as a minister, member of a religious order, or 
Christian Science practitioner isn’t church employee income.) See 
Employees of Churches and Church Organizations, later.
Exception to filing Schedule SE. If you filed Form 4029 or Form 4361 
and received IRS approval, you may not need to file Schedule SE. See 
Ministers, Members of Religious Orders, and Christian Science 
Practitioners and Members of Certain Religious Sects, later, for 
information on how to report your self-employment earnings.
Even if you had a loss or a small amount of income from 
self-employment, it may be to your benefit to file Schedule SE 
and use either "optional method" in the instructions for Part II of 
Schedule SE (discussed later).
Who Must Pay Self-Employment (SE) 
Tax
Self-Employed Persons
Y ou must pay SE tax if you had net earnings of $400 or more as a 
self-employed person. If you are in business (farm or nonfarm) for 
yourself, you are self-employed.
TIP
Y ou must also pay SE tax on your share of certain partnership income 
and your guaranteed payments. See Partnership Income or Loss, later.
Employees of Churches and Church 
Organizations
If you had church employee income of $108.28 or more, you must pay 
SE tax. Church employee income is wages you received as an employee 
(other than as a minister, member of a religious order, or Christian 
Science practitioner) of a church or qualified church-controlled 
organization that has a certificate in effect electing an exemption from 
employer social security and Medicare taxes.
Ministers, Members of Religious Orders, and 
Christian Science Practitioners
In most cases, you must pay SE tax on salaries and other income for 
services you performed as a minister, member of a religious order who 
hasn’t taken a vow of poverty, or Christian Science practitioner. But if you 
filed Form 4361 and received IRS approval, you will be exempt from 
paying SE tax on those net earnings. If you had no other income subject 
to SE tax, check box number 1 for Form 4361 on Schedule 2 (Form 
1040), line 4. See the instructions for Schedule 2 (Form 1040), line 4, for 
more information. However, if you had other earnings of $400 or more 
subject to SE tax, see line A at the top of Schedule SE.
If you have ever filed Form 2031 to elect social security 
coverage on your earnings as a minister, you can’t revoke that 
election.
If you must pay SE tax, include this income on Schedule SE, line 2. 
But don’t report it on Schedule SE, line 5a; it isn’t considered church 
employee income. Also, include on line 2:
• The rental value of a home or an allowance for a home furnished to 
you (including payments for utilities); and
• The value of meals and lodging provided to you, your spouse, and 
your dependents for your employer’s convenience.
However, don’t include on line 2:
• Retirement benefits you received from a church plan after retirement, 
or
• The rental value of a home or an allowance for a home furnished to 
you (including payments for utilities) after retirement.
If you were a duly ordained minister who was an employee of a 
church and you must pay SE tax, the unreimbursed business expenses 
that you incurred as a church employee are not deductible as an 
itemized deduction for income tax purposes. However, when figuring SE 
tax, subtract on line 2 the allowable expenses from your self-employment 
earnings and attach an explanation.
If you were a U.S. citizen or resident alien serving outside the United 
States as a minister or member of a religious order and you must pay SE 
tax, you can’t reduce your net earnings by the foreign earned income 
exclusion or the foreign housing exclusion or deduction.
See Pub. 517 for additional details regarding social security for 
members of the clergy and religious workers.
Members of Certain Religious Sects
If you have conscientious objections to social security insurance 
because of your membership in and belief in the teachings of a religious 
sect recognized as being in existence at all times since December 31, 
1950, and which has provided a reasonable level of living for its 
dependent members, you are exempt from SE tax if you received IRS 
approval by filing Form 4029. In this case, don’t file Schedule SE. 
CAUTION
!
Instructions for Schedule SE (Form 1040) (2025)  Catalog Number 24334P
Oct 23, 2025 Department of the T reasury  Internal Revenue Service  www.irs.gov

Page 2 of 5  Fileid: … form-1040)/2025/a/xml/cycle05/source 7:33 - 23-Oct-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Instead, check box number 2 for Form 4029 on Schedule 2 (Form 1040), 
line 4. See the instructions for Schedule 2 (Form 1040), line 4, and Pub. 
517 for details.
U.S. Citizens Employed by Foreign Governments 
or International Organizations
Y ou must pay SE tax on income you earned as a U.S. citizen employed 
by a foreign government (or, in certain cases, by a wholly owned 
instrumentality of a foreign government or an international organization 
under the International Organizations Immunities Act) for services 
performed in the United States, Puerto Rico, Guam, American Samoa, 
the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, or the U.S. Virgin 
Islands. Report income from this employment on Schedule SE, line 2. If 
you performed services elsewhere as an employee of a foreign 
government or an international organization, those earnings are exempt 
from SE tax.
Exception—Dual citizens.  A person with dual U.S.-foreign citizenship 
is generally considered to be a U.S. citizen for social security purposes. 
However, if you are a U.S. citizen and also a citizen of a country with 
which the United States has a bilateral social security agreement, your 
work for the government of that foreign country may be exempt from U.S. 
social security taxes. For more information about these agreements, see 
the exception shown in the next section.
U.S. Citizens or Resident Aliens Living Outside 
the United States
If you are a self-employed U.S. citizen or resident alien living outside the 
United States, in most cases you must pay SE tax. Foreign earnings from 
self-employment can’t be reduced by your foreign earned income 
exclusion when computing SE tax.
Exception. The United States has social security agreements with 
many countries to eliminate dual taxes under two social security 
systems. Under these agreements, you must generally pay social 
security and Medicare taxes to only the country in which you live.
The United States now has social security agreements with the 
following countries: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Chile, 
the Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, 
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, 
Norway, Poland, Portugal, the Slovak Republic, Slovenia, South Korea, 
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and Uruguay.
If you have questions about international social security agreements, 
or to see if any additional agreements have been entered into, you can 
go to the SSA’s International Programs website at SSA.gov/International. 
The website also provides contact information for questions about 
benefits and the agreements.
If your self-employment income is exempt from SE tax, you should 
get a statement from the appropriate agency of the foreign country 
verifying that your self-employment income is subject to social security 
coverage in that country. If the foreign country won’t issue the statement, 
go to the SSA Office of Earnings and International Operations at SSA 
International Programs Online Certificate of Coverage Service. Don’t 
complete Schedule SE. Instead, attach a copy of the statement to Form 
1040, 1040-SR, or 1040-NR, and on Schedule 2 (Form 1040), line 4, 
check box number 3 and enter “Exempt, see attached statement.”
Nonresident Alien
If you are a self-employed nonresident alien living in the United States, 
you must pay SE tax if an international social security agreement in effect 
determines that you are covered under the U.S. social security system. 
See Exception under U.S. Citizens or Resident Aliens Living Outside the 
United States, earlier, for information about international social security 
agreements. If your self-employment income is subject to SE tax, 
complete Schedule SE and file it with your Form 1040-NR.
Chapter 11 Bankruptcy Cases
While you are a debtor in a chapter 11 bankruptcy case, your net profit or 
loss from self-employment (for example, from Schedule C or Schedule F) 
won’t be included in your Form 1040 or 1040-SR income. Instead, it will 
be included on the income tax return (Form 1041) of the bankruptcy 
estate. However, you (not the bankruptcy estate) are responsible for 
paying SE tax on your net earnings from self-employment.
Enter on the dotted line to the left of Schedule SE, line 3, “Chap. 11 
bankruptcy income” and the amount of your net profit or (loss). Combine 
that amount with the total of lines 1a, 1b, and 2 (if any) and enter the 
result on line 3.
For other reporting requirements, see Chapter 11 Bankruptcy Cases 
in the Instructions for Form 1040.
More Than One Business
If you had two or more businesses subject to SE tax, your net earnings 
from self-employment are the combined net earnings from all of your 
businesses. If you had a loss in one business, it reduces the income from 
another. Figure the combined SE tax on one Schedule SE.
Joint Returns
Show the name of the spouse with self-employment income on 
Schedule SE. If both spouses have self-employment income, each must 
file a separate Schedule SE.
Include the total profits or losses from all businesses on Form 1040 or 
1040-SR. Enter the combined SE tax on Schedule 2 (Form 1040), line 4.
Community Income
If any of the income from a business (including farming) is community 
income, then the income and deductions are reported as follows.
• If only one spouse participates in the business, all of the income from 
that business is the self-employment earnings of the spouse who carried 
on the business.
• If both spouses participate, the income and deductions are allocated 
to the spouses based on their distributive shares.
• If either or both spouses are partners in a partnership, see Partnership 
Income or Loss, later.
• If both spouses elected to treat the business as a qualifying joint 
venture, see Qualified Joint Ventures, later.
Married filing separately. If you and your spouse had community 
income and file separate returns, attach Schedule SE to the return of 
each spouse with self-employment earnings under the rules described 
earlier. Also, attach Schedule(s) C or F (showing the spouse’s share of 
community income and expenses) to the return of each spouse.
Spouse who carried on the business. If you are the only spouse 
who carried on the business, you must include on Schedule SE, line 3, 
the net profit or (loss) reported on the other spouse’s Schedule C or F 
(except in those cases described later under Income and Losses Not 
Included in Net Earnings From Self-Employment). Enter on the dotted 
line to the left of Schedule SE, line 3, “Community income taxed to 
spouse” and the amount of any net profit or (loss) allocated to your 
spouse as community income. Combine that amount with the total of 
lines 1a, 1b, and 2. Enter the result on line 3.
Spouse who didn’t carry on the business. If you aren’t the spouse 
who carried on the business and you had no other income subject to SE 
tax, check box number 3 and enter “ECI — Exempt community income” 
on Schedule 2 (Form 1040), line 4. Don’t file Schedule SE. See the 
instructions for Schedule 2 (Form 1040), line 4, for more information.
But if you have $400 or more of other earnings subject to SE tax, you 
must file Schedule SE. Include on Schedule SE, line 1a or 2, the net 
profit or (loss) from Schedule(s) C or F allocated to you as community 
income. On the dotted line to the left of Schedule SE, line 3, enter 
“Exempt community income” and the allocated amount. Figure the 
amount to enter on line 3 as follows.
• If the allocated amount is a net profit, subtract it from the total of lines 
1a, 1b, and 2.
• If the allocated amount is a loss, treat it as a positive amount and add 
it to the total of lines 1a, 1b, and 2.
Community income included on Schedule(s) C or F must be 
divided for income tax purposes based on the community 
property laws of your state. See Pub. 555 for more information.
Qualified Joint Ventures (QJV)
If you and your spouse materially participate as the only members of a 
jointly owned and operated business, and you file a joint return for the tax 
CAUTION
!
2

Page 3 of 5  Fileid: … form-1040)/2025/a/xml/cycle05/source 7:33 - 23-Oct-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
year, you can make a joint election to be taxed as a QJV instead of a 
partnership. For information on what it means to materially participate, 
see Material participation in the Instructions for Schedule C (Form 1040).
T o make this election, you must divide all items of income, gain, loss, 
deduction, and credit attributable to the business between you and your 
spouse in accordance with your respective interests in the venture. Each 
of you must file a separate Schedule C or F . On each line of your 
separate Schedule C or F , you must enter your share of the applicable 
income, deduction, or loss. Each of you must also file a separate 
Schedule SE to pay SE tax, as applicable.
For more information on qualified joint ventures, go to IRS.gov/QJV.
Rental real estate business. If you and your spouse make the election 
to be taxed as a QJV for your rental real estate business, the income 
generally isn’t subject to SE tax. T o indicate that election, be sure to 
check the “QJV” box in Part I, line 2, of each Schedule E that the rental 
property is listed on. Don’t file Schedule SE unless you have other 
income subject to SE tax. For an exception to this income not being 
subject to SE tax, see item 3 under Other Income and Losses Included in 
Net Earnings From Self-Employment, later.
If you and your spouse make the election for a farm rental business 
that you report on Form 4835, Farm Rental Income and Expenses, each 
of you must file a separate Form 4835 to report your share of farm rental 
income based on crops or livestock produced by the tenant. Don’t file 
Schedule SE unless you have other income subject to the SE tax.
Fiscal Year Filers
If your tax year is a fiscal year, use the tax rate and annual earnings limit 
that apply at the time the fiscal year begins. Don’t prorate the tax or 
annual earnings limit for a fiscal year that overlaps the date of a change 
in the tax or annual earnings limit.
Line Instructions
Y ou will need to figure your net earnings from self-employment. T o find 
out what is included as net earnings from self-employment, see Net 
Earnings From Self-Employment, later.
Enter all negative amounts in (parentheses).
Instructions for Part I
You Have Only Church Employee Income 
Subject to SE Tax
If your only income subject to SE tax is church employee income 
(described earlier under Employees of Churches and Church 
Organizations), skip lines 1 through 4b. Enter -0- on line 4c, and go to 
line 5a.
Note. Income from services you perform as a minister, member of a 
religious order, or Christian Science practitioner isn’t church employee 
income.
Line 1b
If you were receiving social security retirement or social security disability 
benefits at the time you received your Conservation Reserve Program 
(CRP) payment(s), enter the amount of your taxable CRP payment(s) on 
line 1b. These payments are included on Schedule F , line 4b, or listed in 
box 20, code AQ, of Schedule K-1 (Form 1065).
Lines 4a Through 4c
If both lines 4a and 4c are less than $400 and you have an amount on 
line 1b, combine lines 1a and 2.
• If the total of lines 1a and 2 is $434 or more, file Schedule SE 
(completed through line 4c) with your tax return. Enter -0- on Schedule 2 
(Form 1040), line 4.*
• If the total of lines 1a and 2 is less than $434, don’t file Schedule SE 
unless you choose to use an optional method to figure your SE tax.
TIP
* If you also have church employee income (described earlier under 
Employees of Churches and Church Organizations), also complete lines 
5a and 5b. Complete the rest of Schedule SE, as appropriate.
Line 13
If you are filing Form 1040-SS, skip this line.
Additional Medicare Tax
A 0.9% Additional Medicare T ax may apply to you if the total amount on 
line 6 of all your Schedules SE exceeds one of the following threshold 
amounts (based on your filing status).
• Married filing jointly— $250,000
• Married filing separately— $125,000
• Single, Head of household, or Qualifying surviving spouse— 
$200,000
If you have both wages and self-employment income, the threshold 
amount for applying the Additional Medicare T ax on the self-employment 
income is reduced (but not below zero) by the amount of wages subject 
to Additional Medicare T ax.
Use Form 8959, Additional Medicare T ax, to figure this tax. For more 
information, see the Instructions for Form 8959, or go to IRS.gov/
ADMTfaqs.
Net Earnings From Self-Employment
In most cases, net earnings include your net profit from a farm or 
nonfarm business.
Partnership Income or Loss
If you were a general or limited partner in a partnership, include on 
line 1a or line 2, whichever applies, the amount of net earnings from 
self-employment from box 14, code A, of Schedule K-1 (Form 1065). 
General partners should reduce this amount by certain expenses before 
entering it on Schedule SE. See your Schedule K-1 instructions. If you 
reduce the amount you enter on Schedule SE, you must attach an 
explanation. Limited partners should include only guaranteed payments 
for services actually rendered to or on behalf of the partnership. Whether 
a partner qualifies as a limited partner for purposes of self-employment 
tax depends on whether the partner is considered a limited partner under 
section 1402(a)(13).
If a partner died and the partnership continued, include in 
self-employment income the deceased’s distributive share of the 
partnership’s ordinary income or loss through the end of the month in 
which the partner died. See section 1402(f).
If you were married and both you and your spouse were partners in a 
partnership, each of you must report your net earnings from 
self-employment from the partnership. Each of you must file a separate 
Schedule SE and report the partnership income or loss on Schedule E 
(Form 1040), Part II, for income tax purposes. If only one of you was a 
partner in a partnership, the spouse who was the partner must report 
their net earnings from self-employment from the partnership.
Community income. Y our own distributive share of partnership income 
is included in figuring your net earnings from self-employment. Unlike the 
division of that income between spouses for figuring income tax, no part 
of your share can be included in figuring your spouse’s net earnings from 
self-employment.
Share Farming
Y ou are considered self-employed if you produce crops or livestock on 
someone else’s land for a share of the crops or livestock produced (or a 
share of the proceeds from the sale of them). This applies even if you 
paid another person (an agent) to do the actual work or management for 
you. Report your net earnings for income tax purposes on Schedule F 
(Form 1040) and for SE tax purposes on Schedule SE. See Pub. 225 for 
details.
Other Income and Losses Included in Net 
Earnings From Self-Employment
1. Rental income from a farm if, as landlord, you materially 
participated in the production or management of the production of farm 
3

Page 4 of 5  Fileid: … form-1040)/2025/a/xml/cycle05/source 7:33 - 23-Oct-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
products on this land. This income is farm earnings. T o determine 
whether you materially participated in farm management or production, 
don’t consider the activities of any agent who acted for you. The material 
participation tests for landlords are explained in Pub. 225.
2. Cash or a payment-in-kind from the Department of Agriculture for 
participating in a subsidy or conservation reserve program.
3. Payments for the use of rooms or other space when you also 
provided substantial services for the convenience of your tenants. 
Examples are hotel rooms, boarding houses, tourist camps or homes, 
trailer parks, parking lots, warehouses, and storage garages. See Pub. 
334 for more information.
4. Income from the retail sale of newspapers and magazines if you 
were age 18 or older and kept the profits.
5. Income you receive as a direct seller. Newspaper carriers or 
distributors of any age are direct sellers if certain conditions apply. See 
Pub. 334 for details.
6. Amounts received by current or former self-employed insurance 
agents and salespersons that are:
a. Paid after retirement but figured as a percentage of commissions 
received from the paying company before retirement,
b. Renewal commissions, or
c. Deferred commissions paid after retirement for sales made 
before retirement.
However, certain termination payments received by former insurance 
salespersons aren’t included in net earnings from self-employment (as 
explained in item 10 under Income and Losses Not Included in Net 
Earnings From Self-Employment, later).
7. Income of certain crew members of fishing vessels with crews of 
normally fewer than 10 people. See Pub. 334 for details.
8. Fees as a state or local government employee if you were paid 
only on a fee basis and the job wasn’t covered under a federal-state 
social security coverage agreement.
9. Interest received in the course of any trade or business, such as 
interest on notes or accounts receivable.
10. Fees and other payments received by you for services as a 
director of a corporation.
11. Recapture amounts under sections 179 and 280F that you 
included in gross income because the business use of the property 
dropped to 50% or less. Don’t include amounts you recaptured on the 
disposition of property. See Form 4797.
12. Generally, fees you received as a professional fiduciary. This may 
also apply to fees paid to you as a nonprofessional fiduciary if the fees 
relate to active participation in the operation of the estate’s business, or 
the management of an estate that required extensive management 
activities over a long period of time.
13. Gain or loss from section 1256 contracts or related property by 
an options or commodities dealer in the normal course of dealing in or 
trading section 1256 contracts.
Income and Losses Not Included in Net 
Earnings From Self-Employment
1. Salaries, fees, and other income subject to social security or 
Medicare tax that you received for performing services as an employee, 
including services performed as an employee under the railroad 
retirement system. This includes services performed as a public official 
(except as a fee-basis government employee as explained in item 8 
under Other Income and Losses Included in Net Earnings From 
Self-Employment, earlier).
2. Fees received for services performed as a notary public. If you 
had no other income subject to SE tax, check box number 3 and enter 
“Exempt—Notary” on Schedule 2 (Form 1040), line 4. Don’t file 
Schedule SE. However, if you had other earnings of $400 or more 
subject to SE tax, enter “Exempt—Notary” and the amount of your net 
profit as a notary public from Schedule C on the dotted line to the left of 
Schedule SE, line 3. Subtract that amount from the total of lines 1a, 1b, 
and 2, and enter the result on line 3.
3. Income you received as a retired partner under a written 
partnership plan that provides for lifelong periodic retirement payments if 
you had no other interest in the partnership and didn’t perform services 
for it during the year.
4. Income from real estate rentals if you didn’t receive the income in 
the course of a trade or business as a real estate dealer. Report this 
income on Schedule E.
5. Income from farm rentals (including rentals paid in crop shares) 
if, as landlord, you didn’t materially participate in the production or 
management of the production of farm products on the land. See Pub. 
225 for details. Report this income on Form 4835. Use two Forms 4835 if 
you and your spouse made an election to be taxed as a QJV .
6. Payments you receive from the CRP if you are receiving social 
security benefits for retirement or disability. Deduct these payments on 
line 1b of Schedule SE.
7. Dividends on shares of stock and interest on bonds, notes, or 
other evidence of indebtedness issued with interest coupons or in 
registered form by any corporation (including those issued by a 
government or its political subdivision), if you didn’t receive the income in 
the course of your trade or business as a dealer in stocks or securities.
8. Gain or loss from:
a. The sale or exchange of a capital asset;
b. The sale, exchange, involuntary conversion, or other disposition 
of property unless the property is stock in trade or other property that 
would be includible in inventory, or held primarily for sale to customers in 
the ordinary course of the business; or
c. Certain transactions in timber, coal, or domestic iron ore.
9. Net operating losses from other years.
10. T ermination payments you received as a former insurance 
salesperson if all of the following conditions are met.
a. The payment was received from an insurance company because 
of services you performed as an insurance salesperson for the company.
b. The payment was received after termination of your agreement to 
perform services for the company.
c. Y ou didn’t perform any services for the company after termination 
and before the end of the year in which you received the payment.
d. Y ou entered into a covenant not to compete against the company 
for at least a 1-year period beginning on the date of termination.
e. The amount of the payment depended primarily on policies sold 
by or credited to your account during the last year of the agreement, or 
the extent to which those policies remain in force for some period after 
termination, or both.
f. The amount of the payment didn’t depend to any extent on length 
of service or overall earnings from services performed for the company 
(regardless of whether eligibility for the payment depended on length of 
service).
Statutory Employee Income
If you were a statutory employee, don’t include the net profit or (loss) 
from Schedule C, line 31, on Schedule SE, line 2. But be sure to include 
on line 8a statutory employee social security wages and tips from Form 
W-2.
Instructions for Part II
Optional Methods
How the Optional Methods Can Help You
Social security coverage. The optional methods may give you credit 
toward your social security coverage even though you have a loss or a 
small amount of income from self-employment.
Credits affected by earned income. Using the optional methods may 
qualify you to claim the earned income credit (EIC), additional child tax 
credit (ACTC), or child and dependent care credit or give you a larger 
credit if your net earnings from self-employment (determined without 
using the optional methods) are less than $7,240. Figure the EIC, ACTC, 
and child and dependent care credit with and without using the optional 
methods to see if the optional methods will benefit you.
4

Page 5 of 5  Fileid: … form-1040)/2025/a/xml/cycle05/source 7:33 - 23-Oct-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Self-employed health insurance deduction. The optional methods of 
computing net earnings from self-employment may be used to figure 
your self-employed health insurance deduction. See Form 7206 and its 
instructions to determine if your self-employed health insurance 
deduction is limited.
Other items affected by adjusted gross income (AGI). Using the 
optional methods may decrease your AGI, which may affect your 
eligibility for credits, deductions, or other items that are subject to an AGI 
limit. Figure your AGI with and without using the optional methods to see 
if the optional methods will benefit you.
Using the optional methods as described above may be 
beneficial, but they may also increase your SE tax.
Changing your method. Y ou can change the method used to figure 
your net earnings from self-employment after you file your return. That is, 
you can change from the regular to the optional method or from the 
optional to the regular method. T o do this, file Form 1040-X.
Farm optional method. Y ou may use this method to figure your net 
earnings from farm self-employment if your gross farm income was 
$10,860 or less or your net farm profits were less than $7,840. Net farm 
profits are:
• The total of the amounts from Schedule F (Form 1040), line 34, and 
box 14, code A, of Schedule K-1 (Form 1065), minus
• The amount you would have entered on Schedule SE, line 1b, had 
you not used the optional method.
There is no limit on how many years you can use this method.
Under this method, report in Part II, line 15, two-thirds of your gross 
farm income, up to $7,240, as your net earnings. This method can 
increase or decrease your net earnings from farm self-employment even 
if the farming business had a loss.
For a farm partnership, figure your share of gross income based on 
the partnership agreement. With guaranteed payments, your share of the 
partnership’s gross income is your guaranteed payments plus your share 
of the gross income after it is reduced by all guaranteed payments made 
by the partnership. If you were a limited partner, include only guaranteed 
CAUTION
!
payments for services you actually rendered to or on behalf of the 
partnership. Whether a partner qualifies as a limited partner for purposes 
of self-employment tax depends on whether the partner is considered a 
limited partner under section 1402(a)(13).
Nonfarm optional method.  Y ou may be able to use this method to 
figure your net earnings from nonfarm self-employment if your net 
nonfarm profits were less than $7,840 and also less than 72.189% of 
your gross nonfarm income. Net nonfarm profits are the total of the 
amounts from:
• Schedule C (Form 1040), line 31; and
• Box 14, code A, of Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) (from other than farm 
partnerships).
T o use this method, you must also be regularly self-employed. Y ou 
meet this requirement if your actual net earnings from self-employment 
were $400 or more in 2 of the 3 consecutive taxable years immediately 
preceding the year you use the nonfarm optional method. The net 
earnings of $400 or more could be from either farm or nonfarm earnings, 
or both. The net earnings include your distributive share of partnership 
income or loss subject to SE tax.
Y ou can use the nonfarm optional method to figure your earnings 
from self-employment for only 5 years. The 5 years don’t have to be 
consecutive.
Under this method, report in Part II, line 17, two-thirds of your gross 
nonfarm income, up to the amount on line 16, as your net earnings. But 
you can’t report less than your actual net earnings from nonfarm 
self-employment.
Figure your share of gross income from a nonfarm partnership in the 
same manner as a farm partnership. See Farm Optional Method, earlier, 
for details.
Using both optional methods. If you can use both methods, you can 
report less than your total actual net earnings from farm and nonfarm 
self-employment, but you can’t report less than your actual net earnings 
from nonfarm self-employment alone.
If you use both methods to figure net earnings, you can’t report more 
than $7,240 of net earnings from self-employment.
5