Userid: ________ Leading adjust: -50% ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: P504.sgm (23-Oct-2001) (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 26 of Publication 504 15:44 - 23-OCT-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Department of the Treasury
ContentsInternal Revenue Service
Important Reminders ....................... 1
Introduction .............................. 2Publication 504
Cat. No. 15006I Filing Status .............................. 2
Joint Return ............................ 3
Separate Returns ........................ 3
Head of Household ....................... 5Divorced
Exemptions ............................... 6
Personal Exemptions ..................... 6or Separated Exemptions for Dependents ................ 6
Dependency Tests ....................... 6
Phaseout of Exemptions ................... 10
Individuals
Alimony .................................. 10
General Rules .......................... 12
Instruments Executed After 1984 ............ 12
For use in preparing Instruments Executed Before 1985 ........... 15
Qualified Domestic Relations Order ........... 172001 Returns
Individual Retirement Arrangements ........... 18
Property Settlements ....................... 18
Transfer Between Spouses ................. 18
Gift Tax on Property Settlements ............ 20
Sale of Jointly-Owned Property .............. 20
Costs of Getting a Divorce ................... 21
Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax ........... 21
Community Property ....................... 21
Community Income ...................... 22
Alimony (Community Income) ............... 23
How To Get Tax Help ....................... 23
Index .................................... 25
Important Reminders
Relief from joint liability. In some cases, one spouse
may be relieved of joint liability for tax, interest, and penal-
ties on a joint tax return. For more information, see Relief
from joint liability under Joint Return.
Social security numbers for dependents. You must in-
clude the taxpayer identification number (generally the
social security number) of every person for whom you
claim an exemption. See Exemptions for Dependents
under Exemptions, later.
Individual taxpayer identification number (ITIN). The
IRS will issue an ITIN to a nonresident or resident alien
who does not have and is not eligible to get a social
security number (SSN). To apply for an ITIN, Form W–7,
Application for IRS Individual Taxpayer Identification Num-
ber, must be filed with the IRS. It usually takes about 30
days to get an ITIN. The ITIN is entered wherever an SSN
is requested on a tax return. If you are required to include
another person’s SSN on your return and that person does
not have and cannot get an SSN, enter that person’s ITIN.

Page 2 of 26 of Publication 504 15:44 - 23-OCT-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Change of address. If you change your mailing address, ❏ 555 Community Property
be sure to notify the Internal Revenue Service. You can ❏ 590 Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs)use Form 8822,  Change of Address. Mail it to the Internal
❏ 971 Innocent Spouse Relief (And Separation ofRevenue Service Center for your old address. (Addresses
Liability and Equitable Relief)for the Service Centers are on the back of the form.)
Change of name. If you change your name, be sure to Form (and Instructions)notify the Social Security Administration using Form SS–5,
❏ 8332 Release of Claim to Exemption for Child ofApplication for a Social Security Card.
Divorced or Separated Parents
Photographs of missing children. The Internal Reve- ❏ 8379 Injured Spouse Claim and Allocationnue Service is a proud partner with the National Center for
Missing and Exploited Children. Photographs of missing ❏ 8857 Request for Innocent Spouse Relief (And
children selected by the Center may appear in this publica- Separation of Liability and Equitable Relief)
tion on pages that would otherwise be blank. You can help
bring these children home by looking at the photographs
and calling 1–800–THE–LOST (1–800–843–5678) if
you recognize a child. Filing Status
Your filing status is used in determining whether you must
file a return, your standard deduction, and the correct tax. It
Introduction
may also be used in determining whether you can claimThis publication explains tax rules that apply if you are certain deductions and credits. The filing status you candivorced or separated from your spouse. It covers general choose depends partly on your marital status on the lastfiling information and can help you choose your filing sta- day of your tax year.tus. It also can help you decide which exemptions you are
entitled to claim, including exemptions for dependents. Marital status. If you are considered unmarried, your
The publication also discusses payments and transfers filing status is single or, if you meet certain requirements,
of property that often occur as a result of divorce and how head of household or qualifying widow(er). If you are con-
you must treat them on your tax return. Examples include sidered married, your filing status is either married filing a
alimony, child support, other court-ordered payments, joint return or married filing a separate return. For informa-
property settlements, and transfers of individual retirement tion about the single and qualifying widow(er) filing sta-
arrangements. In addition, this publication also explains tuses, see Publication 501.
deductions allowed for some of the costs of obtaining a Considered unmarried. You are considered unmar-divorce and how to handle tax withholding and estimated ried for the whole year if either of the following applies.tax payments.
The last part of the publication explains special rules 1) You have obtained a final decree of divorce or sepa-that may apply to persons who live in community property rate maintenance by the last day of your tax year.states. You must follow your state law to determine if you are
divorced or legally separated.Comments and suggestions. We welcome your com-
Exception. If you and your spouse obtain a divorcements about this publication and your suggestions for
in one year for the sole purpose of filing tax returns asfuture editions.
unmarried individuals, and at the time of divorce youYou can e-mail us while visiting our web site at
intend to remarry each other and do so in the next taxwww.irs.gov.
year, you and your spouse must file as married individ-You can write to us at the following address:
uals. 
Internal Revenue Service 2) You have obtained a decree of annulment, which
Technical Publications Branch holds that no valid marriage ever existed. You must
W:CAR:MP:FP:P file amended returns (Form 1040X, Amended U.S.
1111 Constitution Ave. NW Individual Income Tax Return) for all tax years af-
Washington, DC 20224 fected by the annulment that are not closed by the
statute of limitations. The statute of limitations gener-
ally does not end until 3 years after the due date ofWe respond to many letters by telephone. Therefore, it
your original return. On the amended return you willwould be helpful if you would include your daytime phone
change your filing status to single, or if you meetnumber, including the area code, in your correspondence.
certain requirements, head of household.
Useful Items Considered married. You are considered married forYou may want to see: the whole year if you are separated but you have not
obtained a final decree of divorce or separate maintenancePublications by the last day of your tax year. An interlocutory decree is
❏ 501 Exemptions, Standard Deduction, and Filing not a final decree.
Information Exception. If you live apart from your spouse, under
❏ 544 Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets certain circumstances you may be considered unmarried
Page 2

Page 3 of 26 of Publication 504 15:44 - 23-OCT-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
and can file as head of household. See Head of House- past-due amount of your spouse’s debts. You can get your
hold, later. share of the refund if you qualify as an injured spouse.
Injured spouse. You are an injured spouse if you file a
Joint Return joint return and all or part of your share of the overpayment
was, or is expected to be, applied against your spouse ’sIf you are married, you and your spouse can choose to file past-due federal tax, state income tax, child or spousala joint return. If you file jointly, you both must include all support, or federal nontax debt, such as a student loan.your income, exemptions, deductions, and credits on that You should file Form 8379, if you meet all  three  of thereturn. You can file a joint return even if one of you had no following conditions.income or deductions.
1) You are not required to pay the past-due amount.If both you and your spouse have income, you
should usually figure your tax on both a joint 2) You reported income such as wages, taxable inter-
return and separate returns to see which gives est, etc., on the joint return.
TIP
you the lower tax. 3) You made and reported payments such as federal
income tax withheld from your wages or estimated
To file a joint return, at least one of you must be a U.S. tax payments or you claimed refundable credits
citizen or resident at the end of the tax year. If either of you (such as the earned income credit) on the joint re-
was a nonresident alien at any time during the tax year, turn.
you can file a joint return only if you agree to treat the If all three of the above apply and you want your sharenonresident spouse as a resident of the United States. of the overpayment shown on the joint return refunded toThis means that your combined worldwide incomes are you, complete Form 8379. If your main home was in asubject to U.S. income tax. These rules are explained in community property state (see Community Property, later),Publication 519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens. you can file Form 8379 if only item 1 applies. Follow the
instructions on the form.Signing a joint return. Both you and your spouse must
sign the return, or it will not be considered a joint return. Refunds that involve community property states
must be divided according to local law. If you liveJoint and individual liability. Both you and your spouse in a community property state in which all com-CAUTION
!
are responsible, jointly and individually, for the tax and any munity property is subject to the debts of either spouse,interest or penalty due on your joint return. This means that your entire refund can be used to pay those debts.one spouse may be held liable for all the tax due even if all
the income was earned by the other spouse.
Divorced taxpayers. If you are divorced, you are still Separate Returnsjointly and individually responsible for any tax, interest, and
penalties due on a joint return for a tax year ending before If you and your spouse file separate returns, you shouldyour divorce. This responsibility applies even if your di- each report only your own income, exemptions, deduc-vorce decree states that your former spouse will be re- tions, and credits on your individual return. You can file asponsible for any amounts due on previously filed joint separate return even if only one of you had income. Forreturns. information on exemptions you can claim on your separate
return, see Exemptions, later.Relief from joint liability. In some cases, a spouse will
be relieved of the tax, interest, and penalties on a joint Community or separate income. If you live in a commu-return. You can ask for relief no matter how small the nity property state and file a separate return, your incomeliability. may be separate income or community income for incomeThere are three types of relief available. tax purposes. For more information, see Community In-
come under Community Property, later.1) Separation of liability, which may apply to joint filers
who are divorced, widowed, legally separated, or Separate liability. If you and your spouse file separately,have not lived together for the past 12 months. you each are responsible only for the tax due on your own
2) Innocent spouse relief, which may apply to all joint return.
filers. Itemized deductions. If you and your spouse file sepa-
3) Equitable relief, which applies to all joint filers. rate returns and one of you itemizes deductions, the other
spouse will not qualify for the standard deduction andInnocent spouse relief and separation of liability apply should also itemize deductions.only to items incorrectly reported on the return. If a spouse
does not qualify for innocent spouse relief or separation of Dividing itemized deductions. You may be able to
liability, the IRS may grant equitable relief. claim itemized deductions on a separate return for certain
Each of these kinds of relief is different, and they each expenses that you paid separately or jointly with your
have different requirements. You must file Form 8857 to spouse. See Table 1.
request any of these kinds of relief. Publication 971 ex-
Separate returns may give you a higher tax. Someplains these kinds of relief and who may qualify for them.
married couples file separate returns because each wants
Tax refund applied to spouse ’s debts. The overpay- to be responsible only for his or her own tax. But in almost
ment shown on your joint return may be used to pay the all instances, if you file separate returns, you will pay more
Page 3

Page 4 of 26 of Publication 504 15:44 - 23-OCT-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 1. Itemized Deductions on Separate Returns
This table shows itemized deductions you can claim on your separate return whether you paid the
expenses separately with your own funds or jointly with your spouse. Caution: If you live in a
community property state, these rules do not apply. See Community Property.
Itemized Deduction IF you...
THEN you can deduct on your
separate return...
Medical expenses
State income tax
Property tax
Mortgage interest
Casualty loss
Paid with funds deposited in a joint
checking account in which you and your
spouse have an equal interest
File a separate state income tax return
File a joint state income tax return and
you and your spouse are jointly and
individually liable for the full amount of
the state income tax
File a joint state income tax return and
you are liable for only your own share of
state income tax
Paid on property held as tenants by the
entirety
Paid on property held as tenants by the
entirety
Have a casualty loss on a home you own
as tenants by the entirety
One-half of the total medical expenses,
unless you can show that you alone paid
the expenses.
The state income tax you alone paid
during the year.
The state income tax you alone paid
during the year.
The smaller of:
● The state income tax you alone paid
during the year, or
● The total state income tax you and
your spouse paid during the year
multiplied by the following fraction.
The numerator is your gross income
and the denominator is your combined
gross income.
The property tax you alone paid.
The mortgage interest you alone paid.
Half of the loss. Neither spouse may
report the total casualty loss.
combined federal tax than you would with a joint return. b) You will have to include in income up to 85% of
This is because the tax rate is higher for married persons any social security or equivalent railroad retire-
filing separately. The following rules also apply if you file a ment benefits you received, and
separate return. c) You cannot roll over amounts from a traditional
IRA into a Roth IRA during a year you file a1) You cannot take the credit for child and dependent
separate return.care expenses in most cases.
2) You cannot take the earned income credit. 7) You will become subject to the limit on the child tax
credit, itemized deductions, and the phaseout of the3) You cannot take the exclusion or credit for adoption
deduction for personal exemptions at income levelsexpenses in most instances.
that are half of those for a joint return.4) You cannot take the credit for higher education ex-
8) Your capital loss deduction limit is $1,500 (instead ofpenses or the deduction for student loan interest.
$3,000 on a joint return).5) You cannot exclude the interest from qualified sav-
ings bonds that you used for higher education ex- Joint return after separate returns. If either you or yourpenses. spouse files a separate return, you can change to a joint
6) If you lived with your spouse at any time during the return any time within 3 years from the due date (not
tax year: including extensions) of the separate returns. This applies
even if either of you filed as head of household. Use Forma) You cannot claim the credit for the elderly or the 1040X.disabled,
Separate returns after joint return. After the due date of
your return, you and your spouse cannot file separate
returns if you previously filed a joint return.
Page 4

Page 5 of 26 of Publication 504 15:44 - 23-OCT-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Exception. A personal representative for a decedent later.) For a list of persons who are relatives for
can change from a joint return elected by the surviving purposes of these requirements, see 1. Member of
spouse to a separate return for the decedent. The personal Household or Relationship Test under Dependency
representative has one year from the due date of the joint Tests, later.
return to make the change. Your married child or other relative will not qualify you as
a head of household if you claim an exemption for that
Head of Household person under a multiple support agreement (discussed
later).You may be eligible to file as head of household if you meet
Father or mother. If your parent for whom you canthe requirements discussed later.
claim an exemption does not live with you, you can file asFiling as head of household has the following advan-
head of household if you paid more than half the cost oftages.
keeping up a home that was your parent ’s main home for
1) You can claim the standard deduction even if your the entire year. This includes paying more than half the
spouse files a separate return and itemizes deduc- cost of keeping your parent in a rest home or home for the
tions. elderly.
2) Your standard deduction is higher than is allowed on Considered unmarried. Even if you are married, you willa single or married filing separate return. be considered unmarried on the last day of the year if you
meet all of the following tests. 3) Your tax rate may be lower than it is on a single or
married filing separate return. 1) You file a separate return.
4) You may be able to claim certain credits (such as 2) You paid more than half the cost of keeping up yourchild care credit and earned income credit) you can- home for the tax year.not claim on a married filing separate return.
3) Your spouse did not live in your home during the last5) You will become subject to the limit on itemized de- 6 months of the tax year.ductions and the phaseout of the deduction for per-
sonal exemptions at income levels that are higher 4) Your home was, for more than half the year, the
than the levels for a single or a married filing sepa- main home of your child, stepchild, adopted child, or
rate return. for the entire year, the main home for your foster
child. You generally must be able to claim an exemp-
Requirements. You can file as head of household only if tion for your child. However, you can still meet this
you were unmarried or considered unmarried on the last test if you cannot claim an exemption for your child
day of the year. You also must have paid more than half only because:
the cost of keeping up a home that was the main home for
a) By your written declaration you allow the non-more than half the year (except for temporary absences,
custodial parent to claim the exemption, orsuch as for school) for you and any of the following qualify-
ing persons. b) The noncustodial parent provided at least $600
for the support of the child and claims the ex-1) Certain unmarried children. This includes your un- emption under a pre-1985 agreement.married child, grandchild, stepchild, foster child, or
adopted child. A foster child must qualify as your
dependent and must have lived in your home for the Nonresident alien spouse. If your spouse was a non-
entire year. resident alien at any time during the tax year, and you have
not chosen to treat your spouse as a resident alien, you are2) Certain married children. This includes your mar- considered unmarried for head of household purposes.ried child, grandchild, stepchild, foster child, or However, your spouse is not a qualifying person for headadopted child for whom you can claim an exemption. of household purposes. You must have paid most of theThis also includes your married child, grandchild, cost of keeping up a home that was the main home forstepchild, or adopted child for whom you could claim most of the year for you and a qualifying person (other thanan exemption except that: your spouse) and meet the other requirements to file as
head of household.a) By your written declaration you allow the non-
custodial parent to claim the exemption, or Keeping up a home. You are keeping up a home only if
b) The noncustodial parent provided at least $600 you pay more than half the cost of its upkeep. This includes
for the support of the dependent and claims the rent, mortgage interest, taxes, insurance on the home,
exemption under a pre-1985 agreement. repairs, utilities, and food eaten in the home. This does not
include the cost of clothing, education, medical treatment,
3) Other relatives. This includes any other relative for or transportation for any member of the household.
whom you can claim an exemption. However, your
parent for whom you can claim an exemption does More information. For more information on filing as head
not have to live with you. (See  Father or mother, of household, get Publication 501.
Page 5

Page 6 of 26 of Publication 504 15:44 - 23-OCT-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1) Member of Household or Relationship Test.Exemptions
2) Citizen or Resident Test.
Generally, you can deduct $2,900 for each exemption you 3) Joint Return Test.claim in 2001. However, if your adjusted gross income is
more than $99,725, see Phaseout of Exemptions, later. 4) Gross Income Test.
There are two types of exemptions: personal exemp- 5) Support Test.tions and exemptions for dependents. If you are entitled to
claim an exemption for a dependent (such as your child),
that dependent cannot claim his or her personal exemption
1. Member of Householdon his or her own tax return.
or Relationship Test
Personal Exemptions To meet this test, the person must either: 
You can claim your own exemption unless someone else
1) Be related to you, orcan claim it. If you are married, you may be able to take an
exemption for your spouse. These are called personal 2) Live with you for the entire year as a member of yourexemptions. household.
Exemption for Your Spouse
Related. A person related to you in any of the following
Your spouse is never considered your dependent. You ways meets this test even if he or she did not live with you
may be able to take an exemption for your spouse only for the entire year as a member of your household.
because you are married.
Child StepmotherJoint return. On a joint return, you can claim one exemp- Stepchild Stepfather
tion for yourself and one for your spouse. Mother Mother-in-law
Father Father-in-lawIf your spouse had any gross income, you can claim
Grandparent Brother-in-lawhis or her exemption only if you file a joint return.
Great-grandparent Sister-in-law
Separate return. If you file a separate return, you can Brother Son-in-law
Sister Daughter-in-lawtake an exemption for your spouse only if your spouse had
Grandchild If related by blood:no gross income and was not the dependent of another
Great-grandchild Uncletaxpayer. If your spouse is the dependent of another tax- Half-brother Auntpayer, you cannot claim an exemption for your spouse Half-sister Nepheweven if the other taxpayer does not actually claim your Stepbrother Niece
spouse’s exemption. Stepsister
Alimony paid. If you paid alimony to your spouse, you Any relationships that have been established by marriagecannot take an exemption for your spouse. This is because are not considered ended by death or divorce.alimony is gross income to the spouse who received it.
Child. Your child is:Divorced or separated spouse. You cannot take an ex-
emption for your former spouse for the year in which you
1) Your son, daughter, stepson, stepdaughter, or legallywere divorced or legally separated under a final decree.
adopted son or daughter,This rule applies even if you paid all your former spouse’s
support that year. 2) A child who lived with you in your home as a mem-
ber of your family, if placed with you by an author-
Exemptions for Dependents ized placement agency for legal adoption, or
3) A foster child (any child who lived with you in yourYou can take an exemption for each person who meets all
home as a member of your family for the entirefive of the dependency tests discussed later.
year).If you can claim an exemption for your depen-
dent, the dependent cannot claim his or her own Authorized placement agency. An authorized place-exemption on his or her own tax return. This isCAUTION
!
ment agency includes any person authorized by state lawtrue even if you do not claim the dependent’s exemption on to place children for legal adoption.your return or if the exemption will be reduced or elimi-
nated under the phaseout rule for high-income individuals.
Member of household. If the person is not related to you,
he or she must have lived in your home as a member of
your household for the entire year (except for temporary
Dependency Tests absences, such as for vacation or school). A person is not
a member of your household if at any time during your taxThe following five tests must be met for you to claim an
year the relationship between you and that person violatesexemption for a person (dependent) other than yourself or
local law.your spouse.
Page 6

Page 7 of 26 of Publication 504 15:44 - 23-OCT-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The term “school” includes elementary schools, junior2. Citizen or Resident Test
and senior high schools, colleges, universities, and techni-
To meet the citizen or resident test, a person must be a cal, trade, and mechanical schools. It does not include
U.S. citizen or resident, or a resident of Canada or Mexico on-the-job training courses, correspondence schools, or
for some part of the calendar year in which your tax year night schools.
begins.
Children usually are citizens or residents of the country
5. Support Testof their parents. If you were a U.S. citizen when your child
was born, the child may be a U.S. citizen although the You must provide more than half of a person’s total supportother parent was a nonresident alien and the child was for the calendar year to meet the support test. If you file aborn in a foreign country. If so, and the other dependency joint return, the support could have come from you or yourtests are met, the child is your dependent and you may spouse. Even if you did not provide over half the person’stake the exemption. It does not matter if the child lives support, you will be treated as having provided over halfabroad with the nonresident alien parent. the support if you meet the tests explained later under
Multiple Support Agreement.Special rule for your adopted child. If you are a U.S.
If you are divorced or separated and you or the othercitizen who has legally adopted a child who is not a U.S.
parent, or both together, provided over half your child ’scitizen or resident and the other dependency tests are met,
support for the year, the support test for your child may beyou can take the exemption if your home is the child’s main
based on a special rule. See Support Test for Children ofhome and the child is a member of your household for the
Divorced or Separated Parents, later.entire year.
In figuring total support, you must include money the
person provided for his or her own support, even if this3. Joint Return Test money was not taxable (for example, gifts, savings, and
welfare benefits). If your child was a student, do not includeEven if the other dependency tests are met, you are gener- amounts he or she received as scholarships while aally not allowed an exemption for a person other than full-time student.yourself or your spouse if he or she files a joint return.
Support includes food, a place to live, clothes, medicalHowever, this test does not apply if a joint return is filed by
and dental care, recreation, and education. In figuringa dependent and his or her spouse merely as a claim for
support, use the actual cost of these items. However, therefund and no tax liability would exist for either spouse on
cost of a place to live is figured at its fair rental value.separate returns.
Support does not include income tax, social security
and Medicare taxes, premiums for life insurance, or funeral
4. Gross Income Test expenses.
Generally, you cannot take an exemption for a person Joint ownership of home. If the person lives with you inother than yourself or your spouse if that person had gross a home that is jointly owned by you and your spouse orincome of $2,900 or more for the year. All income in the former spouse, and each of you has the right to use andform of money, property, and services that is not exempt live in the home, each of you is considered to provide halffrom tax is gross income. Gross income does not include of the person’s lodging. However, if your decree of divorcenontaxable income, such as welfare benefits or nontaxable gives only you the right to use and live in the home, you aresocial security benefits. considered to provide the person ’s entire lodging. This is
true even though legal title to the home remains in theSpecial rules for your child. The gross income test does
names of both you and your former spouse.not apply if your child: 
1) Is under age 19 at the end of the year, or Capital items. You must include capital items such as a
car or furniture in figuring support, but only if they were2) Is a student under age 24 at the end of the year. actually given to, or bought by, the person for his or her use
or benefit. Do not include the cost of a capital item for theChild. See 1. Member of Household or Relationship use or benefit of other members of the household. ForTest, earlier, for the definition of “child.” example, include in support a bicycle purchased by and
Student. To qualify as a student, your child must be, used solely by the person for transportation; do not include
during some part of each of 5 calendar months during the a lawn mower you purchase that is occasionally used by
year (not necessarily consecutive): the person.
1) A full-time student at a school that has a regular
teaching staff and course of study, and a regularly Support Test for Child of Divorced or
enrolled body of students in attendance, or Separated Parents
2) A student taking a full-time, on-farm training course The support test for a child of divorced or separated par-given by a school described in (1) above or by a ents is based on the special rule explained here and instate, county, or local government. Figure 1.  However, the special rule applies only if the
A full-time student is one who is enrolled for the num- parents meet all three of the following requirements.
ber of hours or courses the school considers to be full-time
1) The parents are: attendance.
Page 7

Page 8 of 26 of Publication 504 15:44 - 23-OCT-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
a) Divorced or legally separated under a decree of Your former spouse had custody for the other 2 months.
divorce or separate maintenance, You and your former spouse provided the child ’s total
support. You are considered to have provided more thanb) Separated under a written separation agree- half the child ’s support because you are the custodialment, or parent.
c) Lived apart at all times during the last 6 months
of the calendar year. Example 2. You and your former spouse provided your
child’s total support for the year. You had custody of your
2) One or both parents provide more than half the child under your 1990 divorce decree, but in October 2001,
child’s total support for the calendar year. a new custody decree granted custody to your former
spouse. Because you had custody for the greater part of3) One or both parents have custody of the child for
the year, you are the custodial parent and are consideredmore than half the calendar year.
to have provided more than half of your child’s support.The special rule does not apply if:
Example 3. You were separated on June 1. Before the• The child’s support is determined under a multiple
separation, you and your spouse had joint custody of yoursupport agreement discussed later, or
child. Your spouse had custody from June through Sep-• The child’s parents never married each other. tember and you had custody from October through De-
cember. Because your spouse had custody for 4 of the 7Child is defined earlier under 1. Member of Household months following the separation, your spouse was theor Relationship Test. custodial parent for the year and is treated as having
provided more than half of the child’s support for the year.Support provided by others. Support provided to a child
of a divorced or separated parent by a relative or friend is Noncustodial parent. Under the special rule, the parentnot included as support provided by the parent. However, if
who did not have custody, or who had it for the shorteryou remarried, the support your new spouse provided is
time, is the noncustodial parent. The noncustodial parent istreated as provided by you.
treated as the parent who provided more than half of the
child’s support if any one of the following three conditionsExample 1. You are divorced. During the whole year,
is met.you and your child lived with your mother in a house she
owns. You must include your child’s share of the fair rental
1) The custodial parent signs a written declaration thatvalue of the home in figuring total support, but not as part of
he or she will not claim the exemption for the child,the support provided by you.
and the noncustodial parent attaches this written
declaration to his or her return.Example 2. You have two children from a former mar-
riage who lived with you. You remarried and lived in a 2) A decree or agreement went into effect after 1984home owned by your present spouse. Your child’s share of and states the noncustodial parent can claim thethe fair rental value of the home is treated as provided by child as a dependent without regard to any condition,you. such as payment of support.
Custodial parent. Under the special rule, the parent who 3) A decree or agreement executed before 1985 pro-
had custody of the child for the greater part of the year (the vides that the noncustodial parent is entitled to the
custodial parent) is generally treated as the parent who exemption, and he or she gave at least $600 for the
provided more than half of the child’s support. This parent child’s support during the year. This is true unless
is usually allowed to claim the exemption for the child if the the pre-1985 decree or agreement was modified af-
other dependency tests are met. However, see Noncus- ter 1984 to specify that this provision will not apply.
todial parent, later.
Custody. Custody is usually determined by the terms of Example 1. Under your 1984 divorce decree, your for-
the most recent decree of divorce or separate mainte- mer spouse has custody of your child. The decree specifi-
nance, or a later custody decree. If there is no decree, it will cally states that you can claim the child ’s exemption. Yoube determined by the written separation agreement. provided $1,000 of your child’s support during the year andIf neither a decree nor an agreement establishes cus- your spouse provided the rest. You are considered to havetody, then the parent who had physical custody of the child provided over half the child’s support. See item (3) above.for the greater part of the year is considered to have
custody of the child. This also applies if a decree or agree- Example 2. You and your spouse provided all of yourment calls for “split” custody, or if the validity of a decree or child’s support. Under your 1988 written separation agree-agreement awarding custody is uncertain because of legal ment, your spouse has custody of your child. Because theproceedings pending on the last day of the calendar year. agreement was made after 1984, you are considered toIf the parents were divorced or separated during the have provided over half the child ’s support only if youryear after having had joint custody of the child before the spouse agrees not to claim the child’s exemption by sign-separation, the parent who had custody for the greater part ing a written declaration. See item (1) above.of the rest of the year is considered the custodial parent.
Written declaration. The custodial parent should use
Form 8332 , or a similar statement, to make the writtenExample 1. Under the terms of your divorce decree,
declaration to release the exemption to the noncustodialyou had custody of your child for 10 months of the year.
Page 8

Page 9 of 26 of Publication 504 15:44 - 23-OCT-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
parent. The noncustodial parent must attach the form or or for all future years, as specified in the declaration. If the
statement to his or her tax return. exemption is released for more than one year, the original
The exemption can be released for a single year, for a release must be attached to the return of the noncustodial
number of specified years (for example, alternate years), parent for the first year, and a copy of the release must be
Figure 1. Support Test for Child of Divorced or Separated Parents
Start Here
No
Yes
Are the parents divorced
or legally separated,
separated under a written
agreement, or did they
live apart the last 6
months of the year?
Did one or both parents
furnish over half of the
child’s total support?
Is the child in the custody
of one or both parents for
more than half of the
year?
Did the custodial parent
sign a Form 8332 or
similar statement
releasing the exemption?
Did any one person
provide over half of
the child’s total
support?
The person who provided
over half of the child’s
support meets the
support test.
See Multiple Support
Agreement.
Is there a decree or
agreement executed
after 1984 that
unconditionally
entitles the
noncustodial parent
to the exemption?
Is there a decree or
agreement executed
before 1985 (and not
modified after 1984)
that entitles the
noncustodial parent
to the exemption?
Did the noncustodial
parent provide at
least $600 of the
child’s support
during the year?
The custodial
parent meets the
support test.
The noncustodial parent
meets the support test.
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074/H17074/H17074
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
Yes
NoYes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Page 9

Page 10 of 26 of Publication 504 15:44 - 23-OCT-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
attached to the return for each succeeding taxable year for Medical Expenses
which the noncustodial parent claims the exemption.
A child of divorced or separated parents whose supportDivorce decree or separation agreement made after test is based on the special rule described in this section is1984. If your divorce decree or separation agreement treated as a dependent of both parents for the medicalwent into effect after 1984 and it states that you can claim expense deduction. A parent can deduct medical ex-the exemption for your child without regard to any condi- penses he or she paid for the child even if an exemption fortion, such as payment of support, you can attach a copy of the child is claimed by the other parent.the following pages from the decree or agreement instead
of Form 8332.
Multiple Support Agreement1) The cover page (write the other parent ’s social se-
curity number on this page). Sometimes no one individual provides more than half of
the support of a person. Instead, two or more people, each2) The page that states you can claim the exemption for of whom would be able to take the exemption but for theyour child. support test, together provide more than half of the
3) The signature page with the other parent ’s signature person’s support. One of those people can claim an ex-
and the date of the agreement. emption for that person if the requirements in Figure 2 are
met. 
If your divorce decree or separation agreement
went into effect after 1984 and it states that you Phaseout of Exemptionscan claim the exemption for your child if youCAUTION
!
meet certain conditions, you must attach to your return The amount you can claim as a deduction for exemptionsForm 8332 or a similar statement from the custodial parent is phased out if your adjusted gross income (AGI) for 2001releasing the exemption. falls within the range shown below for your filing status.
Filing Status AGI
Single ........................... $132,950 –  $255,450Divorce decree or separation agreement made Married filing jointly or qualifying widow(er) . . . $199,450 –  $321,950before 1985. If you are a noncustodial parent who claims Married filing separately ............... $99,725 –  $160,975
a child’s exemption under a decree or agreement made Head of household ................... $166,200 –  $288,700
before 1985, you must give at least $600 for that child ’s If your AGI is more than the highest amount for your filingsupport. status, your deduction for exemptions is zero. If your AGI
Child support. Child support payments received from falls within the range, use the Deduction for Exemptions
the noncustodial parent are considered used for the child’s Worksheet in the instructions for Form 1040 to figure your
support, even if actually spent on things other than sup- deduction.
port.
Example. Your 1982 divorce decree requires you to Alimonypay child support to the custodial parent and states that
you can claim your child’s exemption. The custodial parent Alimony is a payment to or for a spouse or former spousepaid for all support items and put the $1,000 child support under a divorce or separation instrument. It does not in-you paid during the year into a savings account for the clude voluntary payments that are not made under a di-child. Because your payments are considered used for vorce or separation instrument.support, you are considered to have provided over half the
Alimony is deductible by the payer and must be includedchild’s support.
in the spouse’s or former spouse ’s income. Although thisBack child support. If you fail to pay child support in discussion is generally written for the payer of the alimony,the year it is due, but pay it in a later year, any payment of the recipient can use the information to determine whetherthe overdue amount is not considered child support either an amount received is alimony.for the year it was due or for the year in which it is paid. It is To be alimony, a payment must meet certain require-payment of an amount owed to the custodial parent, but it ments. Different requirements apply to payments underis not child support provided by you. instruments executed after 1984 and to payments under
instruments executed before 1985. These requirementsExample. You and your former spouse provide all your are discussed later.child’s support. Your 1984 divorce decree requires you to
pay $800 child support each year to the custodial parent Spouse or former spouse. Unless otherwise stated inand allows you to claim your child ’s exemption. Last year the following discussions about alimony, the term “spouse”you paid only $500, but you made up the $300 you owed includes former spouse.by paying $1,100 this year. The $300 back child support
you paid this year is not considered support for last year or Divorce or separation instrument. The term “divorce orfor this year. separation instrument” means: 
1) A decree of divorce or separate maintenance or a
written instrument incident to that decree,
2) A written separation agreement, or
Page 10

Page 11 of 26 of Publication 504 15:44 - 23-OCT-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure 2. Can You Claim an Exemption for a Person
Under a Multiple Support Agreement?
If no one person alone pays more than half of another person ’s support, use this chart to see if you can claim
an exemption for that person under a multiple support agreement.
Start Here
Yes
No
Did you pay over 10% of another person ’s support?
Could you claim the other person ’s exemption were it not for the
support test?
Could at least one other individual claim the other person ’s
exemption were it not for the support test?
Did you and that other individual or those other people together
pay over half of the other person ’s support?
Did anyone alone pay over half of the other person ’s support?
Are you attaching to your tax return a Form 2120 (or a statement)
signed by every other individual who paid over 10% of the other
person’s support and could claim the person ’s exemption were it
not for the support test?
You can claim the person ’s exemption under a
multiple support agreement.
You cannot claim the person ’s exemption under a
multiple support agreement.
/H17075
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
No
/H17074
Yes
/H17074 /H17074
No
/H17075
No
/H17075
No
/H17075
Yes
/H17075
No
/H17075
3) A decree or any type of court order requiring a Example 1. A court order retroactively corrected a
spouse to make payments for the support or mainte- mathematical error under your divorce decree to express
nance of the other spouse. This includes a tempo- the original intent to spread the payments over more than
rary decree, an interlocutory (not final) decree, and a 10 years. This change also is effective retroactively for
decree of alimony pendente lite (while awaiting ac- federal tax purposes.
tion on the final decree or agreement).
Example 2. Your original divorce decree did not fix any
Invalid decree. Payments under a divorce decree can part of the payment as child support. To reflect the true
be alimony even if the decree ’s validity is in question. A intention of the court, a court order retroactively corrected
divorce decree is valid for tax purposes until a court having the error by designating a part of the payment as child
proper jurisdiction holds it invalid. support. The amended order is effective retroactively for
federal tax purposes.Amended instrument. An amendment to a divorce de-
cree may change the nature of your payments. Amend- Deducting alimony paid. You can deduct alimony youments are not ordinarily retroactive for federal tax paid, whether or not you itemize deductions on your return.purposes. However, a retroactive amendment to a divorce You must file Form 1040. You cannot use Form 1040A ordecree correcting a clerical error to reflect the original Form 1040EZ.intent of the court will generally be effective retroactively Enter the amount of alimony you paid on line 31a (Formfor federal tax purposes. 1040). In the space provided on line 31b, enter your
spouse’s social security number.
Page 11

Page 12 of 26 of Publication 504 15:44 - 23-OCT-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you paid alimony to more than one person, enter the Underpayment. If both alimony and child support pay-
social security number of one of the recipients. Show the ments are called for by your divorce or separation instru-
social security number and amount paid to each other ment, and you pay less than the total required, the
recipient on an attached statement. Enter your total pay- payments apply first to child support and then to alimony.
ments on line 31a.
Example. Your divorce decree calls for you to pay yourIf you do not provide your spouse’s social security former spouse $200 a month as child support and $150 anumber, you may have to pay a $50 penalty and month as alimony. If you pay the full amount of $4,200your deduction may be disallowed.
CAUTION
!
during the year, you can deduct $1,800 as alimony and
your former spouse must report $1,800 as alimony re-
ceived. If you pay only $3,600 during the year, $2,400 is
child support. You can deduct only $1,200 as alimony andReporting alimony received. Report alimony you re-
your former spouse must report $1,200 as alimony re-ceived on line 11 of Form 1040. You cannot use Form
ceived.1040A or Form 1040EZ.
You must give the person who paid the alimony Payments to a third party. Cash payments (includingyour social security number. If you do not, you checks and money orders) to a third party on behalf of yourmay have to pay a $50 penalty.
CAUTION
!
spouse under the terms of your divorce or separation
instrument may be alimony, if they otherwise qualify.
These include payments for your spouse ’s medical ex-
penses, housing costs (rent, utilities, etc.), taxes, tuition,Withholding on nonresident aliens. If you are a U.S.
etc. The payments are treated as received by your spousecitizen or resident and you pay alimony to a nonresident
and then paid to the third party.alien spouse, you may have to withhold income tax at a
rate of 30% (or lower treaty rate) on each payment. For
Example 1. Under your divorce decree, you must paymore information, get Publication 515, Withholding of Tax
your former spouse’s medical and dental expenses. If theon Nonresident Aliens and Foreign Entities.
payments otherwise qualify, you can deduct them as ali-
mony on your return. Your former spouse must report them
General Rules as alimony received and can include them in figuring de-
ductible medical expenses.The following rules apply to alimony regardless of when
the divorce or separation instrument was executed. Example 2. Under your separation agreement, you
must pay the real estate taxes, mortgage payments, andPayments not alimony. Not all payments under a divorce
insurance premiums on a home owned by your spouse. Ifor separation instrument are alimony. Alimony does not
they otherwise qualify, you can deduct the payments asinclude:
alimony on your return, and your spouse must report them
as alimony received. If itemizing deductions, your spouse1) Child support,
can deduct the real estate taxes and, if the home is a2) Noncash property settlements, qualified home, also include the interest on the mortgage in
figuring deductible interest.3) Payments that are your spouse ’s part of community
income, as explained later under Community Prop-
erty, Life insurance premiums. Alimony includes premiums
you must pay under your divorce or separation instrument4) Payments to keep up the payer ’s property, or for insurance on your life to the extent your spouse owns
5) Use of property. the policy.
Payments for jointly-owned home. If your divorce orExample. Under your written separation agreement, separation instrument states that you must pay expensesyour spouse lives rent-free in a home you own and you for a home owned by you and your spouse or formermust pay the mortgage, real estate taxes, insurance, re- spouse, some of your payments may be alimony. Seepairs, and utilities for the home. Because you own the Table 2.home and the debts are yours, your payments for the
mortgage, real estate taxes, insurance, and repairs are not
Instruments Executed After 1984alimony. Neither is the value of your spouse ’s use of the
home.
The following rules for alimony apply to payments underIf they otherwise qualify, you can deduct the payments divorce or separation instruments executed after 1984.for utilities as alimony. Your spouse must report them as
income. If you itemize deductions, you can deduct the real
Exception for instruments executed before 1985.estate taxes and, if the home is a qualified home, you can
There are two situations where the rules for instrumentsalso include the interest on the mortgage in figuring your
executed after 1984 apply to instruments executed beforedeductible interest.
1985.Child support. To determine whether a payment is
child support, see the separate discussions under Instru- 1) A divorce or separation instrument executed before
ments Executed After 1984 or Instruments Executed 1985 and then modified after 1984 to specify that the
Before 1985, later. after-1984 rules will apply.
Page 12

Page 13 of 26 of Publication 504 15:44 - 23-OCT-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 2. Expenses for a Jointly-Owned Home
Use the table below to find how much of your payment is alimony and how much you can claim as
an itemized deduction.
IF you must pay all of
the...
AND your home is... THEN you can deduct
and your spouse (or
former spouse) must
include as alimony...
AND you can claim as
an itemized deduction...
Mortgage payments
(principal and interest)
Real estate taxes and
home insurance
Jointly-owned
Held as tenants in
common
Held as tenants by the
entirety or in joint
tenancy
One-half of the total
payments
One-half of the total
payments
None of the payments
One-half of the interest as
interest expense (if the
home is a qualified
home).
1
One-half of the real estate
taxes
2 
and none of the
home insurance.
All of the real estate taxes
and none of the home
insurance.
1
Your spouse (or former spouse) can deduct the other one-half of the interest if the home is a qualified home.
2
Your spouse (or former spouse) can deduct the other one-half of the real estate taxes.
2) A temporary divorce or separation instrument exe- quirement applies only if the spouses are legally
separated under a decree of divorce or separatecuted before 1985 and incorporated into, or adopted
maintenance.by, a final decree executed after 1984 that:
4) There is no liability to make any payment (in cash ora) Changes the amount or period of payment, or property) after the death of the recipient spouse.
b) Adds or deletes any contingency or condition. 5) The payment is not treated as child support.
For the rules for alimony payments under pre-1985 Each of these requirements is discussed below.
instruments not meeting these exceptions, see Instru- Payment must be in cash. Only cash payments, includ-ments Executed Before 1985, later. ing checks and money orders, qualify as alimony. The
following do not qualify as alimony.Example 1. In November 1984, you and your former
spouse executed a written separation agreement. In Feb- • Transfers of services or property (including a debt
ruary 1985, a decree of divorce was substituted for the instrument of a third party or an annuity contract).
written separation agreement. The decree of divorce did • Execution of a debt instrument by the payor.not change the terms for the alimony you pay your former
• The use of property.spouse. The decree of divorce is treated as executed
before 1985. Alimony payments under this decree are not
Payments to a third party. Cash payments to a thirdsubject to the rules for payments under instruments exe-
party under the terms of your divorce or separation instru-cuted after 1984.
ment can qualify as a cash payment to your spouse. See
Payments to a third party under General Rules, earlier.Example 2. Assume the same facts as in Example 1
Also, cash payments made to a third party at the writtenexcept that the decree of divorce changed the amount of
request of your spouse qualify as alimony if all the follow-the alimony. In this example, the decree of divorce is not
ing requirements are met.treated as executed before 1985. The alimony payments
are subject to the rules for payments under instruments 1) The payments are in lieu of payments of alimonyexecuted after 1984. directly to your spouse.
2) The written request states that both spouses intend
Alimony Requirements the payments to be treated as alimony.
3) You receive the written request from your spouseA payment to or for a spouse under a divorce or separation
before you file your return for the year you made theinstrument is alimony if the spouses do not file a joint return
payments.with each other and all the following requirements are met.
1) The payment is in cash. Payments designated as not alimony. You and your
spouse can designate that otherwise qualifying payments2) The instrument does not designate the payment as are not alimony. You do this by including a provision in yournot alimony. divorce or separation instrument that states the payments
3) The spouses are not members of the same house- are not deductible as alimony by you and are excludable
hold at the time the payments are made. This re- from your spouse ’s income. For this purpose, any instru-
Page 13

Page 14 of 26 of Publication 504 15:44 - 23-OCT-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
ment (written statement) signed by both of you that makes trust income and corpus (principal) are to be used for your
this designation and that refers to a previous written sepa- children ’s benefit.
ration agreement is treated as a written separation agree- These facts indicate that the payments to be made after
ment. If you are subject to temporary support orders, the your former spouse ’s death are a substitute for $10,000 of
designation must be made in the original or a later tempo- the $30,000 annual payments. $10,000 of each of the
rary support order. $30,000 annual payments is not alimony.
Your spouse can exclude the payments from income
Example 2. Under your divorce decree, you must payonly if he or she attaches a copy of the instrument
your former spouse $30,000 annually. The payments willdesignating them as not alimony to his or her return. The
stop at the end of 15 years or upon your former spouse ’scopy must be attached each year the designation applies.
death, if earlier. The decree provides that if your formerSpouses cannot be members of the same household. spouse dies before the end of the 15-year period, you mustPayments to your spouse while you are members of the pay the estate the difference between $450,000 ($30,000same household are not alimony if you are legally sepa- × 15) and the total amount paid up to that time. Forrated under a decree of divorce or separate maintenance. example, if your spouse dies at the end of the tenth year,A home you formerly shared is considered one household, you must pay the estate $150,000 ($450,000 − $300,000).even if you physically separate yourselves in the home. These facts indicate that the lump-sum payment to beYou are not treated as members of the same household made after your former spouse ’s death is a substitute forif one of you is preparing to leave the household and does the full amount of the $30,000 annual payments. None ofleave no later than one month after the date of the pay- the annual payments are alimony. The result would be thement. same if the payment required at death were to be dis-
counted by an appropriate interest factor to account for theException. If you are not legally separated under a
prepayment.decree of divorce or separate maintenance, a payment
under a written separation agreement, support decree, or Child support. A payment that is specifically designatedother court order may qualify as alimony even if you are as child support or treated as specifically designated asmembers of the same household when the payment is child support under your divorce or separation instrumentmade. is not alimony. The designated amount or part may vary
Liability for payments after death of recipient spouse. from time to time. Child support payments are neither
If you must continue to make payments for any period after deductible by the payer nor taxable to the payee.
your spouse’s death, none of the payments made before or Specifically designated as child support. A paymentafter the death are alimony. will be treated as specifically designated as child support toThe divorce or separation instrument does not have to the extent that the payment is reduced either:expressly state that the payments cease upon the death of
your spouse if, for example, the liability for continued 1) On the happening of a contingency relating to yourpayments would end under state law. child, or
2) At a time that can be clearly associated with theExample. You must pay your former spouse $10,000 in
contingency.cash each year for 10 years. Your divorce decree states
that the payments will end upon your former spouse ’s A payment may be treated as specifically designated asdeath. You must also pay your former spouse or your child support even if other separate payments are specifi-former spouse’s estate $20,000 in cash each year for 10 cally designated as child support.years. The death of your spouse would not terminate these
Contingency relating to your child. A contingencypayments under state law.
relates to your child if it depends on any event relating toThe $10,000 annual payments are alimony. But be-
that child. It does not matter whether the event is certain orcause the $20,000 annual payments will not end upon your
likely to occur. Events relating to your child include theformer spouse’s death, they are not alimony.
child’s:Substitute payments. If you must make any payments
• Becoming employed,in cash or property after your spouse ’s death as a substi-
tute for continuing otherwise qualifying payments, the oth- • Dying,erwise qualifying payments are not alimony. To the extent
• Leaving the household,that your payments begin, accelerate, or increase because
of the death of your spouse, otherwise qualifying payments • Leaving school,you made may be treated as payments that were not
• Marrying, oralimony. Whether or not such payments will be treated as
not alimony depends on all the facts and circumstances. • Reaching a specified age or income level.
Example 1. Under your divorce decree, you must pay Clearly associated with a contingency. Paymentsyour former spouse $30,000 annually. The payments will are presumed to be reduced at a time clearly associatedstop at the end of 6 years or upon your former spouse ’s with the happening of a contingency relating to your childdeath, if earlier. only in the following situations.Your former spouse has custody of your minor children.
The decree provides that if any child is still a minor at your 1) The payments are to be reduced not more than 6
spouse’s death, you must pay $10,000 annually to a trust months before or after the date the child will reach
until the youngest child reaches the age of majority. The 18, 21, or local age of majority.
Page 14

Page 15 of 26 of Publication 504 15:44 - 23-OCT-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
2) The payments are to be reduced on two or more How to figure and report the recapture. Both you and
your spouse can use Table 3 to figure recaptured alimony.occasions that occur not more than one year before
or after a different one of your children reaches a Including the recapture in income. If you must in-certain age from 18 to 24. This certain age must be clude a recapture amount in income, show it on Formthe same for each child, but need not be a whole 1040, line 11 ( “Alimony received ”). Cross out “received”number of years. and write “recapture.” On the dotted line next to the
amount, enter your spouse’s last name and social securityIn all other situations, reductions in payments are not
number.treated as clearly associated with the happening of a
contingency relating to your child. Deducting the recapture. If you can deduct a recap-
ture amount, show it on Form 1040, line 31a ( “AlimonyEither you or the IRS can overcome the presumption in
paid”). Cross out “paid” and write “recapture.” In the spacethe two situations above. This is done by showing that the
provided, enter your spouse’s social security number.time at which the payments are to be reduced was deter-
mined independently of any contingencies relating to your
Example. You pay your former spouse $50,000 ali-children. For example, if you can show that the period of
mony the first year, $39,000 the second year, and $28,000alimony payments is customary in the local jurisdiction,
the third year. You complete Table 3 as shown on Filled-insuch as a period equal to one-half of the duration of the Table 3. In the third year, you report $1,500 as income onmarriage, you can treat the amount as alimony. line 11, Form 1040, and your former spouse reports $1,500
as a deduction on line 31a, Form 1040.
Recapture of Alimony
Instruments Executed Before 1985If your alimony payments decrease or terminate during the
first 3 calendar years, you may be subject to the recapture The following rules for alimony apply to payments underrule. If you are subject to this rule, you have to include in divorce or separation instruments executed before 1985.income in the third year part of the alimony payments you
Exception. There are two situations where the rules forpreviously deducted. Your spouse can deduct in the third
instruments executed after 1984 apply to instruments exe-year part of the alimony payments he or she previously
cuted before 1985.included in income.
The 3-year period starts with the first calendar year you 1) A divorce or separation instrument executed beforemake a payment qualifying as alimony under a decree of 1985 and modified after 1984 to specify that the
divorce or separate maintenance or a written separation after-1984 rules will apply.
agreement. Do not include any time in which payments 2) A temporary divorce or separation instrument exe-were being made under temporary support orders. The cuted before 1985 and incorporated into, or adoptedsecond and third years are the next 2 calendar years, by, a final decree executed after 1984 that:whether or not payments are made during those years.
The reasons for a reduction or termination of alimony a) Changes the amount or period of payment, or
payments that can require a recapture include: b) Adds or deletes any contingency or condition.
• A change in your divorce or separation instrument,
If an exception applies, see Instruments Executed After• A failure to make timely payments, 1984, earlier.
• A reduction in your ability to provide support, or
Alimony Requirements• A reduction in your spouse’s support needs.
A payment to or for a spouse under a divorce or separation
When to apply the recapture rule. You are subject to the instrument is alimony if the spouses do not file a joint return
recapture rule in the third year if the alimony you pay in the and the payment meets both of the following require-
third year decreases by more than $15,000 from the sec- ments.
ond year or the alimony you pay in the second and third
1) It is based on the marital or family relationship.years decreases significantly from the alimony you pay in
the first year. 2) It is not child support.
When you figure a decrease in alimony, do not include In addition, the spouses must be separated and living apartthe following amounts. for a payment under a separation agreement or court order
to qualify as alimony.1) Payments made under a temporary support order.
Payments of a fixed sum. If you must pay a fixed sum in2) Payments required over a period of at least 3 calen- installments, your payments during the year that you treatdar years of a fixed part of your income from a as alimony cannot be more than 10% of the fixed sum. Thisbusiness or property, or from compensation for em- limit applies to payments for the current year and pay-ployment or self-employment. ments in advance, but not to late payments for an earlier
3) Payments that decrease because of the death of year.
either spouse or the remarriage of the spouse receiv- However, do not treat any part of a late installment
ing the payments. payment as alimony if the fixed sum was payable over a
Page 15

Page 16 of 26 of Publication 504 15:44 - 23-OCT-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 3. Worksheet for Recapture of Alimony
Note: Do not enter less than zero on any line.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
Alimony paid in 2nd year
Alimony paid in 3rd year
Floor
Add lines 2 and 3
Subtract line 4 from line 1
Alimony paid in 1st year
Adjusted alimony paid in 2nd year (line 1
less line 5)
Alimony paid in 3rd year
Add lines 7 and 8
Divide line 9 by 2
Floor
Add lines 10 and 11
Subtract line 12 from line 6
Recaptured alimony. Add lines 5 and 13
$15,000
$15,000
*If you deducted alimony paid, report this amount as income on line 11, Form 1040.
If you reported alimony received, deduct this amount on line 31a, Form 1040.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
*14.
Filled-in Table 3. Worksheet for Recapture of Alimony
Note: Do not enter less than zero on any line.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
Alimony paid in 2nd year
Alimony paid in 3rd year
Floor
Add lines 2 and 3
Subtract line 4 from line 1
Alimony paid in 1st year
Adjusted alimony paid in 2nd year (line 1
less line 5)
Alimony paid in 3rd year
Add lines 7 and 8
Divide line 9 by 2
Floor
Add lines 10 and 11
Subtract line 12 from line 6
Recaptured alimony. Add lines 5 and 13
$15,000
$15,000
*If you deducted alimony paid, report this amount as income on line 11, Form 1040.
If you reported alimony received, deduct this amount on line 31a, Form 1040.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
*14.
28,000
39,000
28,000
67,000
33,500
39,000
0
43,000
50,000
48,500
1,500
1,500
Page 16

Page 17 of 26 of Publication 504 15:44 - 23-OCT-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
period ending 10 years or less from the date of the divorce is paid out of principal or interest. You do not include any
or separation instrument. part of the payment in your income, nor can you deduct any
part.Payments subject to contingencies. Payments are
not considered installment payments of a fixed sum if they Annuity and endowment contracts. Proceeds from an-
are to end or change in amount on the happening of one or nuity and endowment contracts bought for or transferred to
more of the following contingencies. a spouse after July 18, 1984, cannot be treated as alimony.
However, this does not apply to contracts bought or trans-1) The death of you or your spouse. ferred to pay alimony under a divorce or separation instru-
ment executed before July 19, 1984, unless both spouses2) The remarriage of your spouse.
choose to have it apply.3) A change in the economic status of you or your
spouse. Proceeds not alimony. If the proceeds from an annuity or
endowment contract cannot be treated as alimony, theThe contingency may be either specified in your instrument amount received is reduced by the cost of the contract. Getor imposed by local law. Publication 575, Pension and Annuity Income, for informa-
Marital or family relationship. To be alimony, your pay- tion on reporting annuities, and Publication 525, Taxable
ments must be based on your obligation, because of the and Nontaxable Income, for information on reporting en-
marital or family relationship, to continue supporting your dowment proceeds.
spouse. Any payment that does not arise out of that sup- If the proceeds from a trust cannot be treated as ali-
port obligation, such as the repayment of a loan, is not mony, see the rules for reporting trust income in Publica-
alimony. tion 525.
Property settlement. Payments are not based on your
obligation to continue support if they are a settlement of
Qualified Domesticproperty rights. However, even if a state court describes
payments made under a divorce decree as payments for Relations Orderproperty rights, they are alimony if they are made to fulfill a
legal support obligation and they otherwise qualify. A qualified domestic relations order (QDRO) is a judgment,
Child support. A payment that is specifically designated decree, or court order (including an approved property
as child support under your divorce or separation instru- settlement agreement) issued under a domestic relations
ment is not alimony. If the instrument calls for payments law that:
that otherwise qualify as alimony and does not separately
1) Relates to the rights of someone other than a partici-designate an amount as child support, all the payments are
pant to receive benefits from a qualified retirementalimony. This is true even if the payments are subject to a
plan (such as most pension and profit-sharing plans)contingency relating to your child.
or a tax-sheltered annuity,
Example. Your divorce decree states that you must pay 2) Relates to payment of child support, alimony, or mar-
your former spouse $400 a month for life for the support of ital property rights to a spouse, former spouse, child,
your former spouse and your child. The payment is to be or other dependent of the participant, and
reduced to $300 upon the first of the following to happen:
3) Specifies the amount or portion of the participant ’sthe child’s death, the child ’s 22nd birthday, or the child ’s
benefits to be paid to the participant’s spouse, formermarriage. Despite these contingencies, no amount of child
spouse, child, or dependent.support is fixed by the decree. The entire payment is
alimony.
Benefits paid to a child or dependent. Benefits paid
under a QDRO to the plan participant’s child or dependent
Alimony Trusts, Annuities, are treated as paid to the participant. For information about
and Endowment Contracts the tax treatment of benefits from retirement plans, see
Publication 575.If you transferred property to a trust or bought or trans-
Benefits paid to a spouse or former spouse. Benefitsferred an annuity or endowment contract to pay the ali-
paid under a QDRO to the plan participant ’s spouse ormony you owe, the trust income or other proceeds that
former spouse generally must be included in the spouse’swould ordinarily be includible in your income must be
or former spouse’s income. If the participant contributed toincluded in your former spouse ’s income as alimony re-
the retirement plan, a prorated share of the participant ’sceived. You do not include the payments in your income,
cost (investment in the contract) is used to figure thenor can you deduct them as alimony paid. This rule applies
taxable amount.whether the proceeds are from the earnings or the princi-
The spouse or former spouse can use the special rulespal of the transferred property. It does not apply to any trust
for lump-sum distributions if the benefits would have beenincome that is fixed for child support.
treated as a lump-sum distribution had the participant
Example. You must make monthly alimony payments received them. For this purpose, consider only the balance
of $500. You bought your former spouse a commercial to the spouse ’s or former spouse ’s credit in determining
annuity contract paying $500 a month. Your former spouse whether the distribution is a total distribution. See
must include the full amount received under the contract in Lump-Sum Distributions in Publication 575 for information
income, as alimony. It does not matter whether the amount about the special rules.
Page 17

Page 18 of 26 of Publication 504 15:44 - 23-OCT-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Rollovers. If you receive an eligible rollover distribution However, this rule does not apply if your spouse or
former spouse is a nonresident alien. Nor does it apply tounder a QDRO as the plan participant ’s spouse or former
certain transfers covered under Transfers in trust, later.spouse, you may be able to roll it over tax free into an
The term “property” includes all property whether real orindividual retirement arrangement (IRA) or another quali-
personal, tangible or intangible, or separate or community.fied retirement plan.
It includes property acquired after the end of your marriageFor more information on the tax treatment of eligible
and transferred to your former spouse. It does not includerollover distributions, see Publication 575.
services.
Medical savings accounts (MSAs). If you transfer
your interest in an Archer MSA to your spouse or formerIndividual Retirement
spouse under a divorce or separation instrument, it is not
considered a taxable transfer. After the transfer, the inter-
Arrangements
est is treated as your spouse’s Archer MSA.
The following discussions explain some of the effects of Incident to divorce. A property transfer is incident to yourdivorce or separation on traditional individual retirement divorce if the transfer:arrangements (IRAs). Traditional IRAs are IRAs other than
Roth or SIMPLE IRAs. 1) Occurs within one year after the date your marriage
ends, orSpousal IRA. If you get a final decree of divorce or sepa-
2) Is related to the ending of your marriage.rate maintenance by the end of your tax year, you cannot
deduct contributions you make to your former spouse ’s A divorce, for this purpose, includes the ending of your
traditional IRA. You can deduct only contributions to your marriage by annulment or due to violations of state laws.
own traditional IRA. Related to the ending of marriage. A property transfer
is related to the ending of your marriage if both the follow-IRA transferred as a result of divorce.The transfer of all ing conditions apply.or part of your interest in a traditional IRA to your spouse or
former spouse, under a decree of divorce or separate 1) The transfer is made under your original or modifiedmaintenance or a written instrument incident to the decree, divorce or separation instrument.is not considered a taxable transfer. Starting from the date
2) The transfer occurs within 6 years after the date yourof the transfer, the traditional IRA interest transferred is
marriage ends.treated as your spouse ’s or former spouse ’s traditional
IRA. Unless these conditions are met, the transfer is pre-
sumed not to be related to the ending of your marriage.IRA contribution and deduction limits. All taxable ali- However, this presumption will not apply if you can showmony you receive under a decree of divorce or separate that the transfer was made to carry out the division ofmaintenance is treated as compensation for the contribu- property owned by you and your spouse at the time yourtion and deduction limits for traditional IRAs. marriage ended. For example, the presumption will not
apply if you can show that the transfer was made moreMore information. For more information about IRAs, in- than 6 years after the end of your marriage because ofcluding Roth IRAs, see Publication 590. business or legal factors which prevented earlier transfer
of the property and the transfer was made promptly after
those factors were taken care of.
Property Settlements Transfers to third parties. If you transfer property to a
third party on behalf of your spouse (or former spouse, ifThere is no recognized gain or loss on the transfer of incident to your divorce), the transfer is treated as twoproperty between spouses, or between former spouses if transfers.the transfer is because of a divorce. You may, however,
have to report the transaction on a gift tax return. See  Gift 1) A transfer of the property from you to your spouse or
Tax on Property Settlements, later. If you sell property that former spouse.
you own jointly to split the proceeds as part of your prop- 2) An immediate transfer of the property from yourerty settlement, see Sale of Jointly-Owned Property, later. spouse or former spouse to the third party.
You do not recognize gain or loss on the first transfer.Transfer Between Spouses
Instead, your spouse or former spouse may have to recog-
nize gain or loss on the second transfer.No gain or loss is recognized on a transfer of property from
For this treatment to apply, the transfer from you to theyou to (or in trust for the benefit of):
third party must be one of the following.• Your spouse, or
1) Required by your divorce or separation instrument.• Your former spouse, but only if the transfer is inci-
dent to your divorce. 2) Requested in writing by your spouse or former
spouse.This rule applies even if the transfer was in exchange for
cash, the release of marital rights, the assumption of liabili- 3) Consented to in writing by your spouse or former
ties, or other considerations. spouse. The consent must state that both you and
Page 18

Page 19 of 26 of Publication 504 15:44 - 23-OCT-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
your spouse or former spouse intend the transfer to When you transfer property to your spouse (or
be treated as a transfer from you to your spouse or former spouse, if incident to your divorce), you
former spouse subject to the rules of section 1041 of must give your spouse sufficient records to deter-
RECORDS
the Internal Revenue Code. You must receive the mine the adjusted basis and holding period of the property
consent before filing your tax return for the year you on the date of the transfer. If you transfer investment credit
transfer the property. property with recapture potential, you also must provide
sufficient records to determine the amount and period of
the recapture.Transfers in trust. If you make a transfer of property in
trust for the benefit of your spouse (or former spouse, if
incident to your divorce), you generally do not recognize
any gain or loss. Tax treatment of property received. Property you re-
However, you must recognize gain or loss if, incident to ceive from your spouse (or former spouse, if the transfer is
your divorce, you transfer an installment obligation in trust incident to your divorce) is treated as acquired by gift for
for the benefit of your former spouse. For information on income tax purposes. Its value is not taxable to you.
the disposition of an installment obligation, see Publication Basis of property received. Your basis in property re-537, Installment Sales. ceived from your spouse (or former spouse, if incident toYou also must recognize gain on the transfer of property your divorce) is the same as your spouse’s adjusted basis.in trust in the amount by which the liabilities assumed by This applies for determining either gain or loss when youthe trust, plus the liabilities to which the property is subject, later dispose of the property. It applies whether theexceed the total of your adjusted basis in the transferred property’s adjusted basis is less than, equal to, or greaterproperty. than either its value at the time of the transfer or any
consideration you paid. It also applies even if theExample. You own property with a fair market value of property’s liabilities are more than its adjusted basis.$10,000 and an adjusted basis of $1,000. The trust did not This rule generally applies to all property received afterassume any liabilities. The property is subject to a $5,000 July 18, 1984, under a divorce or separation instrument inliability. Your recognized gain on the transfer of the prop- effect after that date. It also applies to all other propertyerty in trust for the benefit of your spouse is $4,000 ($5,000 received after 1983 for which you and your spouse (or− $1,000). former spouse) made a section 1041 election to apply this
Reporting income from property. You should report in- rule.  For information about that election, see section
come from property transferred to your spouse or former 1.1041–1T(g) of the regulations.
spouse as shown on Table 4.
For information on the treatment of interest on U.S. Example. Karen and Don owned their home jointly.
savings bonds, see chapter 1 of Publication 550, Invest- Karen transferred her interest in the home to Don as part of
ment Income and Expenses. their property settlement when they divorced last year.
Table 4. Property Transferred Pursuant to Divorce
The tax treatment of items of property transferred from you to your spouse or former spouse pursuant
to your divorce is shown below.
IF you transfer: THEN you: AND your spouse or
former spouse:
FOR more information,
see
Income-producing
property (such as an
interest in a business,
rental property, stocks, or
bonds)
Include on your tax
return any profit or loss,
rental income or loss,
dividends, or interest
generated or derived
from the property during
the year until the
property is transferred.
Reports any income or
loss generated or derived
after the property is
transferred.
Interest in a passive
activity with unused
passive activity losses
Investment credit
property with recapture
potential
Cannot deduct your
accumulated unused
passive activity losses
allocable to the interest.
Do not have to recapture
any part of the credit.
Increases the adjusted
basis of the transferred
interest by the amount of
the unused losses.
May have to recapture
part of the credit if he or
she disposes of the
property or changes its
use before the end of the
recapture period.
Publication 925, Passive
Activity and At-Risk Rules
Form 4225, Recapture of
Investment Credit
Page 19

Page 20 of 26 of Publication 504 15:44 - 23-OCT-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Don’s basis in the interest received from Karen is her Marital deduction. A transfer of property to your spouse
adjusted basis in the home. His total basis in the home is before receiving a final decree of divorce or separate
their joint adjusted basis. maintenance is not subject to gift tax. However, this excep-
tion does not apply to:Property received before July 19, 1984. Your basis in
property received in settlement of marital support rights
• Transfers of certain terminable interests, or
before July 19, 1984, or under an instrument in effect • Transfers to your spouse if your spouse is not a U.S.before that date (other than property for which you made a citizen.section 1041 election) is its fair market value when you
received it.
Transfer under divorce decree. A transfer of property
Example. Larry and Gina owned their home jointly under the decree of a divorce court having the power to
before their divorce in 1978. That year, Gina received prescribe a property settlement is not subject to gift tax.
Larry’s interest in the home in settlement of her marital This exception also applies to a property settlement
support rights. Gina ’s basis in the interest received from agreed on before the divorce if it was made part of or
Larry is the part of the home’s fair market value proportion- approved by the decree.
ate to that interest. Her total basis in the home is that part of
the fair market value plus her adjusted basis in her own Transfer under written agreement. A transfer of prop-
interest. erty under a written agreement in settlement of marital
rights or to provide a reasonable child support allowance isProperty transferred in trust. If the transferor recog- not subject to gift tax if you are divorced within the 3-yearnizes gain on property transferred in trust, as described period beginning 1 year before and ending 2 years afterearlier under  Transfers in trust, the trust ’s basis in the the date of the agreement. This exception applies whetherproperty is increased by the recognized gain. or not the agreement is part of or approved by the divorce
decree.Example. Your spouse transfers property in trust, rec-
ognizing a $4,000 gain. Your spouse ’s adjusted basis in
Annual exclusion. The first $10,000 of gifts of presentthe property was $1,000. The trust’s basis in the property is
interests to any person during 2001 is not subject to gift$5,000 ($1,000 + $4,000).
tax. The annual exclusion is $106,000 for transfers to a
spouse who is not a U.S. citizen provided the gift wouldGift Tax on Property Settlements otherwise qualify for the gift tax marital deduction if the
donee were a U.S. citizen.The federal gift tax does not apply to most transfers of
property between spouses, or between former spouses Present interest. A gift is considered a present interest
because of divorce. The transfers usually qualify for one or if the donee has unrestricted rights to the immediate use,
more of the exceptions explained in this discussion. How- possession, and enjoyment of the property and income
ever, if your transfer of property does not qualify for an from the property.
exception, or qualifies only in part, you must report it on a
gift tax return. See Gift Tax Return, later.
Gift Tax ReturnFor more information about the federal gift tax, get
Publication 950, Introduction to Estate and Gift Taxes, and Report a transfer of property subject to gift tax on FormForm 709, United States Gift (and Generation-Skipping 709. Generally, Form 709 is due April 15 following the yearTransfer) Tax Return, and its instructions. of the transfer.
Transfer under written agreement. If a property transferExceptions would be subject to gift tax except that it is made under a
written agreement, and you do not receive a final decree ofYour transfer of property to your spouse or former spouse
divorce by the due date for filing the gift tax return, youis not subject to gift tax if it meets any of the following
must report the transfer on Form 709 and attach a copy ofexceptions.
your written agreement. The transfer will be treated as not
1) It is made in settlement of marital support rights. subject to the gift tax until the final decree of divorce is
granted, but no longer than 2 years after the effective date2) It qualifies for the marital deduction. of the written agreement.
3) It is made under a divorce decree. Within 60 days after you receive a final decree of di-
vorce, send a certified copy of the decree to the IRS office4) It is made under a written agreement, and you are where you filed Form 709.divorced within a specified period.
5) It qualifies for the annual exclusion. Sale of Jointly-Owned Property
Settlement of marital support rights. A transfer in set- If you sell property that you and your spouse own jointly,
tlement of marital support rights is not subject to gift tax to you must report your share of the recognized gain or loss
the extent the value of the property transferred is not more on your income tax return for the year of the sale. Your
than the value of those rights. This exception does not share of the gain or loss is determined by your state law
apply to a transfer in settlement of dower, curtesy, or other governing ownership of property. For information on re-
marital property rights. porting gain or loss, get Publication 544.
Page 20

Page 21 of 26 of Publication 504 15:44 - 23-OCT-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Sale of home. If you sold your main home, you may be These costs are not deductible, even if they are paid, in
able to exclude up to $250,000 (up to $500,000 if you and part, to arrive at a financial settlement or to protect
your spouse file a joint return) of gain on the sale. For more income-producing property.
information, see Publication 523, Selling Your Home. However, you can add certain legal fees you pay specif-
ically for a property settlement to the basis of the property
you receive. For example, you can add the cost of prepar-
ing and filing a deed to put title to your house in your name
Costs of Getting a Divorce alone to the basis of the house.
You cannot deduct fees you pay for your spouse orYou cannot deduct legal fees and court costs for getting a former spouse, unless your payments qualify as alimony.divorce. But you may be able to deduct legal fees paid for (See Payments to a third party in the earlier discussion oftax advice in connection with a divorce and legal fees to get the general rules for alimony.) If you have no legal respon-alimony. In addition, you may be able to deduct fees you sibility arising from the divorce settlement or decree to paypay to appraisers, actuaries, and accountants for services your spouse’s legal fees, your payments are gifts and mayin determining your correct tax or in helping to get alimony. be subject to the gift tax.
Fees you pay may include charges that are de-
ductible and charges that are not deductible. You
should request a breakdown showing the amount
TIP
Tax Withholdingcharged for each service performed.
and Estimated Tax
You can claim deductible fees only if you itemize deduc-
When you become divorced or separated, you will usuallytions on Schedule A (Form 1040). Claim them as miscella-
have to file a new Form W –4, Employee’s Withholdingneous itemized deductions subject to the
Allowance Certificate,  with your employer to claim your2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit. For more information,
proper withholding allowances. If you receive alimony, youget Publication 529, Miscellaneous Deductions.
may have to make estimated tax payments.
Fees for tax advice. You can deduct fees for advice on If you do not pay enough tax either through with-federal, state, and local taxes of all types, including in- holding or by making estimated tax payments,come, estate, gift, inheritance, and property taxes. you will have an underpayment of estimated taxCAUTION
!
If a fee is also for other services, you must determine and you may have to pay a penalty. If you do not payand prove the expense for tax advice. The following exam- enough tax by the due date of each payment, you mayples show how you can meet this requirement. have to pay a penalty even if you are due a refund when
you file your tax return.Example 1. The lawyer handling your divorce consults
another law firm, which handles only tax matters, to get
information on how the divorce will affect your taxes. You For more information, get Publication 505, Tax With-
can deduct the part of the fee paid over to the second firm holding and Estimated Tax.
and separately stated on your bill, subject to the 2% limit.
Joint estimated tax payments. If you and your spouse
Example 2. The lawyer handling your divorce uses the made joint estimated tax payments for 2001 but file sepa-
firm’s tax department for tax matters related to your di- rate returns, either of you can claim all of your payments, or
vorce. Your statement from the firm shows the part of the you can divide them in any way on which you both agree. If
total fee for tax matters. This is based on the time used, the you cannot agree, you must divide the payments in propor-
difficulty of the tax questions, and the amount of tax in- tion to your individual tax amounts as shown on your
volved. You can deduct this part of your bill, subject to the separate returns for 2001.
2% limit. If you claim any of the payments on your tax return,
enter your spouse ’s or former spouse ’s social security
Example 3. The lawyer handling your divorce also number in the space provided on the front of Form 1040 or
works on the tax matters. The fee for tax advice and the fee Form 1040A. If you were divorced and remarried in 2001,
for other services are shown on the lawyer ’s statement. enter your present spouse’s social security number in that
They are based on the time spent on each service and the space. Also enter your former spouse ’s social security
fees charged locally for similar services. You can deduct number, followed by “DIV” to the left of line 60, Form 1040,
the fee charged for tax advice, subject to the 2% limit. or line 38, Form 1040A.
Fees for getting alimony. Because you must include
alimony you receive in your gross income, you can deduct
Community Propertyfees you pay to get or collect alimony.
If you are married and your domicile (permanent legalExample. You pay your attorney a fee for handling your
home) is in a community property state, special rulesdivorce and an additional fee that is for services in getting
determine your income. Some of these rules are explainedand collecting alimony. You can deduct the fee for getting
in the following discussions. For more information, getand collecting alimony, subject to the 2% limit, if it is
Publication 555.separately stated on your attorney’s bill.
Nondeductible expenses. You cannot deduct the costs Community property states. The community property
of personal advice, counseling, or legal action in a divorce. states are:
Page 21

Page 22 of 26 of Publication 504 15:44 - 23-OCT-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Arizona, 1) You and your spouse live apart all year.
• California, 2) You and your spouse do not file a joint return for a
tax year beginning or ending in the calendar year.• Idaho,
3) You or your spouse has earned income for the cal-• Louisiana,
endar year that is community income.
• Nevada,
4) You and your spouse have not transferred, directly
• New Mexico, or indirectly, any of the earned income in (3) be-
tween yourselves before the end of the year. Do not• Texas,
take into account transfers satisfying child support
• Washington, and obligations or transfers of very small amounts or
value.• Wisconsin.
If all these conditions exist, you and your spouse must
report your community income as explained in the follow-
ing discussions.Community Income
Earned income. Treat earned income that is not trade orIf your domicile is in a community property state during any business or partnership income as the income of thepart of your tax year, you may have community income. spouse who performed the services to earn the income.Your state law determines whether your income is sepa- Earned income is wages, salaries, professional fees, andrate or community income. If you and your spouse file other pay for personal services.separate returns, you must report half of any income de- Earned income does not include amounts paid by ascribed by state law as community income, and your corporation that are a distribution of earnings and profitsspouse must report the other half. Each of you can claim rather than a reasonable allowance for personal servicescredit for half the income tax withheld from community rendered.income.
Trade or business income. Treat income and relatedCommunity property laws disregarded. Community deductions from a trade or business that is not a partner-property laws do not apply to an item of community in- ship as those of the spouse carrying on the trade orcome, and you will be responsible for reporting all of it if: business.
If capital investment and personal services both pro-1) You treat the item as if only you are entitled to the duce business income, treat all of the income as trade orincome, and business income.
2) You do not notify your spouse of the nature and
Partnership income or loss. Treat income or loss from aamount of the income by the due date for filing the
trade or business carried on by a partnership as the in-return (including extensions).
come or loss of the spouse who is the partner.
Separate property income. Treat income from the sepa-Relief from separate return liability for community in-
rate property of one spouse as the income of that spouse.come. You are not responsible for reporting an item of
community income if all of the following conditions exist. Social security benefits. Treat social security and
equivalent railroad retirement benefits as the income of the1) You do not file a joint return for the tax year.
spouse who receives the benefits.2) You do not include an item of community income in
gross income on your separate return. Other income. Treat all other community income, such as
dividends, interest, rents, royalties, or gains, as provided3) You establish that you did not know of, and had no under your state’s community property law.reason to know of, that community income.
4) Under all facts and circumstances, it would not be Example. George and Sharon were married throughout
fair to include the item of community income in your the year but did not live together at any time during the
gross income. year. Both domiciles were in a community property state.
They did not file a joint return or transfer any of their earned
Requesting relief. For information on how to request income between themselves. During the year their in-
relief from separate return liability, see Community Prop- comes were as follows:
erty Laws in Publication 971.
George Sharon
Wages ........................ $20,000 $22,000Spousal agreements. In some states a husband and wife Consulting business ............... 5,000may enter into an agreement that affects the status of Partnership ..................... 10,000property or income as community or separate property. Dividends from separate property ..... 1,000 2,000
Check your state law to determine how it affects you. Interest from community property ..... 5 0 0 5 0 0
Totals $26,500 $34,500
Under the community property law of their state, all theSpouses Living Apart All Year
income is considered community income. (Some states
Special rules apply if all the following conditions exist. treat income from separate property as separate income —
Page 22

Page 23 of 26 of Publication 504 15:44 - 23-OCT-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
check your state law.) Sharon did not take part in George’s
consulting business. How To Get Tax Help
Ordinarily, they would each report $30,500, half the total
community income, on their separate returns. But because You can get help with unresolved tax issues, order free
they meet the four conditions listed earlier under Spouses publications and forms, ask tax questions, and get more
Living Apart All Year, they must disregard community prop- information from the IRS in several ways. By selecting the
erty law in reporting all their income except the interest method that is best for you, you will have quick and easy
income from community property. They each report on access to tax help.
their returns only their own earnings and other income, and Contacting your Taxpayer Advocate. If you have at-their share of the interest income from community prop- tempted to deal with an IRS problem unsuccessfully, youerty. George reports $26,500 and Sharon reports $34,500. should contact your Taxpayer Advocate.
The Taxpayer Advocate represents your interests and
concerns within the IRS by protecting your rights andEnding the Community
resolving problems that have not been fixed through nor-
When the marital community ends, the community assets mal channels. While Taxpayer Advocates cannot change
(money and property) are divided between the spouses. the tax law or make a technical tax decision, they can clear
Income received before the community ended is treated up problems that resulted from previous contacts and
according to the rules explained earlier. Income received ensure that your case is given a complete and impartial
after the community ended is separate income, taxable review.
only to the spouse to whom it belongs. To contact your Taxpayer Advocate:
An absolute decree of divorce or annulment ends the • Call the Taxpayer Advocate at 1–877–777–4778.community in all community property states. A decree of
• Call the IRS at 1–800–829–1040.annulment, even though it holds that no valid marriage
ever existed, usually does not nullify community property • Call, write, or fax the Taxpayer Advocate office inrights arising during the “marriage.” However, you should your area.check your state law for exceptions.
• Call 1–800–829–4059 if you are a TTY/TDD user.A decree of legal separation or of separate mainte-
nance may or may not end the community. The court
For more information, see Publication 1546, The Tax-issuing the decree may terminate the community and di-
payer Advocate Service of the IRS.vide the property between the spouses.
A separation agreement may divide the community Free tax services. To find out what services are avail-property between you and your spouse. It may provide that able, get Publication 910, Guide to Free Tax Services. Itthis property, along with future earnings and property ac- contains a list of free tax publications and an index of taxquired, will be separate property. This agreement may end topics. It also describes other free tax information services,the community. including tax education and assistance programs and a list
In some states, the community ends when the spouses of TeleTax topics.
permanently separate, even if there is no formal agree-
Personal computer. With your personal com-ment. Check your state law.
puter and modem, you can access the IRS on the
Internet at www.irs.gov. While visiting our webAlimony (Community Income) site, you can:
Payments that may otherwise qualify as alimony are not • Find answers to questions you may have.
deductible by the payer if they are the recipient spouse ’s • Download forms and publications or search for formspart of community income. They are deductible as alimony and publications by topic or keyword.only to the extent they are more than that spouse’s part of
community income. • View forms that may be filled in electronically, print
the completed form, and then save the form for re-
Example. You live in a community property state. You cordkeeping.
are separated but the special rules explained earlier under
• View Internal Revenue Bulletins published in the lastSpouses Living Apart All Year do not apply. Under a few years.written agreement, you pay your spouse $12,000 of your
$20,000 total yearly community income. Your spouse re- • Search regulations and the Internal Revenue Code.
ceives no other community income. Under your state law, • Receive our electronic newsletters on hot tax issuesearnings of a spouse living separately and apart from the and news.other spouse continue as community property.
On your separate returns, each of you must report • Get information on starting and operating a small
$10,000 of the total community income. In addition, your business.
spouse must report $2,000 as alimony received on line 11
of Form 1040. You can deduct $2,000 as alimony paid on You can also reach us with your computer using File
line 31a of Form 1040. Transfer Protocol at ftp.irs.gov.
Page 23

Page 24 of 26 of Publication 504 15:44 - 23-OCT-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
TaxFax Service. Using the phone attached to an extensive collection of products available to print from a
your fax machine, you can receive forms and CD-ROM or photocopy from reproducible proofs. Also,
instructions by calling 703–368–9694. Follow some IRS offices and libraries have the Internal Revenue
the directions from the prompts. When you order forms, Code, regulations, Internal Revenue Bulletins, and Cumu-
enter the catalog number for the form you need. The items lative Bulletins available for research purposes.
you request will be faxed to you.
For help with transmission problems, call the FedWorld
Help Desk at 703–487–4608. Mail. You can send your order for forms, instruc-
tions, and publications to the Distribution Center
nearest to you and receive a response within 10
Phone. Many services are available by phone. workdays after your request is received. Find the address
that applies to your part of the country.
• Western part of U.S.:
Western Area Distribution Center
• Ordering forms, instructions, and publications. Call Rancho Cordova, CA 95743–00011–800–829–3676 to order current and prior year
• Central part of U.S.:forms, instructions, and publications.
Central Area Distribution Center• Asking tax questions. Call the IRS with your tax P.O. Box 8903questions at 1–800–829–1040. Bloomington, IL 61702–8903
• TTY/TDD equipment. If you have access to TTY/ • Eastern part of U.S. and foreign addresses:TDD equipment, call 1–800–829–4059 to ask tax Eastern Area Distribution Centerquestions or to order forms and publications. P.O. Box 85074
• TeleTax topics. Call 1–800–829–4477 to listen to Richmond, VA 23261 –5074
pre-recorded messages covering various tax topics.
CD-ROM. You can order IRS Publication 1796,
Evaluating the quality of our telephone services. To Federal Tax Products on CD-ROM, and obtain:
ensure that IRS representatives give accurate, courteous,
and professional answers, we evaluate the quality of our
telephone services in several ways.
• Current tax forms, instructions, and publications.
• A second IRS representative sometimes monitors • Prior-year tax forms and instructions.live telephone calls. That person only evaluates the
• Popular tax forms that may be filled in electronically,IRS assistor and does not keep a record of any
taxpayer’s name or tax identification number. printed out for submission, and saved for record-
keeping.• We sometimes record telephone calls to evaluate
IRS assistors objectively. We hold these recordings • Internal Revenue Bulletins.
no longer than one week and use them only to mea-
sure the quality of assistance. The CD-ROM can be purchased from National Techni-
cal Information Service (NTIS) by calling• We value our customers’ opinions. Throughout this 1–877–233–6767 or on the Internet at www.irs.gov. Theyear, we will be surveying our customers for their first release is available in mid-December and the finalopinions on our service. release is available in late January.
IRS Publication 3207, Small Business Resource Guide,Walk-in. You can walk in to many post offices, is an interactive CD-ROM that contains information impor-libraries, and IRS offices to pick up certain forms, tant to small businesses. It is available in mid-February.instructions, and publications. Some IRS offices, You can get one free copy by calling 1–800–829–3676 orlibraries, grocery stores, copy centers, city and county visiting the IRS web site at www.irs.gov.governments, credit unions, and office supply stores have
Page 24

Page 25 of 26 of Publication 504 15:44 - 23-OCT-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Index
Spouse ....................6 More information ( See Tax help)A
Multiple support agreement .....1 0Address, change of .............2
FAlimony ....................1 0
Filing status: NAlimony:
Head of household ...........5Community income ..........2 3 Name, change of ..............2
Joint return .................3Deduction .................1 1 Noncustodial parent, exemption
Separate returns .............3Fees for getting .............2 1 for dependent ...............8
Instruments executed after Form: Nonresident alien, withholding
1984 ...................1 2 2120 .....................1 0 on alimony ................1 2
Instruments executed before 7 0 9......................2 0 Nonresident alien:1985 ...................1 5 8332 ......................8 spouse ....................5Recapture .................1 5 8379 ......................3 Number, taxpayer identification ....1Trusts ....................1 7 8822 ......................2
Withholding, nonresident 8857 ......................3 Palien ...................1 2 W–4.....................2 1 Phaseout of exemptions ........1 0Annuities ...................1 7 Free tax services .............2 3 Property settlements ...........1 8Annulment decree .............2 Property settlements:Assistance ( See Tax help) G Gift tax ...................2 0Gift tax on property settlements . . 20 Jointly-owned property, saleC Gross income test .............7 o f......................2 0Change of name ...............2 Publications ( See Tax help)Child ..................... 5 - 6 H
Child support ......... 10, 12, 14, Head of household .............5 Q17 Help ( See Tax help) Qualified domestic relationsCitizen or resident test ..........7 Home owned jointly: order (QDRO) ..............1 7Comments ...................2 Payments for ..............1 2
Community income ............2 2 Support for dependent ........7 RCommunity property ...........2 1 Recapture of alimony ..........1 5Community property: I Relief from joint liability ........1 ,  3Alimony paid ...............2 3 Identification number ...........1
Income ...................2 2 Important reminders ............1 SCustodial parent, dependency Individual retirement Sale of jointly-owned property ....2 0exemption ..................8 arrangements (IRAs) .........1 8 Section 1041 election ..........1 9Injured spouse ................3 Separate maintenanceD Innocent spouse ( See Relief from decree .................2 ,  1 0Deductions ...................3 joint liability) Separate returns ............. 3 - 4Dependency tests ..............6 Itemized deductions ............3 Separation agreement .........1 0Dependent: ITIN ........................1 Social security number,Child ......................5 dependents .................1Custodial parent .............8 J Suggestions ..................2Noncustodial parent ..........8 Joint liability: Support test, dependents:Social security number ........1 Relief from .................3 Children of divorced orDivorce decree .............2 ,  1 0 Joint return ...................3 separated parents ..........7Divorce decree: Joint return test for dependents . . . 7 Multiple support agreement ....1 0Amended .................1 1
Costs of getting .............2 1
L TInvalid ....................1 1
Life insurance premiums ........1 2 Tax advice, fees for ...........2 1Domicile ....................2 1
Tax help ....................2 3
M Tax withholding ..............2 1E
Marital status .................2 Taxpayer Advocate ............2 3Earned income ............ 18, 22
Medical expenses, child of TTY/TDD information ..........2 3Endowment contracts ..........1 7 divorced or separatedEstimated tax ................2 1 Iparents ...................1 0Exemptions: Medical savings accounts .......1 8Dependent .................6 Member of household orPersonal ...................6 relationship test ..............6Phaseout .................1 0
Page 25

Page 26 of 26 of Publication 504 15:44 - 23-OCT-2001
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tax Publications for Individual Taxpayers
General Guides
Your Rights as a Taxpayer
Your Federal Income Tax (For
Individuals)
Farmer’s Tax Guide
Tax Guide for Small Business (For
Individuals Who Use Schedule C or
C-EZ)
Tax Calendars for 2002
Highlights of 2001 Tax Changes
Guide to Free Tax Services
Specialized Publications
Armed Forces’ Tax Guide
Fuel Tax Credits and Refunds
Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Expenses
Exemptions, Standard Deduction,
and Filing Information
Medical and Dental Expenses
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Divorced or Separated Individuals
Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax
Tax Benefits for Work-Related
Education
Foreign Tax Credit for Individuals
U.S. Government Civilian Employees
Stationed Abroad
Social Security and Other
Information for Members of the
Clergy and Religious Workers
U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens
Scholarships and Fellowships
Moving Expenses
Selling Your Home
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Taxable and Nontaxable Income
Charitable Contributions
Residential Rental Property
Commonly Used Tax Forms
Miscellaneous Deductions
Tax Information for First-Time
Homeowners
Reporting Tip Income
Self-Employment Tax
Depreciating Property Placed in
Service Before 1987
Installment Sales
Partnerships
Sales and Other Dispositions of
Assets
Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
Investment Income and Expenses
Basis of Assets
Recordkeeping for Individuals
Older Americans’ Tax Guide
Community Property
Examination of Returns, Appeal
Rights, and Claims for Refund
Survivors, Executors, and
Administrators
Determining the Value of Donated
Property
Mutual Fund Distributions
Tax Guide for Individuals With
Income From U.S. Possessions
Pension and Annuity Income
Casualty, Disaster, and Theft Loss
Workbook (Personal-Use Property)
Business Use of Your Home
(Including Use by Day-Care
Providers)
Individual Retirement Arrangements
(IRAs)
Tax Highlights for U.S. Citizens and
Residents Going Abroad
The IRS Collection Process
Earned Income Credit (EIC)
Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service
Retirement Benefits
Tax Highlights for Persons with
Disabilities
Bankruptcy Tax Guide
Direct Sellers
Social Security and Equivalent
Railroad Retirement Benefits
How Do I Adjust My Tax Withholding?
Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
Household Employer’s Tax Guide
Tax Rules for Children and
Dependents
Home Mortgage Interest Deduction
How To Depreciate Property
Practice Before the IRS and Power
of Attorney
Introduction to Estate and Gift Taxes
IRS Will Figure Your Tax
Per Diem Rates
Reporting Cash Payments of Over
$10,000
The Taxpayer Advocate Service of
the IRS
Derechos del Contribuyente
Cómo Preparar la Declaraci ón de
Impuesto Federal
Crédito por Ingreso del Trabajo
English-Spanish Glossary of Words
and Phrases Used in Publications
Issued by the Internal Revenue
Service
U.S. Tax Treaties
Spanish Language Publications
Tax Highlights for Commercial
Fishermen
910
595
553
509
334
225
17
1
3
378
463
501
502
503
504
505
508
514
516
517
519
520
521
523
524
525
526
527
529
530
531
533
534
537
544
547
550
551
552
554
541
555
556
559
561
564
570
575
584
587
590
593
594
596
721
901
907
908
915
919
925
926
929
946
911
936
950
1542
967
1544
1546
596SP
1SP
850
579SP
Comprendiendo el Proceso de Cobro594SP
947
Tax Benefits for Adoption968
Informe de Pagos en Efectivo en
Exceso de $10,000 (Recibidos en
una Ocupación o Negocio)
1544SP
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get forms, including by computer, fax,
phone, and mail. For fax orders only, use the catalog number when ordering.
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Itemized Deductions & Interest and
Ordinary Dividends
Profit or Loss From Business
Net Profit From Business
Capital Gains and Losses
Supplemental Income and Loss
Earned Income Credit
Profit or Loss From Farming
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Income Tax Return for Single and 
Joint Filers With No Dependents
Self-Employment Tax
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Interest and Ordinary Dividends for
Form 1040A Filers
Child and Dependent Care
Expenses for Form 1040A Filers
Credit for the Elderly or the 
Disabled for Form 1040A Filers
Estimated Tax for Individuals
Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Unreimbursed Employee Business
Expenses
Underpayment of Estimated Tax by
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
Power of Attorney and Declaration
of Representative
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Moving Expenses
Depreciation and Amortization
Application for Automatic Extension of Time
To File U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Investment Interest Expense Deduction
Additional Taxes Attributable to IRAs, Other
Qualified Retirement Plans, Annuities,
Modified Endowment Contracts, and MSAs
Alternative Minimum Tax –Individuals
Noncash Charitable Contributions
Change of Address
Expenses for Business Use of Your Home
Nondeductible IRAs
Passive Activity Loss Limitations
1040
Sch A & B
Sch C
Sch C-EZ
Sch D
Sch E
Sch EIC
Sch F
Sch H Household Employment Taxes 
Sch R
Sch SE
1040EZ
1040A
Sch 1
Sch 2
Sch 3
1040-ES
1040X
2106 Employee Business Expenses
2106-EZ
2210
2441
2848
3903
4562
4868
4952
5329
6251
8283
8582
8606
8822
8829
Form Number and Title
Catalog
Number
Sch J Farm Income Averaging
Additional Child Tax Credit8812
Education Credits8863
Catalog
Number
11700
20604
11744
11862
11980
12490
12906
13141
13177
13329
13600
62299
63704
63966
10644
12081
13232
25379
11320
Form Number and Title
11330
11334
14374
11338
11344
13339
11346
12187
25513
11359
11358
11327
12075
10749
12064
11329
11340
11360
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get publications, including
by computer, phone, and mail.
970 Tax Benefits for Higher Education
971 Innocent Spouse Relief
Sch D-1 Continuation Sheet for Schedule D 10424
972 Child Tax Credit (For Individuals
Sent Here From the Form 1040 or
1040A Instructions)
Page 26