Userid: ________ Leading adjust: 0% ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: P501.cvt (20-Nov-2003) (Init. & date)
Filename: D:\USERS\mxverz00\documents\Epicfiles\2003_Std_Pubs\03P501.sgm
Page 1 of 23 of Publication 501 15:05 - 20-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 ContentsCat. No. 15000U
Important Changes................ 1Department
of the Important Reminders.............. 1Exemptions,Treasury
Internal Introduction..................... 2
Revenue Standard Who Must File ................... 2Service
Who Should File ................. 4Deduction,
Filing Status.................... 4
and Filing Exemptions ..................... 9
Standard Deduction............... 18
Information 2003 Standard Deduction Tables.... 19
How To Get Tax Help.............. 20
Index.......................... 22For use in preparing
2003 Returns
Important Changes
Who must file. Generally, the amount of in-
come you can receive before you must file a
return has increased. Table 1 shows the filing
requirements for most taxpayers.
Exemption amount. The amount you can de-
duct for each exemption has increased from
$3,000 in 2002 to $3,050 in 2003.
Exemption phaseout. You lose all or part of
the benefit of your exemptions if your adjusted
gross income is above a certain amount. The
amount at which this phaseout begins depends
on your filing status. For 2003, the phaseout
begins at $104,625 for married persons filing
separately; $139,500 for single individuals;
$174,400 for heads of household; and $209,250
for married persons filing jointly or qualifying
widow(er)s. See Phaseout of Exemptions, later.
Standard deduction.The standard deduction
for most taxpayers who do not itemize deduc-
tions on Schedule A of Form 1040 is higher in
2003 than it was in 2002. The amount depends
on your filing status. The 2003 Standard Deduc-
tion Tables are shown near the end of this publi-
cation as Tables 7, 8, and 9.
Itemized deductions.Some of your itemized
deductions may be limited if your adjusted gross
income is more than $139,500 ($69,750 if you
are married filing separately). See Who Should
Itemize, later.
Important Reminders
Kidnapped child. A child who has been kid-Get forms and other information napped may still qualify you for:
faster and easier by: • Head of household or qualifying widow(er)
with dependent child filing status, andInternet • www.irs.gov or FTP • ftp.irs.gov
• The child’s dependency exemption.
FAX • 703–368–9694 (from your fax machine) For details, see Filing Status and Exemptions for
Dependents, later.

Page 2 of 23 of Publication 501 15:05 - 20-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Social security number for dependents. The second section is about who should file You can e-mail us at *taxforms@irs.gov.
a return. Reading this section will help you de- Please put “Publications Comment” on the sub-You must list either the social security number
cide if you should file a return, even if you are not ject line.(SSN), individual taxpayer identification number
required to do so. You can write to us at the following address:(ITIN), or adoption taxpayer identification num-
The third section helps you determine whichber (ATIN) of every person for whom you claim
filing status to use. Filing status is important in Internal Revenue Servicean exemption.
determining whether you must file a return, your Individual Forms and Publications BranchIf you do not list the dependent’s SSN, ITIN,
standard deduction, and your tax rate. It also SE:W:CAR:MP:T:Ior ATIN, the exemption may be disallowed. See
helps determine what credits you may be enti- 1111 Constitution Ave. NWSocial Security Numbers for Dependents, later.
tled to. Washington, DC 20224
The fourth section discusses exemptions,Election to report child’s unearned income
which reduce your taxable income. The discus-on parent’s return.You may be able to in- We respond to many letters by telephone.
sions include the social security number re-clude your child’s interest and dividend income Therefore, it would be helpful if you would in-
quirement for dependents, the rules for multipleon your tax return by using Form 8814,Parents’ clude your daytime phone number, including the
support agreements, and the rules for divorcedElection To Report Child’s Interest and Divi- area code, in your correspondence.
or separated parents.dends. If you choose to do this, your child will not
The fifth section gives the rules and dollarhave to file a return. Useful Items
amounts for the standard deduction— a ben- You may want to see:Photographs of missing children.The Inter- efit for taxpayers who do not itemize their deduc-
nal Revenue Service is a proud partner with thetions. This section also discusses the standardPublicationNational Center for Missing and Exploited Chil-deduction for taxpayers who are blind or age 65
❏ 559 Survivors, Executors, anddren. Photographs of missing children selectedor older, and special rules for dependents. In
Administratorsby the Center may appear in this publication onaddition, this section should help you decide
pages that would otherwise be blank. You canwhether you would be better off taking the stan-❏ 929 Tax Rules for Children andhelp bring these children home by looking at thedard deduction or itemizing your deductions. Dependentsphotographs and calling 1–800–THE–LOST The last section explains how to get tax help
(1–800–843–5678) if you recognize a child.from the IRS. Form (and Instructions)
This publication is for U.S. citizens and resi-
❏ 1040X Amended U.S. Individual Incomedent aliens only. If you are a resident alien for
Tax Returnthe entire year, you must follow the same tax
rules that apply to U.S. citizens. The rules toIntroduction ❏ 2848 Power of Attorney and Declaration
determine if you are a resident or nonresident of RepresentativeThis publication discusses some tax rules thatalien are discussed in chapter 1 of Publication
❏ 8332 Release of Claim to Exemption foraffect every person who may have to file a fed-519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens.
Child of Divorced or Separatederal income tax return. It answers some basic
Nonresident aliens.If you were a nonresi- Parentsquestions: who must file; who should file; what
dent alien at any time during the year, the rulesfiling status to use; how many exemptions to ❏ 8814 Parents’ Election To Report Child’sand tax forms that apply to you may be differentclaim; and the amount of the standard deduc- Interest and Dividendsfrom those that apply to U.S. citizens. See Publi-tion.
cation 519.The first section of this publication explains
who must file an income tax return. If you haveComments and suggestions. We welcome
little or no gross income, reading this section willyour comments about this publication and your
Who Must Filehelp you decide if you have to file a return.suggestions for future editions.
If you are a U.S. citizen or resident, whether youTable 1. 2003 Filing Requirements Chart for Most Taxpayers
must file a federal income tax return depends
upon your gross income, your filing status, yourTHEN file a return age, and whether you are a dependent. Forif your gross details, see Table 1 and Table 2. You must alsoAND at the end of 2003 you income was at file if one of the situations described in Table 3IF your filing status is... were...* least...**
applies. The filing requirements apply even if
you owe no tax.under 65  $ 7,800single
You may have to pay a penalty if you are
65 or older $ 8,950 required to file a return but fail to. If you willfully
fail to file a return, you may be subject to criminalunder 65 $10,050head of household prosecution.
For information on what form to use — Form65 or older $11,200
1040EZ, Form 1040A, or Form 1040 — see the
under 65 (both spouses) $15,600married, filing jointly*** instructions in your tax package.
65 or older (one spouse) $16,550 Gross income. Gross income is all income
you receive in the form of money, goods, prop-65 or older (both spouses) $17,500 erty, and services that is not exempt from tax. If
you are married and live with your spouse in a
married, filing separately any age  $ 3,050
community property state, half of any income
under 65 $12,550qualifying widow(er) with defined by state law as community income may
be considered yours. For a list of communitydependent child 65 or older $13,500 property states, see Community property states
under Married Filing Separately, later.*  If you were born before January 2, 1939, you are considered to be 65 or older at the end of 2003.
**  Gross income means all income you received in the form of money, goods, property, and Self-employed persons. If you areservices that is not exempt from tax, including any income from sources outside the United
self-employed in a business that provides serv-States (even if you may exclude part or all of it). Do not include social security benefits unless
ices (where products are not a factor), youryou are married filing a separate return and you lived with your spouse at any time during
2003. gross income from that business is the gross
*** If you didn’t live with your spouse at the end of 2003 (or on the date your spouse died) andreceipts. If you are self-employed in a businessyour gross income was at least $3,050, you must file a return regardless of your age. involving manufacturing, merchandising, or min-
Page 2

Page 3 of 23 of Publication 501 15:05 - 20-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Age. Age is a factor in determining if you mustTable 2. 2003 Filing Requirements for Dependents 
file a return only if you are 65 or older at the endSee Exemptions for Dependents to find out if you are a dependent. of your tax year. For 2003, you are 65 or older if
you were born before January 2, 1939.If your parent (or someone else) can claim you as a dependent, use this table to see
if you must file a return.
In this table, unearned income includes taxable interest, ordinary dividends, andFiling Requirements
capital gain distributions. Earned income includes wages, tips, and taxable for Most Taxpayers
scholarship and fellowship grants. Gross income is the total of your unearned and
You must file a return if your gross income forearned income.
the year was at least the amount shown on theCaution: If your gross income was $3,050 or more, you usually cannot be claimed
appropriate line in Table 1. Dependents shouldas a dependent unless you were under age 19 or a full-time student under age 24.
see Table 2 instead.For details, see Gross Income Test under Dependency Tests.
Single dependents— Were you either age 65 or older or blind?
Deceased Persons❏ No. You must file a return if any of the following apply.
You must file an income tax return for a dece-1) Your unearned income was more than $750.
dent (a person who died) if both of the following2) Your earned income was more than $4,750.
are true.3) Your gross income was more than the larger of —
1) You are the surviving spouse, executor,a) $750, or administrator, or legal representative.b) Your earned income (up to $4,500) plus $250.
2) The decedent met the filing requirements
described in this publication at the time of❏ Yes. You must file a return if any of the following apply. his or her death.
1) Your unearned income was more than $1,900 ($3,050 if 65 or older and For more information, see Final Return for
blind). Decedent in Publication 559.
2) Your earned income was more than $5,900 ($7,050 if 65 or older and
blind).
U.S. Citizens or3) Your gross income was more than —
Residents Living Abroad
a) The larger of $750, or your earned income (up to $4,500) plus $250,
For purposes of determining whether you mustplus
file a return, you must include in your grossb) $1,150 ($2,300 if 65 or older and blind).
income all of the income you earned abroad,
including any income you can exclude under the
Married dependents— Were you either age 65 or older or blind? foreign earned income exclusion. For more in-
formation on special tax rules that may apply to❏ No. You must file a return if any of the following apply.
you, see Publication 54, Tax Guide for U.S.1) Your gross income was at least $5 and your spouse files a separateCitizens and Resident Aliens Abroad.return and itemizes deductions.
2) Your unearned income was more than $750.
Residents of Puerto Rico3) Your earned income was more than $4,750.
4) Your gross income was more than the larger of —
Generally, if you are a U.S. citizen and a resi-
dent of Puerto Rico, you must file a U.S. incomea) $750, or
tax return if you meet the income requirements.b)  Your earned income (up to $4,500) plus $250. This is in addition to any legal requirement you
may have to file an income tax return with Puerto
❏ Yes. You must file a return if any of the following apply. Rico.
If you are a resident of Puerto Rico for the1) Your gross income was at least $5 and your spouse files a separatewhole year, your U.S. gross income does notreturn and itemizes deductions. include income from sources within Puerto Rico.
2) Your unearned income was more than $1,700 ($2,650 if 65 or older and However, include in your U.S. gross income any
blind). income you received for your services as an
3) Your earned income was more than $5,700 ($6,650 if 65 or older and employee of the United States or any U.S.
blind). agency. If you receive income from Puerto Ri-
can sources that is not subject to U.S. tax, you4) Your gross income was more than —
must reduce your standard deduction. This also
a) The larger of $750 or your earned income (up to $4,500) plus $250,reduces the amount of income you can have
plus before you must file a U.S. income tax return.
For more information, see Publication 570,b) $950 ($1,900 if 65 or older and blind).
Tax Guide for Individuals With Income From
U.S. Possessions.
ing, your gross income from that business is theFiling status.Your filing status generally de-Individuals With Income From U.S.
pends on whether you are single or married. Intotal sales minus the cost of goods sold. To this Possessionssome cases, it depends on other factors as well.figure, you add any income from investments
Whether you are single or married is determinedIf you had income from Guam, the Common-and from incidental or outside operations or
as of the last day of your tax year, which iswealth of Northern Mariana Islands, Americansources. December 31 for most taxpayers. Filing status isSamoa, or the Virgin Islands, special rules may
You must file Form 1040 if you owe anydiscussed in detail later in this publication.apply when determining whether you must file a
self-employment tax. U.S. federal income tax return. In addition, youTIP
may have to file a return with the individual
Page 3

Page 4 of 23 of Publication 501 15:05 - 20-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 3. Other Situations When You Must File a 2003 Return
Who Should FileIf any of the four conditions listed below applied to you for 2003, you must file a
return. Even if you do not have to file, you should file a
1. You owe any special taxes, such as: tax return to get money back if one of the follow-
ing applies.• Social security or Medicare tax on tips you did not report to your employer.
(See Publication 531, Reporting Tip Income.)
1) You had income tax withheld from your• Uncollected social security, Medicare, or railroad retirement tax on tips youpay.reported to your employer or on group-term life insurance. (See Publication
2) You qualify for the earned income credit.531 and the Form 1040 instructions for line 60.)
See Publication 596, Earned Income• Alternative minimum tax. (See the Form 1040 instructions for line 42.)
Credit (EIC), for more information.• Tax on a qualified plan, including an individual retirement arrangement (IRA),
or other tax-favored account. (See Publication 590, Individual Retirement 3) You qualify for the additional child tax
Arrangements (IRAs), and Publication 969, Medical Savings Accounts credit. See the instructions in your tax
forms package for more information on this(MSAs).) But if you are filing a return only because you owe this tax, you can
credit.file Form 5329 by itself.
• Recapture taxes. (See the Form 1040 instructions for lines 41 and 60.)4) You qualify for the health coverage tax
2. You received any advance earned income credit (EIC) payments from your credit. For information about this credit,
employer. These payments should be shown in box 9 of your Form W–2. (Seesee Form 8885, Health Coverage Tax
Publication 596, Earned Income Credit.) Credit.
3. You had net earnings from self-employment of at least $400. (See Publication
533, Self-Employment Tax.)
4. You had wages of $108.28 or more from a church or qualified church-controlled
organization that is exempt from employer social security and Medicare taxes.Filing Status(See Publication 533.)
You must determine your filing status before you
can determine your filing requirements, stan-
island government. See Publication 570 for on your tax return. If you choose to do this, yourdard deduction (discussed later), and correct
more information. child will not have to file a return. However, all of tax. You figure your correct tax by using the Tax
the following conditions must be met. Rate Schedule or the column in the Tax Table
that applies to your filing status.Dependents 1) Your child was under age 14 at the end ofYou also use your filing status in determining2003. (A child born on January 1, 1990, isA person who is a dependent may still have to whether you are eligible to claim certain otherconsidered to be age 14 at the end offile a return. This depends on the amount of the deductions and credits.2003; you cannot make the election fordependent’s earned income, unearned income, There are five filing statuses:this child.)and gross income. For details, see Table 2. A
dependent may also have to file if one of the • Single,2) Your child is required to file a return for
situations described in Table 3 applies. 2003 unless you make this election. • Married Filing Jointly,
Responsibility of parent.If a dependent 3) Your child had gross income only from in-• Married Filing Separately,child who must file an income tax return cannotterest and dividends (including capital gain
• Head of Household, andfile it for any reason, such as age, a parent,distributions and Alaska Permanent Fund
guardian, or other legally responsible persondividends). • Qualifying Widow(er) With Dependentmust file it for the child. If the child cannot sign Child.4) The interest and dividend income was lessthe return, the parent or guardian must sign thethan $7,500. If more than one filing status applies to you,child’s name followed by the words “By (your
choose the one that will give you the lowest tax.signature), parent for minor child.” 5) No estimated tax payment was made for
2003 and no 2002 overpayment was ap-Earned income. This is salaries, wages, pro-plied to 2003 under your child’s name andMarital Statusfessional fees, and other amounts received associal security number.pay for work you actually perform. Earned in- In general, your filing status depends oncome (only for purposes of filing requirements6) No federal income tax was withheld fromwhether you are considered unmarried or mar-and the standard deduction) also includes anyyour child’s income under the backup with-ried. A marriage means only a legal union be-part of a scholarship that you must include inholding rules. tween a man and a woman as husband andyour gross income. See chapter 1 of Publication wife.7) You are the parent whose return must be970, Tax Benefits for Education, for more infor- used when making the election to reportmation on taxable and nontaxable scholarships. Unmarried persons. You are considered un-your child’s unearned income.
married for the whole year if, on the last day ofChild’s earnings.Amounts a child earns by For more information, see Parent’s Electionyour tax year, you are unmarried or legally sepa-performing services are his or her gross income.To Report Child’s Interest and Dividends in Pub- rated from your spouse under a divorce or aThis is true even if under local law the child’slication 929, and Form 8814. separate maintenance decree.parents have the right to the earnings and may
actually have received them. If the child does not State law governs whether you are married
Other Situationspay the tax due on this income, the parent is or legally separated under a divorce or separate
liable for the tax. maintenance decree.You may have to file a tax return even if your
Unearned income. This is income such as Divorced persons.  If you are divorcedgross income is less than the amount shown in
interest, dividends, and capital gains. Trust dis- under a final decree by the last day of the year,Table 1 or Table 2 for your filing status. See
tributions of interest, dividends, capital gains, you are considered unmarried for the wholeTable 3 for those other situations when you must
and survivor annuities are considered unearned year.file.
income also. Divorce and remarriage. If you obtain a
Election to report child’s unearned income divorce in one year for the sole purpose of filing
on parent’s return.You may be able to in- tax returns as unmarried individuals, and at the
clude your child’s interest and dividend income time of divorce you intended to and did remarry
Page 4

Page 5 of 23 of Publication 501 15:05 - 20-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
each other in the next tax year, you and your Filing a Joint ReturnSingle
spouse must file as married individuals.
Both you and your spouse must include all ofYour filing status is single if, on the last day ofAnnulled marriages. If you obtain a court your income, exemptions, and deductions onthe year, you are unmarried or legally separateddecree of annulment, which holds that no valid your joint return.from your spouse under a divorce or separatemarriage ever existed, you are considered un-maintenance decree, and you do not qualify forAccounting period.Both of you must use themarried even if you filed joint returns for earlieranother filing status. To determine your maritalsame accounting period, but you can use differ-years. You must file amended returns (Formstatus on the last day of the year, see Marital ent accounting methods.1040X) claiming single or head of householdStatus, earlier. Joint responsibility.Both of you may be heldstatus for all tax years affected by the annulment
Your filing status may be single if you wereresponsible, jointly and individually, for the taxthat are not closed by the statute of limitations
widowed before January 1, 2003, and did notand any interest or penalty due on your jointfor filing a tax return. The statute of limitations
remarry in 2003. However, you might be able toreturn. One spouse may be held responsible forgenerally does not expire until 3 years after your
use another filing status that will give you a lowerall the tax due even if all the income was earnedoriginal return was filed.
tax. See Head of Household and Qualifying by the other spouse.Head of household or qualifying widow(er)Widow(er) With Dependent Child, later, to see ifDivorced taxpayer.You may be held jointlywith dependent child.If you are consideredyou qualify. and individually responsible for any tax, interest,unmarried, you may be able to file as a head of
and penalties due on a joint return filed beforehousehold or as a qualifying widow(er) with a
How to file.You can file Form 1040EZ (if youyour divorce. This responsibility may apply evendependent child. See Head of Household and
have no dependents, are under 65 and not blind,if your divorce decree states that your formerQualifying Widow(er) With Dependent Child to spouse will be responsible for any amounts dueand meet other requirements), Form 1040A, orsee if you qualify. on previously filed joint returns.Form 1040. If you file Form 1040A or Form
1040, show your filing status as single by check-Married persons. If you are considered mar- Relief from joint responsibility.In someing the box on line 1. Use the Single column of cases, one spouse may be relieved of joint liabil-ried for the whole year, you and your spouse canthe Tax Table, or Schedule X of the Tax Rate ity for tax, interest, and penalties on a joint returnfile a joint return, or you can file separate re-Schedules, to figure your tax. for items of the other spouse which were incor-turns.
rectly reported on the joint return. You can askConsidered married. You are considered Married Filing Jointly for relief no matter how small the liability.married for the whole year if on the last day of There are three types of relief available. 
your tax year you and your spouse meet any oneYou can choose married filing jointly as your
of the following tests. 1) Innocent spouse relief, which applies tofiling status if you are married and both you and
all joint filers.your spouse agree to file a joint return. On a joint
1) You are married and living together asreturn, you report your combined income and2) Separation of liability, which applies tohusband and wife. deduct your combined allowable expenses. Youjoint filers who are divorced, widowed, le-
can file a joint return even if one of you had no2) You are living together in a common law gally separated, or who have not lived to-
income or deductions.marriage that is recognized in the state gether for the 12 months ending on the
date election of this relief is filed.where you now live or in the state where If you and your spouse decide to file a joint
return, your tax may be lower than your com-the common law marriage began. 3) Equitable relief, which applies to all jointbined tax for the other filing statuses. Also, yourfilers who do not qualify for innocent3) You are married and living apart, but notstandard deduction (if you do not itemize deduc-spouse relief or separation of liability andlegally separated under a decree of di-tions) may be higher, and you may qualify for taxto married couples filing separate returnsvorce or separate maintenance. benefits that do not apply to other filing statuses.in community property states.4) You are separated under an interlocutory If you and your spouse each have in-You must file Form 8857, Request for Inno-(not final) decree of divorce. For purposes come, you may want to figure your taxcent Spouse Relief, to request any of theseof filing a joint return, you are not consid-both on a joint return and on separate
TIP
kinds of relief. Publication 971, Innocent Spouseered divorced. returns (using the filing status of married filingRelief, explains these kinds of relief and who
separately). Choose the method that gives themay qualify for them.Spouse died during the year. If your two of you the lower combined tax.spouse died during the year, you are considered Signing a joint return.For a return to be
married for the whole year for filing status pur- considered a joint return, both husband and wife
poses. must generally sign the return.How to file.If you file as married filing jointly,
you can use Form 1040 or Form 1040A. If youIf you did not remarry before the end of the Spouse died before signing. If yourhave no dependents, are under 65 and not blind,tax year, you can file a joint return for yourself spouse died before signing the return, the exec-and meet other requirements, you can file Formand your deceased spouse. For the next 2 utor or administrator must sign the return for1040EZ. If you file Form 1040 or Form 1040A,years, you may be entitled to the special benefits your spouse. If neither you nor anyone else hasshow this filing status by checking the box ondescribed later under Qualifying Widow(er) With yet been appointed as executor or administrator,line 2. Use the Married filing jointly column of theDependent Child. you can sign the return for your spouse and printTax Table, or Schedule Y–1 of the Tax RateIf you remarried before the end of the tax “Filing as surviving spouse” in the area where
Schedules, to figure your tax.year, you can file a joint return with your new you sign the return.
spouse. Your deceased spouse’s filing status is Spouse away from home. If your spouse ismarried filing separately for that year. Spouse died during the year.If your spouseaway from home, you should prepare the return,
died during the year, you are considered mar-sign it, and send it to your spouse to sign so thatMarried persons living apart.If you live
ried for the whole year and can choose marriedit can be filed on time.apart from your spouse and meet certain tests,
filing jointly as your filing status. See Spouseyou may be considered unmarried. If this ap- Injury or disease prevents signing.If yourdied during the year, under Married persons,plies to you, you can file as head of household spouse cannot sign because of injury or diseaseearlier.even though you are not divorced or legally and tells you to sign, you can sign your spouse’s
separated. If you qualify to file as head of house- name in the proper space on the return followed
hold instead of as married filing separately, yourDivorced persons. If you are divorced underby the words “By (your name), Husband (or
standard deduction will be higher. Also, your taxa final decree by the last day of the year, you areWife).” Be sure to also sign in the space pro-
considered unmarried for the whole year andmay be lower, and you may be able to claim the vided for your signature. Attach a dated state-
you cannot choose married filing jointly as yourearned income credit. See Head of Household, ment, signed by you, to the return. The
filing status.later. statement should include the form number of the
Page 5

Page 6 of 23 of Publication 501 15:05 - 20-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
return you are filing, the tax year, the reasonyou would on a joint return for the reasons listedb) The retirement savings contributions
your spouse cannot sign, and that your spouse credit,under Special Rules, later.
has agreed to your signing for him or her. c) Itemized deductions, and
How to file.If you file a separate return, youSigning as guardian of spouse.If you are d) The deduction for personal exemptions.generally report only your own income, exemp-the guardian of your spouse who is mentally
tions, credits, and deductions on your individualincompetent, you can sign the return for your 10) Your capital loss deduction limit is $1,500return. You can claim an exemption for yourspouse as guardian. (instead of $3,000 if you filed a joint re-spouse if your spouse had no gross income andturn).Spouse in combat zone. If your spouse iswas not the dependent of another person. How-unable to sign the return because he or she is 11) If your spouse itemizes deductions, youever, if your spouse had any gross income orserving in a combat zone (such as the Persian cannot claim the standard deduction. Ifwas the dependent of someone else, you cannotGulf area, Yugoslavia, or Afghanistan), or a you can claim the standard deduction,claim an exemption for him or her on your sepa-qualified hazardous duty area (such as Bosnia your basic standard deduction is half therate return.and Herzegovina, Croatia, or Macedonia), and amount allowed on a joint return.If you file as married filing separately, youyou do not have a power of attorney or other
can use Form 1040A or Form 1040. Select thisstatement, you can sign for your spouse. Attach Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs).filing status by checking the box on line 3 ofa signed statement to your return that explains You may not be able to deduct all or part of youreither form. You must also enter your spouse’sthat your spouse is serving in a combat zone. contributions to a traditional IRA if you or yoursocial security number and full name in theFor more information on special tax rules for spouse was covered by an employee retirementspaces provided. Use the Married filing sepa-persons who are serving in a combat zone, or plan at work during the year. Your deduction isrately column of the Tax Table or Schedule Y–2who are in missing status as a result of serving reduced or eliminated if your income is moreof the Tax Rate Schedules to figure your tax.in a combat zone, get Publication 3, Armed than a certain amount. This amount is muchForces’ Tax Guide. lower for married individuals who file separately
Other reasons spouse cannot sign. If and lived together at any time during the year.Special Rulesyour spouse cannot sign the joint return for any For more information, see How Much Can You
other reason, you can sign for your spouse only Deduct? in chapter 1 of Publication 590, Individ-If you choose married filing separately as your
if you are given a valid power of attorney (a legal ual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs).filing status, the following special rules apply.
document giving you permission to act for yourBecause of these special rules, you will usuallyRental activity losses.If you actively partici-spouse). Attach the power of attorney (or a copypay more tax on a separate return than if youpated in a passive rental real estate activity thatof it) to your tax return. You can use Form 2848. used another filing status that you qualify for.produced a loss, you generally can deduct the
loss from your nonpassive income up toNonresident alien or dual-status alien.A 1) Your tax rate generally will be higher than$25,000. This is called a special allowance.joint return generally cannot be filed if eitheron a joint return. However, married persons filing separate re-spouse is a nonresident alien at any time during
2) Your exemption amount for figuring the al-turns who lived together at any time during thethe tax year. However, if one spouse was a
ternative minimum tax will be half that al-year cannot claim this special allowance. Mar-nonresident alien or dual-status alien who was
lowed to a joint return filer. ried persons filing separate returns who livedmarried to a U.S. citizen or resident at the end of
apart at all times during the year are each al-the year, the spouses can choose to file a joint3) You cannot take the credit for child andlowed a $12,500 maximum special allowancereturn. If you do file a joint return, you and yourdependent care expenses in most cases,for losses from passive real estate activities.spouse are both treated as U.S. residents for theand the amount that you can exclude fromSee Rental Activities in Publication 925, Passiveentire tax year. See chapter 1 of Publication 519.income under an employer’s dependent Activity and At-Risk Rules.care assistance program is limited to
Married Filing Separately $2,500 (instead of $5,000 if you filed aCommunity property states.If you live in Ari-
joint return). zona, California, Idaho, Louisiana, Nevada,You can choose married filing separately as New Mexico, Texas, Washington, or Wisconsin4) You cannot take the earned income credit.your filing status if you are married. This filing and file separately, your income may be consid-status may benefit you if you want to be respon-5) You cannot take the exclusion or credit forered separate income or community income forsible only for your own tax or if it results in lessadoption expenses in most cases. income tax purposes. See Publication 555,tax than filing a joint return. Community Property.6) You cannot take the education credits (theIf you and your spouse do not agree to file a
Hope credit and the lifetime learningjoint return, you may have to use this filing sta-
credit), the deduction for student loan in-tus. Joint Return Afterterest, or the tuition and fees deduction.You may be able to choose head of house- Separate Returnshold filing status if you live apart from your7) You cannot exclude any interest income
spouse, meet certain tests, and are considered You can change your filing status by filing anfrom qualified U.S. savings bonds that youunmarried (defined later, under Head of House- amended return using Form 1040X.used for higher education expenses.hold). This can apply to you even if you are not If you or your spouse (or both of you) file a
8) If you lived with your spouse at any timedivorced or legally separated. If you qualify to file separate return, you generally can change to a
during the tax year:as head of household, instead of as married joint return any time within 3 years from the due
filing separately, your tax may be lower, you may date of the separate return or returns. This doesa) You cannot claim the credit for the eld-be able to claim the earned income credit and not include any extensions. A separate returnerly or the disabled.certain other credits, and your standard deduc- includes a return filed by you or your spouse
tion will be higher. The head of household filing claiming married filing separately, single, orb) You will have to include in income more
status allows you to choose the standard deduc- head of household filing status.(up to 85%) of any social security or
tion even if your spouse chooses to itemize equivalent railroad retirement benefits
deductions. See Head of Household, later, for you received, and
more information. Separate Returnsc) You cannot roll over amounts from aAfter Joint ReturnUnless you are required to file sepa- traditional IRA into a Roth IRA.
rately, you should figure your tax both Once you file a joint return, you cannot chooseways (on a joint return and on separate9) The following credits and deductions are
TIP
to file separate returns for that year after the duereturns). This way you can make sure you arereduced at income levels that are half ofdate of the return.using the filing status that results in the lowestthose for a joint return:
combined tax. However, you will generally pay Exception. A personal representative for a
a) The child tax credit,more combined tax on separate returns than decedent can change from a joint return elected
Page 6

Page 7 of 23 of Publication 501 15:05 - 20-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
by the surviving spouse to a separate return forIf you were considered married for partreal estate taxes, insurance on the home, re-
the decedent. The personal representative has of the year and lived in a community pairs, utilities, and food eaten in the home.
1 year from the due date of the return to make property state (listed earlier underCAUTION
!
the change. See Publication 559 for more infor- Married Filing Separately), special rules mayCosts you do not include.Do not include in
mation on filing income tax returns for a dece-apply in determining your income and expenses.the cost of upkeep expenses such as clothing,
dent. See Publication 555 for more information.education, medical treatment, vacations, life in-
surance, or transportation. Also, do not include
the rental value of a home you own or the value
Head of Household Nonresident alien spouse.You are consid-
of your services or those of a member of yourered unmarried for head of household purposesYou may be able to file as head of household if household.if your spouse was a nonresident alien at anyyou meet all the following requirements. time during the year and you do not choose to
treat your nonresident spouse as a resident1) You are unmarried or considered unmar- Qualifying Personalien. However, your spouse is not a qualifyingried on the last day of the year. person for head of household purposes. YouSee Table 4 to see who is a qualifying person.2) You paid more than half the cost of keep-must have another qualifying person and meetAny person not described in Table 4 is not aing up a home for the year. the other tests to be eligible to file as a head ofqualifying person.household.3) A qualifying person lived with you in the
home for more than half the year (exceptEarned income credit.Even if you are con-Home of qualifying person.Generally, the
for temporary absences, such as school).sidered unmarried for head of household pur-qualifying person must live with you for more
However, your dependent parent does notposes because you are married to a nonresidentthan half of the year.
have to live with you. See Special rule foralien, you are still considered married for pur-Special rule for parent.You may be eligi-parent, later, under Qualifying Person. A poses of the earned income credit (unless youble to file as head of household even if thefoster child must live with you all year.meet the five tests listed earlier under Consid- parent for whom you can claim an exemptionAlso, see Table 4, later. ered Unmarried). You are not entitled to thedoes not live with you. You must pay more thancredit unless you file a joint return with yourhalf the cost of keeping up a home that was theIf you qualify to file as head of house-spouse and meet other qualifications. See Publi-main home for the entire year for your father orhold, your tax rate usually will be lowercation 596 for more information. mother. You are keeping up a main home forthan the rates for single or married fil-
TIP
Choice to treat spouse as resident.You your father or mother if you pay more than halfing separately. You will also receive a higher
the cost of keeping your parent in a rest home orare considered married if you choose to treatstandard deduction than if you file as single or
home for the elderly.your spouse as a resident alien. See chapter 1married filing separately.
of Publication 519. Death or birth.You may be eligible to file as
head of household if the individual who qualifiesHow to file.If you file as head of household,
you for this filing status is born or dies during theyou can use either Form 1040A or Form 1040.Keeping Up a Home year. You must have provided more than half ofIndicate your choice of this filing status by
the cost of keeping up a home that was thechecking the box on line 4 of either form. Use theTo qualify for head of household status, you
individual’s main home for more than half of theHead of a household column of the Tax Table ormust pay more than half of the cost of keeping
year, or, if less, the period during which theSchedule Z of the Tax Rate Schedules, to figureup a home for the year. You can determine
individual lived.your tax. whether you paid more than half of the cost of
keeping up a home by using the Cost of Keeping Example. You are unmarried. Your mother,Up a Home worksheet, below. for whom you can claim an exemption, lived inConsidered Unmarried
an apartment by herself. She died on Septem-
You are considered unmarried on the last day of ber 2. The cost of the upkeep of her apartmentCost of Keeping Up a Homethe tax year if you meet all the following tests. for the year until her death was $6,000. You paid
$4,000 and your brother paid $2,000. Your
1) You file a separate return (defined, ear- brother made no other payments towards yourAmountlier, under Joint Return After Separate Re- mother’s support. Your mother had no income.You Totalturns). Because you paid more than half of the cost ofPaid Cost
keeping up your mother’s apartment from Janu-2) You paid more than half the cost of keep-Property taxes $ $ ary 1 until her death, and you can claim aning up your home for the tax year. Mortgage interest expense exemption for her, you can file as a head of
Rent3) Your spouse did not live in your home dur- household.
Utility chargesing the last 6 months of the tax year. Your Temporary absences. You and your quali-spouse is considered to live in your homeUpkeep and repairs fying person are considered to live togethereven if he or she is temporarily absent dueProperty insurance even if one or both of you are temporarily absentto special circumstances. See Temporary Food consumed from your home due to special circumstancesabsences, later. on the premises such as illness, education, business, vacation,Other household expenses4) Your home was the main home of your or military service. It must be reasonable toTotals $$child, stepchild or adopted child for more assume that the absent person will return to the
than half the year or was the main home of home after the temporary absence. You mustMinus total amount you ()your foster child for the entire year. (See continue to keep up the home during the ab-paidHome of qualifying person, later, for rules sence.
applying to a child’s birth, death, or tempo- Kidnapped child.You may be eligible to fileAmount others paid $rary absence during the year.) as head of household, even if the child who is
5) You must be able to claim an exemption your qualifying person has been kidnapped. You
for the child. However, you can still meetIf the total amount you paid is more than the amountcan claim head of household filing status if all
others paid, you meet the requirement of paying morethis test if you cannot claim the exemption the following statements are true.
than half the cost of keeping up the home.only because of one of the three situations
described under Exception on page 15. 1) The child must be presumed by law en-
The general rules for claiming an exemp- forcement authorities to have been kid-
Costs you include.Include in the cost of up-tion for a dependent are explained later napped by someone who is not a member
keep expenses such as rent, mortgage interest,under Exemptions for Dependents. of your family or the child’s family.
Page 7

Page 8 of 23 of Publication 501 15:05 - 20-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 4. Who Is a Qualifying Person for Filing as Head of Household?1
IF the person is your . . . AND . . . THEN that person is . . .
you can claim an exemption for him or a qualifying person.parent, grandparent, brother, sister,
her2stepbrother, stepsister, stepmother,
stepfather, mother-in-law,
father-in-law, half brother, halfyou cannot claim an exemption for him orNOT  a qualifying person.sister, brother-in-law, sister-in-law,herson-in-law, or daughter-in-law
he or she is related to you by blood and a qualifying person.uncle, aunt, nephew, or niece
you can claim an exemption for him or
her
2, 3
he or she is not related to you by blood3 NOT  a qualifying person.
you cannot claim an exemption for him or
her
he or she is single a qualifying person. 4child, grandchild, stepchild, or
adopted child he or she is married and you can claim an a qualifying person.
exemption for him or her2
he or she is married and you cannot claimNOT  a qualifying person.5
an exemption for him or her
the child lived with you all year and you a qualifying person.foster child6
can claim an exemption for him or her2
the child did not live with you all year, orNOT  a qualifying person.
you cannot claim an exemption for him or
her
1 A person cannot qualify more than one taxpayer to use the head of household filing status for the year.
2 If you can claim an exemption for a person only because of a multiple support agreement, that person cannot be a qualifying person.
See Multiple Support Agreement.
3 You are related by blood to an uncle or aunt if he or she is the brother or sister of your mother or father. You are related by blood to a
nephew or niece if he or she is the child or your brother or sister.
4 This child is a qualifying person even if you cannot claim an exemption for the child.
5 This child is a qualifying person if you could claim an exemption for the child except that the child’s other parent claims the exemption
under the special rules for a noncustodial parent discussed under Support Test for Child of Divorced or Separated Parents.
6 The term “foster child” is defined under Exemptions for Dependents.
2) In the year of the kidnapping, the child died. For example, if your spouse died in 2002 3) You have a child, stepchild, adopted child,
lived with you for more than half the part of and you have not remarried, you may be able toor foster child for whom you can claim an
the year before the kidnapping. use this filing status for 2003 and 2004. The exemption.
rules for using this filing status are explained in3) You would have qualified for head of 4) You paid more than half of the cost ofdetail here.household filing status if the child had not keeping up a home that was the mainThis filing status entitles you to use jointbeen kidnapped. home for you and that child for the entirereturn tax rates and the highest standard deduc-year, except for temporary absences. SeeThis treatment applies for all years until thetion amount (if you do not itemize deductions).Temporary absences and Keeping Up achild is returned. However, the last year thisThis status does not entitle you to file a jointHome,  discussed earlier under Head oftreatment can apply is the earlier of: return. Household.
1) The year there is a determination that theHow to file.If you file as a qualifying widow(er)
child is dead, or Example. John Reed’s wife died in 2001.with dependent child, you can use either Form
John has not remarried. He has continued dur-1040A or Form 1040. Indicate your filing status2) The year the child would have reached
by checking the box on line 5 of either form. Useing 2002 and 2003 to keep up a home for himselfage 18.
the Married filing jointly column of the Tax Tableand his child for whom he can claim an exemp-
or Schedule Y-1 of the Tax Rate Schedules totion. For 2001 he was entitled to file a joint return
figure your tax.Qualifying Widow(er) for himself and his deceased wife. For 2002 and
2003 he can file as a qualifying widower with aWith Dependent Child Eligibility rules.You are eligible to file yourdependent child. After 2003 he can file as head
2003 return as a qualifying widow(er) with de-If your spouse died in 2003, you can use married of household if he qualifies.
pendent child if you meet all the following tests. filing jointly as your filing status for 2003 if you
otherwise qualify to use that status. The year of Death or birth.You may be eligible to file as a1) You were entitled to file a joint return withdeath is the last year for which you can file jointly qualifying widow(er) with dependent child if theyour spouse for the year your spouse died.with your deceased spouse. See Married Filing child who qualifies you for this filing status isIt does not matter whether you actuallyJointly, earlier. born or dies during the year. You must havefiled a joint return. provided more than half of the cost of keeping upYou may be eligible to use qualifying
a home that was the child’s main home duringwidow(er) with dependent child as your filing 2) You did not remarry before the end of
the entire part of the year he or she was alive.status for 2 years following the year your spouse 2003.
Page 8

Page 9 of 23 of Publication 501 15:05 - 20-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Kidnapped child. You may be eligible to fileNonresident aliens.Generally, if you are a exemption under the rules just explained in Joint
as a qualifying widow(er) with dependent child, nonresident alien (other than a resident of Can-return and Separate return.
even if the child who qualifies you for this filing ada or Mexico, or certain residents of India, If you remarried during the year, you cannot
status has been kidnapped. You can claim quali- Japan, or Korea), you can qualify for only one take an exemption for your deceased spouse.
fying widow(er) with dependent child filing status personal exemption for yourself. You cannot If you are a surviving spouse without gross
if all the following statements are true. claim exemptions for a spouse or dependents. income and you remarry in the year your spouse
These restrictions do not apply if you are a died, you can be claimed as an exemption on
1) The child must be presumed by law en-nonresident alien married to a citizen or resident both the final separate return of your deceased
forcement authorities to have been kid-of the United States and have chosen to be spouse and the separate return of your new
napped by someone who is not a membertreated as a resident of the United States. spouse for that year. If you file a joint return with
of your family or the child’s family. For information on exemptions if you are a your new spouse, you can be claimed as an
nonresident alien, see chapter 5 in Publication exemption only on that return.2) In the year of the kidnapping, the child
519.lived with you for more than half the part of Divorced or separated spouse. If you ob-
the year before the kidnapping. tained a final decree of divorce or separateDual-status taxpayers.If you have been both
maintenance by the end of the year, you cannota nonresident alien and a resident alien in the3) You would have qualified for qualifying
take your former spouse’s exemption. This rulesame tax year, you should get Publication 519widow(er) with dependent child filing status
applies even if you provided all of your formerfor information on determining your exemptions.if the child had not been kidnapped.
spouse’s support.
As mentioned earlier, this filing statusPersonal Exemptions
is only available for 2 years following Exemptions
You are generally allowed one exemption forthe year your spouse died.CAUTION
!
for Dependentsyourself and, if you are married, one exemption
for your spouse. These are called personal ex-You are allowed one exemption for each person
emptions. you can claim as a dependent.
To claim the exemption for a dependent, youExemptions must meet all five of the dependency tests dis-
Your Own Exemption cussed later. You can claim an exemption forExemptions reduce your taxable income. Gen- your dependent even if your dependent files aYou can take one exemption for yourself unlesserally, you can deduct $3,050 for each exemp- return.you can be claimed as a dependent by anothertion you claim in 2003. If you are entitled to two
taxpayer.exemptions for 2003, you would deduct $6,100 If you are entitled to claim an exemp-
($3,050 × 2). But you may lose the benefit of part tion for your dependent, that depen-Single persons.If another taxpayer is entitledor all of your exemptions if your adjusted gross dent cannot claim his or her personalCAUTION
!
to claim you as a dependent, you cannot take anincome is above a certain amount. See exemption.exemption for yourself. This is true even if thePhaseout of Exemptions, later. other taxpayer does not actually claim your ex-Kidnapped child. You may be eligible toYou usually can claim exemptions for your-emption. claim the exemption for a child even if the childself, your spouse, and each person you can
has been kidnapped. Both of the following state-claim as a dependent. Married persons. If you file a joint return, you
ments must be true.can take your own exemption. If you file a sepa-
Types of exemptions.There are two types ofrate return, you can take your own exemption1) The child must be presumed by law en-exemptions: personal exemptions and exemp-only if another taxpayer is not entitled to claimforcement authorities to have been kid-tions for dependents. While each is worth theyou as a dependent. napped by someone who is not a membersame amount ($3,050 for 2003), different rules,
of your family or the child’s family.discussed later, apply to each type.
Your Spouse’s Exemption 2) The child must have qualified as your de-Who cannot claim a personal exemption.If pendent for the part of the year before theyou are entitled to claim an exemption for aYour spouse is never considered your depen- kidnapping.dependent (such as your child), that dependentdent. You may be able to take one exemption for
If both statements are true, the child iscannot claim a personal exemption on his or heryour spouse only because you are married.
treated as your dependent and you qualify toown tax return. Joint return.On a joint return, you can claimclaim the exemption.
one exemption for yourself and one for yourHow to claim exemptions.How you claim an This treatment applies for all years until the
spouse.exemption on your tax return depends on which child is returned. However, the last year this
form you file. treatment can apply is the earlier of:Separate return.If you file a separate return,
you can claim the exemption for your spouseForm 1040EZ filers. If you file Form 1) The year there is a determination that theonly if your spouse had no gross income, is not1040EZ, the exemption amount is combined child is dead, orfiling a return, and was not the dependent ofwith the standard deduction and entered on line
2) The year the child would have reachedanother taxpayer. This is true even if the other5.
age 18.taxpayer does not actually claim your spouse’s
Form 1040A filers.If you file Form 1040A,exemption. This is also true if your spouse is a
complete lines 6a through 6d. The total number Child born alive.If your child was born alivenonresident alien.
of exemptions you can claim is the total in the during the year, and the dependency tests areHead of household. If you qualify for headbox on line 6d. Also complete line 26 by multiply- met, you can claim the exemption. This is trueof household filing status because you are con-ing the number in the box on line 6d by $3,050. even if the child lived only for a moment. State orsidered unmarried, you can claim an exemptionlocal law must treat the child as having beenForm 1040 filers.If you file Form 1040,for your spouse if the conditions described in theborn alive. There must be proof of a live birthcomplete lines 6a through 6d. On line 39, multi-preceding paragraph are satisfied. shown by an official document, such as a birthply the total exemptions shown in the box on lineTo claim the exemption for your spouse,certificate.6d by $3,050 and enter the result. If your ad-check the box on line 6b of Form 1040 or Form
justed gross income is more than $104,625, see1040A and enter the name of your spouse in theStillborn child.You cannot claim an exemp-
Phaseout of Exemptions, later. space to the right of the box. Enter the SSN or tion for a stillborn child.
ITIN of your spouse in the space provided at theU.S. citizen or resident.If you are a U.S. Death of dependent. If your dependent diedtop of Form 1040 or Form 1040A.citizen or resident, or a resident of Canada or during the year and otherwise met the depen-
Mexico, you may qualify for any of the exemp-Death of spouse. If your spouse died during dency tests, you can claim the exemption for
tions discussed here. the year, you can generally claim your spouse’s your dependent.
Page 9

Page 10 of 23 of Publication 501 15:05 - 20-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure A. Can You Claim an Exemption for a Dependent?
Was the person either a member of your household for the entire tax
year or related to you? (See Member of Household or Relationship Test. )
You cannot
claim an
exemption
for this
person.
You can
claim an
exemption
for this
person.
5
Start Here
No
Yes
No
Yes
/H17076
/H17075
/H17074
/H17074
/H17075 Was the person a U.S. citizen or resident, or a resident of Canada or
Mexico, for any part of the tax year?
1
Did the person file a joint return for the year?
2
Did you provide more than half the person’s total support for the
year? (If you are a divorced or separated parent of the person, see
Support Test for Child of Divorced or Separated Parents. )
3
Did the person have gross income of $3,050 or more during the tax
year?
4
Was the person your child?
Was your child under 19 at the end of the year?
Was your child under 24 at the end of the year and a full-time
student for some part of each of five months during the year? (See
Student under age 24 .)
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
/H17074
No
No
No
No
/H17075
/H17075
Yes
1
If the person was your legally adopted child and lived in your home as a member of your household for the entire tax year, answ er “yes” to this question.
2
If neither the person nor the person’s spouse is required to file a return, but they file a joint return only to claim a refund  of tax withheld, answer “no” to this
question.
3
Answer “yes” to this question if you meet the multiple support requirements under Multiple Support Agreement.
/H17075
4
Gross income for this purpose does not include income received by a permanently disabled individual at a sheltered workshop. (S ee Disabled dependents.)
5
If your adjusted gross income is more than $104,625, see Table 6, Deduction for Exemptions Worksheet.
Example. Your dependent mother died onDependency Tests 1. Member of Household or
January 15. The five dependency tests are met.  Relationship Test
The following five tests must be met for you toYou can claim the exemption for her on your
claim an exemption for a dependent. To meet this test, a person must either:return.
Housekeepers, maids, or servants.If these 1. Member of Household or Relationship Test.1) Live with you for the entire year as a mem-
people work for you, you cannot claim exemp- ber of your household, or2. Citizen or Resident Test.tions for them. 2) Be related to you in one of the ways listed3. Joint Return Test.Child tax credit.You may be entitled to a child later under Relatives who do not have to
tax credit for each of your qualifying children for4. Gross Income Test. live with you.
whom you can claim an exemption. For more5. Support Test. If at any time during the year the person wasinformation, see the instructions in your tax your spouse, that person cannot be your depen-forms package. dent. However, see Personal Exemptions, ear-
lier.
Temporary absences. A person lives with
you as a member of your household even if
Page 10

Page 11 of 23 of Publication 501 15:05 - 20-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
either (or both) of you are temporarily absentFoster child.A foster child must live with youExample. You supported your daughter for
due to special circumstances. Temporary ab- as a member of your household for the entire the entire year while her husband was in the
sences due to special circumstances include year to qualify as your dependent. For this test, a Armed Forces. The couple files a joint return.
absences because of illness, education, busi- foster child is one who is in your care that you Even though all the other tests are met, you
ness, vacation, or military service. care for as your own child. It does not matter cannot take an exemption for your daughter.
how the child became a member of the house-If the person is placed in a nursing home for Exception. The joint return test does not applyhold.an indefinite period of time to receive constant if a joint return is filed by the dependent and hismedical care, the absence is considered tempo- or her spouse merely as a claim for refund andCousin. You can claim an exemption for yourrary. no tax liability would exist for either spouse oncousin only if he or she lives with you as a
separate returns.member of your household for the entire year. ADeath or birth.A person who died during the
cousin is a descendant of a brother or sister ofyear, but was a member of your household until Example. Your son and his wife each hadyour father or mother.death, will meet the member of household test. less than $3,000 of wages and no unearnedThe same is true for a child who was born during income. Neither is required to file a tax return.Joint return.If you file a joint return, you dothe year and was a member of your household Taxes were taken out of their pay, so they filed anot need to show that a person is related to bothfor the rest of the year. The test is also met if a joint return to get a refund. You are allowed toyou and your spouse. You also do not need tochild would have been a member except for any take exemptions for your son andshow that a person is related to the spouse whorequired hospital stay following birth. daughter-in-law if the other dependency testsprovides support.
are met, even though they filed a joint return.For example, your spouse’s uncle who re-Local law violated.A person does not meet ceives more than half of his support from youthe member of household test if at any timemay be your dependent, even though he doesduring your tax year the relationship between 4. Gross Income Testnot live with you. However, if you and youryou and that person violates local law. spouse file separate returns, your spouse’s Generally, you cannot take an exemption for auncle can be your dependent only if he is aExample. Your girlfriend lived with you as a dependent if that person had gross income ofmember of your household and lives with you formember of your household for the full year. $3,050 or more for 2003. This test does notyour entire tax year.However, your relationship with her violated the apply if the person is your child and is either:
laws of the state where you live, because she
was married to someone else. Therefore, she 1) Under age 19 at the end of the year, or2. Citizen or Resident Testdoes not meet this test and you cannot claim her 2) A student under age 24 at the end of theas a dependent. You cannot claim an exemption for a dependentyear.
unless that person is a U.S. citizen or resident,Relatives who do not have to live with you. The exceptions for children under age 19 andor a resident of Canada or Mexico, for some partA person related to you in any of the following students under age 24 are discussed in detailof the calendar year in which your tax yearways does not have to live with you for the entire later.begins. However, there is an exception for cer-year as a member of your household to meet If you file on a fiscal year basis, the grosstain adopted children, as explained next.this test. income test applies to the calendar year in which
your fiscal year begins.Children’s place of residence.Children usu-• Your child, grandchild, great grandchild,ally are citizens or residents of the country ofetc. (a legally adopted child is considered Gross income defined.All income in the formtheir parents.your child). of money, property, and services that is notIf you were a U.S. citizen when your childexempt from tax is gross income.• Your stepchild. was born, the child may be a U.S. citizen al-In a manufacturing, merchandising, or min-though the other parent was a nonresident alien• Your brother, sister, half brother, half sis- ing business, gross income is the total net salesand the child was born in a foreign country. If so,ter, stepbrother, or stepsister. minus the cost of goods sold, plus any miscella-and the other dependency tests are met, youneous income from the business.• Your parent, grandparent, or other directcan take the exemption. It does not matter if theGross receipts from rental property are grossancestor, but not foster parent. child lives abroad with the nonresident alienincome. Do not deduct taxes, repairs, etc., toparent.• Your stepfather or stepmother. determine the gross income from rental prop-
erty.Adopted child.If you are a U.S. citizen who• A brother or sister of your father or Gross income includes a partner’s share ofhas legally adopted a child who is not a U.S.mother. the gross (not a share of the net) partnershipcitizen or resident, and the other dependency
• A son or daughter of your brother or sister. income. tests are met, you can take the exemption if your
Gross income also includes all unemploy-home is the child’s main home and the child is a• Your father-in-law, mother-in-law, ment compensation and certain scholarship andmember of your household for your entire taxson-in-law, daughter-in-law, fellowship grants. Scholarships received by de-year.brother-in-law, or sister-in-law. gree candidates that are used for tuition, fees,
Foreign students’ place of residence.For-Any of these relationships that were established supplies, books, and equipment required for
eign students brought to this country under aby marriage are not ended by death or divorce. particular courses may not be included in gross
qualified international education exchange pro-income. For more information about scholar-
gram and placed in American homes for a tem-Adoption. Even if your adoption of a child is ships, see chapter 1 of Publication 970, Tax
porary period generally are not U.S. residentsnot yet final, the child is considered to be your Benefits for Education.
and do not meet the citizen or resident test. Youchild if he or she was placed with you for legal Tax-exempt income, such as certain social
cannot claim an exemption for them. However, ifadoption by an authorized placement agency. security payments, is not included in gross in-
you provided a home for a foreign student, youThe child must also be a member of your house- come.
may be able to take a charitable contributionhold, but does not have to be a member of your
Disabled dependents. For this gross in-deduction. See Expenses Paid for Student Liv-household for the entire year.
come test, gross income does not include in-ing With You in Publication 526, Charitable Con-If the child was not placed with you by an come received by a permanently and totallytributions.authorized placement agency, the child will disabled individual for services performed at ameet this test only if he or she was a member of sheltered workshop. The availability of medicalyour household for your entire tax year. care must be the main reason the individual is at3. Joint Return Test
Authorized placement agency.An author- the workshop. Also, the income must come
ized placement agency includes any person or Even if the other dependency tests are met, you solely from activities at the workshop that are
court authorized by state law to place children are generally not allowed an exemption for your incident to this medical care. A sheltered work-
for legal adoption. dependent if he or she files a joint return. shop is a school operated by certain tax-exempt
Page 11

Page 12 of 23 of Publication 501 15:05 - 20-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 5. Worksheet for Determining Support
(Keep for Your Records)
Funds Belonging to the Person You Supported
1) Total funds belonging to the person you supported, including income received (taxable and
nontaxable) and amounts borrowed during the year, plus the amount in savings and other
accounts at the beginning of the year $
2) Amount used for support $
3) Amount used for other purposes $
4) Amount in savings and other accounts at the end of the year $
(The total of lines 2, 3, and 4 should equal line 1) $
Expenses for Entire Household (where the person you supported lived)
5) Lodging (complete 5a or 5b)
a) Rent paid $
b) If not rented, show fair rental value of home. If the person you supported owned the
home, include this amount in line 19. $
6) Food $
7) Utilities (heat, light, water, etc. not included in line 5a or 5b) $
8) Repairs (not included in line 5a or 5b) $
9) Other. Do not include expenses of maintaining home, such as mortgage interest, real estate
taxes, and insurance. $
10) Total household expenses (add lines 5 through 9) $
11) Total number of persons who lived in household
Expenses for the Person You Supported
12) Each person’s part of household expenses (line 10 divided by line 11) $
13) Clothing $
14) Education $
15) Medical, dental $
16) Travel, recreation $
17) Other (specify)
$
18) Total cost of support for the year (add lines 12 through 17) $
Did You Provide More Than Half?
19) Amount the person provided for own support (line 2, plus line 5b if the person you supported
owned the home) $
20) Amount others provided for the person’s support. Include amounts provided by state, local,
and other welfare societies or agencies. Do not include any amounts included on line 1. $
21) Amount you provided for the person’s support (line 18 minus lines 19 and 20) $
22) 50% of line 18 $
Is line 21 more than line 22?
Yes. You meet the support test for the person. If the other dependency tests are met, you may claim an exemption
for the person.
No. You do not meet the support test for the person. You cannot claim an exemption for the person unless you can
do so under a multiple support agreement. See Multiple Support Agreement later in this publication.
Page 12

Page 13 of 23 of Publication 501 15:05 - 20-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
organizations, or by a state, a U.S. possession, dependency allotments in figuring support. The5. Support Test
allotment of pay and the tax-exempt basic allow-a political subdivision of a state or possession,
Generally, you must provide more than half of aance for quarters are both considered as pro-the United States, or the District of Columbia,
person’s total support during the calendar yearvided by you for support.that provides special instruction or training de-
to meet the support test. However, there aresigned to alleviate the disability of the individual. Tax-exempt income. In figuring a person’sspecial rules that apply in the following two situa-
total support, include tax-exempt income, sav-tions.Child defined.For purposes of the gross in-
ings, and borrowed amounts used to supportcome test, your child is your son, stepson,1) Two or more persons provide support, butthat person. Tax-exempt income includes cer-daughter, stepdaughter, a legally adopted child,no one person provides more than half oftain social security benefits, welfare benefits,or a child who was placed with you by an author-a person’s total support. See Multiple Sup- nontaxable life insurance proceeds, Armedized placement agency for your legal adoption.port Agreement, later. Forces family allotments, nontaxable pensions,A foster child who was a member of your house- and tax-exempt interest.hold for your entire tax year is also considered2) The person supported is the child of di-
your child. vorced or separated parents. See Support Example 1. You provide $4,000 towardTest for Child of Divorced or Separatedyour mother’s support during the year. She hasChild under age 19.If your child is under 19 atParents, later. earned income of $600, nontaxable social se-the end of the year, the gross income test does curity benefit payments of $4,800, and tax-ex-not apply. Your child can have any amount ofHow to determine if test is met.You figure empt interest of $200. She uses all these for herincome and you can still claim an exemption ifwhether you have provided more than half of asupport. You cannot claim an exemption for yourthe other dependency tests, including the sup-person’s total support by comparing the amountmother because the $4,000 you provide is notport test, are met. you contributed to that person’s support with themore than half of her total support of $9,600.entire amount of support that person receivedExample. Marie, 18, earned $4,000. Her fa-from all sources. This includes support the per-Example 2. Your daughter takes out a stu-ther provided more than half her support. Be-son provided from his or her own funds. dent loan of $2,500 and uses it to pay her col-cause Marie is under 19, the gross income testYou may find Table 5 helpful in figuringlege tuition. She is personally responsible for thedoes not apply. If the other dependency testswhether you provided more than half of a loan. You provide $2,000 toward her total sup-were met, Marie’s father can claim an exemptionperson’s support. port. You cannot claim an exemption for yourfor her. daughter because you provide less than half ofPerson’s own funds not used for support.
her support.Student under age 24.The gross income test A person’s own funds are not support unless
does not apply if your child is a student who isthey are actually spent for support. Social security benefit payments.If a
under age 24 at the end of the calendar year. husband and wife each receive payments that
Example. Your mother received $2,400 inThe other dependency tests must still be met. are paid by one check made out to both of them,
social security benefits and $300 in interest. Shehalf of the total paid is considered to be for theStudent defined.To qualify as a student,paid $2,000 for lodging and $400 for recreation.support of each spouse, unless they can showyour child must be, during some part of each of 5She put $300 in a savings account. otherwise.calendar months during the calendar year (notEven though your mother received a total ofIf a child receives social security benefits andnecessarily consecutive): $2,700, she spent only $2,400 for her own sup-uses them toward his or her own support, the
port. If you spent more than $2,400 for her sup-payments are considered as provided by the1) A full-time student at a school that has aport and no other support was received, youchild.regular teaching staff, course of study, andhave provided more than half of her support.regularly enrolled body of students in at- Support provided by the state (welfare,tendance, or Child’s wages used for own support.You food stamps, housing, etc.).Benefits pro-
cannot include in your contribution to yourvided by the state to a needy person generally2) A student taking a full-time, on-farm train-
child’s support any support that is paid for by theare considered support provided by the state.ing course given by a school described in
child with the child’s own wages, even if you paidHowever, payments based on the needs of the(1) above or a state, county, or local gov-
the wages. recipient will not be considered as used by thaternment.
individual entirely for his or her own support if itYear support is provided.The year you pro-is shown that part of the payments were notFull-time student defined.A full-time stu-vide the support is the year you pay for it, even ifused for that purpose.dent is a person who is enrolled for the numberyou do so with borrowed money that you repayof hours or courses the school considers to bein a later year. Foster care payments and expenses.Pay-full-time attendance. If you use a fiscal year to report your income,ments you receive for the support of a foster
you must provide more than half of theSchool defined.The term “school” includes child from a child placement agency are consid-
dependent’s support for the calendar year inelementary schools, junior and senior high ered support provided by the agency. Similarly,
which your fiscal year begins.schools, colleges, universities, and technical, payments you receive for the support of a foster
trade, and mechanical schools. It does not in- child from a state or county are considered sup-Armed Forces dependency allotments.Theclude on-the-job training courses, correspond- port provided by the state or county.part of the allotment contributed by the govern-ence schools, and night schools. If you are not in the trade or business ofment and the part taken out of your military payproviding foster care and your unreimbursedare both considered provided by you in figuringExample. James, 22, attends college as a out-of-pocket expenses in caring for a fosterwhether you provide more than half of the sup-full-time student. During the summer, James child were mainly to benefit an organizationport. If your allotment is used to support personsearned $4,000. If the other dependency tests qualified to receive deductible charitable contri-other than those you name, you can take theare met, his parents can take the exemption for butions, the expenses are deductible as charita-exemptions for them if they otherwise qualify.James. ble contributions, but are not considered support
you provided. For more information about theVocational high school students.People Example. You are in the Armed Forces. deduction for charitable contributions, see Publi-who work on “co-op” jobs in private industry as aYou authorize an allotment for your widowedcation 526. If your unreimbursed expenses arepart of the school’s prescribed course of class-mother that she uses to support herself and yournot deductible as charitable contributions, theyroom and practical training are consideredsister. If the allotment provides more than half ofare considered support you provided.full-time students. their support, you can take an exemption forIf you are in the trade or business of provid-each of them, if they otherwise qualify, evenNight school. Your child is not a full-time ing foster care, your unreimbursed expensesthough you authorize the allotment only for yourstudent while attending school only at night. are not considered support provided by you.mother.However, full-time attendance at a school can
include some attendance at night as part of aTax-exempt military quarters allowances. Example.  Lauren, a foster child, lived with
full-time course of study. These allowances are treated the same way asMr. and Mrs. Smith. The Smiths cared for
Page 13

Page 14 of 23 of Publication 501 15:05 - 20-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Lauren because they wanted to adopt her, not bills amount to $1,200. Your mother has hospital or she owns is considered support contributed
and medical expenses of $600, which you pay by that person.as a trade or business or to benefit the agency
during the year. Figure your parents’ total sup-that placed her in their home. The Smiths’ un- Living with someone rent free.If you liveport as follows:reimbursed expenses are not deductible as with a person rent free in his or her home, youcharitable contributions, but are considered sup- must reduce the amount you provide for supportport they provided for Lauren. Support provided Father Mother by the fair rental value of lodging he or she
provides you.Fair rental value of lodging $1,000 $1,000Home for the aged. If you make a lump-sum
advance payment to a home for the aged to take Property. Property provided as support isPension spent for their
care of your relative for life and the payment is measured by its fair market value. Fair marketsupport ............. 2,100 2,100
based on that person’s life expectancy, the value is the price that property would sell for onShare of food (1/6 ofamount of support you provide each year is the the open market. It is the price that would be$6,000) ............. 1,000 1,000lump-sum payment divided by the relative’s life agreed upon between a willing buyer and a
Medical expenses forexpectancy. The amount of support you provide willing seller, with neither being required to act,
mother.............. 6 0 0also includes any other amounts that you pro- and both having reasonable knowledge of the
vided during the year. relevant facts.Parents’ total support. . . $4,100 $4,700
Capital expenses. Capital items, such asYou must apply the support test separatelyfurniture, appliances, and cars, that are boughtTotal Support to each parent. You provide $2,000 ($1,000for a person during the year can be included inlodging, $1,000 food) of your father’s total sup-total support under certain circumstances.To figure if you provided more than half of theport of $4,100 — less than half. You provideThe following examples show when a capitalsupport of a person, you must first determine the$2,600 to your mother ($1,000 lodging, $1,000item is or is not support.total support provided for that person. Total sup-food, $600 medical) — more than half of her
port includes amounts spent to provide food,total support of $4,700. You meet the supportExample 1. You buy a $200 power lawnlodging, clothing, education, medical and dentaltest for your mother, but not your father. Heatmower for your 13-year-old child. The child iscare, recreation, transportation, and similar ne-and utility costs are included in the fair rentalgiven the duty of keeping the lawn trimmed.cessities. value of the lodging, so these are not consideredBecause a lawn mower is ordinarily an item youGenerally, the amount of an item of supportseparately. buy for personal and family reasons that bene-is the amount of the expense incurred in provid- fits all members of the household, you cannoting that item. For lodging, the amount of supportLodging. If you provide a person with lodging,include the cost of the lawn mower in the supportis the fair rental value of the lodging. you are considered to provide support equal toof your child.the fair rental value of the room, apartment,Expenses that are not directly related to any
house, or other shelter in which the person lives.one member of a household, such as the cost of Example 2. You buy a $150 television setFair rental value includes a reasonable allow-food for the household, must be divided among as a birthday present for your 12-year-old child.ance for the use of furniture and appliances, andthe members of the household. The television set is placed in your child’s bed-for heat and other utilities that are provided.room. You can include the cost of the televisionExample 1. Grace Brown, mother of Mary Fair rental value defined.This is the set in the support of your child.Miller, lives with Frank and Mary Miller and theiramount you could reasonably expect to receivetwo children. Grace gets social security benefitsfrom a stranger for the same kind of lodging. It isExample 3. You pay $5,000 for a car andof $2,400, which she spends for clothing, trans-used instead of actual expenses such as rent orregister it in your name. You and yourportation, and recreation. Grace has no othertaxes, interest, depreciation, paint, insurance,17-year-old daughter use the car equally. Be-income. Frank and Mary’s total food expense forutilities, cost of furniture and appliances, etc. Incause you own the car and do not give it to yourthe household is $5,200. They pay Grace’ssome cases, fair rental value may be equal todaughter but merely let her use it, you cannotmedical and drug expenses of $1,200. The fairthe rent paid. include the cost of the car in your daughter’srental value of the lodging provided for Grace is total support. However, you can include in yourIf you provide the total lodging, the amount of$1,800 a year, based on the cost of similar daughter’s support your out-of-pocket expensessupport you provide is the fair rental value of therooming facilities. Figure Grace’s total support of operating the car for her benefit.room the person uses, or a share of the fairas follows: rental value of the entire dwelling if the person
Example 4. Your 17-year-old son, usinghas use of your entire home. If you do not pro-
Fair rental value of lodging...... $  1,800 personal funds, buys a car for $4,500. You pro-vide the total lodging, the total fair rental value
vide all the rest of your son’s support — $4,000.must be divided depending on how much of theClothing, transportation and Since the car is bought and owned by your son,total lodging you provide. If you provide only arecreation.................. 2,400 the car’s fair market value ($4,500) must bepart and the person supplies the rest, the fairMedical expenses............ 1,200 included in his support. The $4,000 support yourental value must be divided between both of
provide is less than half of his total support ofyou according to the amount each provides.Share of food (1/5 of $5,200)..... 1,040
$8,500. You cannot claim an exemption for yourTotal support............... $6,440 son.Example. Your parents live rent free in a
house you own. It has a fair rental value ofMedical insurance premiums.Medical insur-Because the support Frank and Mary pro-$5,400 a year furnished, which includes a fairance premiums you pay, including premiums forvide ($1,800 lodging + $1,200 medical ex-rental value of $3,600 for the house and $1,800supplementary Medicare coverage, are in-penses + $1,040 food = $4,040) is more thanfor the furniture. This does not include heat andcluded in the support you provide.half of Grace’s $6,440 total support, and Graceutilities. The house is completely furnished withmeets the other dependency tests, they can Medical insurance benefits.Medical in-furniture belonging to your parents. You payclaim an exemption for her. surance benefits, including basic and supple-$600 for their utility bills. Utilities are not usually
mentary Medicare benefits, are not part ofincluded in rent for houses in the area whereExample 2. Your parents live with you, your support.your parents live. Therefore, you consider thespouse, and your two children in a house youtotal fair rental value of the lodging to be $6,000own. The fair rental value of your parents’ share Tuition payments and allowances under the($3,600 fair rental value of the unfurnishedof the lodging is $2,000 a year, which includes GI Bill.Amounts veterans receive under thehouse, $1,800 allowance for the furnishings pro-furnishings and utilities. Your father receives a GI Bill for tuition payments and allowances whilevided by your parents, and $600 cost of utilities)nontaxable pension of $4,200, which he spends they attend school are included in total support.of which you are considered to provide $4,200equally between your mother and himself for($3,600 + $600).items of support such as clothing, transporta- Example. During the year, your son re-
tion, and recreation. Your total food expense forPerson living in his or her own home.The ceives $2,200 from the government under the GI
the household is $6,000. Your heat and utilitytotal fair rental value of a person’s home that he Bill. He uses this amount for his education. You
Page 14

Page 15 of 23 of Publication 501 15:05 - 20-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
provide the rest of his support — $2,000. Be-Example 2. You and your brother each pro-Example 1. Under the terms of your di-
cause GI benefits are included in total support, vorce, you have custody of your child for 10vide 20% of your mother’s support for the year.
your son is not your dependent. months of the year. Your former spouse hasThe remaining 60% of her support is provided
custody for the other 2 months. You and yourequally by two persons who are not related to
Child care expenses.If you pay someone to former spouse provide the child’s total support.her. She does not live with them. Because more
provide child care or disabled dependent care, You are considered to have provided more thanthan half of her support is provided by persons
you can include these payments in the amount half of the support of the child. However, seewho cannot claim an exemption for her, no one
you provided for the support of your child or Exception, later.can take the exemption.
disabled dependent, even if you claim a credit
for them. For information on the credit, see Pub- Example 2. You and your former spouseExample 3. Your father lives with you and
lication 503, Child and Dependent Care Ex- provided your child’s total support for 2003. Forreceives 25% of his support from social security,
penses. the first 8 months of the year, you had custody of40% from you, 24% from his brother, and 11%
your child under your 1995 divorce decree (thefrom a friend. Either you or your uncle can take
Other support items. Other items may be most recent decree at the time). On August 31,the exemption for your father if the other signs a
considered as support depending on the facts in 2003, a new custody decree granted custody tostatement agreeing not to. The one who takes
each case. your former spouse. Because you had custodythe exemption must attach Form 2120, or a
for the greater part of the year, you are consid-similar declaration, to his return and must keep
ered to have provided more than half of yourfor his records the signed statement from theDo Not Include child’s support, unless the exception describedone agreeing not to take the exemption.in Total Support next applies.
The following items are not included in total Exception. The noncustodial parent will beSupport Test for Child ofsupport. treated as providing more than half of the child’sDivorced or Separated Parents
support if:1) Federal, state, and local income taxes paidThe support test for a child of divorced or sepa-by persons from their own income. 1) The custodial parent signs a written decla-rated parents is based on the special rules ex-
ration, discussed later, that he or she will2) Social security and Medicare taxes paid byplained here and shown in Figure B. However,
not claim the exemption for the child, andpersons from their own income. these special rules apply only if all the following
the noncustodial parent attaches this writ-are true. 3) Life insurance premiums. ten declaration to his or her return,
1) The parents are divorced or legally sepa-4) Funeral expenses. 2) The custodial parent signed a decree orrated under a decree of divorce or sepa- agreement executed after 1984 stating5) Scholarships received by your child if yourrate maintenance, or separated under a that he or she will not claim the exemptionchild is a full-time student. written separation agreement, or lived for the child and that the noncustodial par-apart at all times during the last 6 months6) Survivors’ and Dependents’ Educational ent can claim an exemption for the childof the calendar year.Assistance payments used for the support without regard to any condition such asof the child who receives them. payment of support, and the noncustodial2) One or both parents provide more than
parent attaches to his or her return thehalf of the child’s total support for the cal-
documentation described later under Di-endar year.
vorce decree or separation agreementMultiple Support Agreement 3) One or both parents have custody of the made after 1984, orchild for more than half of the calendarSometimes no one provides more than half of
3) A decree or agreement executed beforeyear.the support of a person. Instead, two or more
1985 provides that the noncustodial parentpersons, each of whom would be able to take“Child” is defined earlier under 4. Gross In- is entitled to the exemption, and he or shethe exemption but for the support test, togethercome Test. provides at least $600 for the child’s sup-provide more than half of the person’s support.This discussion does not apply if the supportport during the year, unless the pre-1985When this happens, you can agree that anyof the child is determined under a multiple sup-decree or agreement is modified afterone of you who individually provides more thanport agreement, discussed earlier. 1984 to specify that this provision will not10% of the person’s support, but only one, can apply.claim an exemption for that person. Each of theGeneral rule.The parent who has custody of
others must sign a statement agreeing not tothe child for the greater part of the year (the
claim the exemption for that year. The personcustodial parent) is generally treated as theNoncustodial parent. The noncustodialwho claims the exemption must keep these parent who provides more than half of the child’sparent is the parent who has custody of the childsigned statements for his or her records. A multi-support. It does not matter whether the custodialfor the shorter part of the year or who does notple support declaration identifying each of theparent actually provided more than half of thehave custody at all.others who agreed not to claim the exemptionsupport.
must be attached to the return of the person Written declaration. The custodial parentCustody. Custody is usually determined byclaiming the exemption. Form 2120 , Multiple may use either Form 8332 or a similar state-the terms of the most recent decree of divorce orSupport Declaration, can be used for this pur- ment (containing the information required by theseparate maintenance, or a later custody de-pose. form) to make the written declaration to releasecree. If there is no decree, use the written sepa-the exemption to the noncustodial parent. Theration agreement. If neither a decree norExample 1. You, your sister, and your two noncustodial parent must attach the form oragreement establishes custody, then the parentbrothers provide the entire support of your statement to his or her tax return.who has the physical custody of the child for themother for the year. You provide 45%, your The exemption can be released for a singlegreater part of the year is considered to havesister 35%, and your two brothers each provide year, for a number of specified years (for exam-custody of the child. This also applies if the10%. Either you or your sister can claim an ple, alternate years), or for all future years, asvalidity of a decree or agreement awarding cus-exemption for your mother. The other must sign specified in the declaration. If the exemption istody is uncertain because of legal proceedingsa statement agreeing not to take an exemption released for more than one year, the originalpending on the last day of the calendar year.for your mother. The one who claims the exemp- release must be attached to the return of theIf the parents are divorced or separated dur-tion must attach Form 2120, or a similar declara- noncustodial parent for the first year, and a copying the year and had joint custody of the childtion, to his or her return and must keep the must be attached for each later year.before the separation, the parent who has cus-statement signed by the other for his or her
tody for the greater part of the rest of the year isrecords. Because neither brother provides more
considered to have custody of the child for theDivorce decree or separation agreementthan 10% of the support, neither can take the
tax year. made after 1984. If your divorce decree orexemption and neither has to sign a statement.
Page 15

Page 16 of 23 of Publication 501 15:05 - 20-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Figure B. Support Test for Children of Divorced or Separated Parents
Are the parents divorced or
legally separated, separated
under a written agreement, or
did they live apart the last 6
months of the year?
Did the custodial parent sign
a decree or agreement
executed after 1984 releasing
the exemption?
Start Here
No
/H17075
/H17074
/H17075
Did one or both parents
furnish over half of the
child’s total support?
Is the child in the custody
of one or both parents for
more than half of the year?
Did the custodial parent sign a
Form 8332 or similar statement
releasing the exemption?
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
Yes
Yes
Yes
/H17075
/H17075
No
No
/H17075
/H17075
YesDid any one person
provide over half of the
child’s total support?
The person who provided
over half of the child’s
support meets the support
test.
See Multiple Support
Agreement.
Is there a decree or
agreement executed
before 1985 (and not
modified after 1984) that
entitles the noncustodial
parent to the exemption?
Did the noncustodial
parent provide at least
$600 of the child’s
support during the year?
The noncustodial parent
meets the support test.
The custodial parent meets
the support test.
No
/H17075
/H17075
/H17075
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
/H17074
/H17074
/H17074
No
Yes
Is the noncustodial parent
attaching the signed form or
other required documentation
to his or her return?
/H17074
Yes
/H17074
No
/H17075
Yes
Page 16

Page 17 of 23 of Publication 501 15:05 - 20-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example. You are divorced. During the en-
tire year you and your child live with your mother
in a house she owns. The fair rental value of the
lodging provided by your mother for your child is
$3,000. The home provided by your mother is
not included in the amount of support you pro-
vide.
Remarried parent.If you remarry, the sup-
port provided by your new spouse is treated as
provided by you.
Example. You have two children from a for-
mer marriage who live with you. You have re-
married and are living in a home owned by your
new spouse. The fair rental value of the home
provided to the children by your new spouse is
treated as provided by you.
Home jointly owned. If you and your former
spouse have the right to use and live in the
home, each of you is considered to provide half
of your child’s lodging. However, if the divorce
decree gives only you the right to use and live in
the home, you are considered to provide your
child’s entire lodging. It does not matter if the
legal title to the home remains in the names of
both parents.
Parents who never married. These special
rules for divorced or separated parents also ap-
ply to parents who never married.
Phaseout of Exemptions
The amount you can claim as a deduction for
exemptions is phased out once your adjusted
gross income (AGI) goes above a certain level
Table 6. Deduction for Exemptions Worksheet
1. Is the amount on Form 1040, line 35, more than the amount shown on
line 4 below for your filing status?
● Married filing separately—$104,625
No. Stop. Multiply $3,050 by the total number of exemptions
claimed on Form 1040, line 6d, and enter the result on line 39.
Yes. Continue.
2. Multiply $3,050 by the total number of exemptions claimed on Form
1040, line 6d
3. Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 35
4. Enter the amount shown below for your filing status:
● Single—$139,500
● Head of household—$174,400
● Married filing jointly or Qualifying widow(er)
—$209,250
5. Subtract line 4 from line 3. If the result is more than
$122,500 ($61,250 if married filing separately) stop
here.
You cannot take a deduction for exemptions.
6. Divide line 5 by $2,500 ($1,250 if married filing
separately). If the result is not a whole number, round
it UP to the next higher whole number
7. Multiply line 6 by 2% (.02) and enter the result as a
decimal amount
8. Multiply line 2 by line 7
9. Deduction for exemptions. Subtract line 8 from line 2. Enter the result
here and on Form 1040, line 39
2.
3.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
4.
/H20854
for your filing status. These levels are as follows:
separation agreement was executed after 1984, If these requirements are not met, the
AGI Levelthe noncustodial parent does not have to attach noncustodial parent must attach to his
Which ReducesForm 8332 if both of the following requirements or her return Form 8332 or a similarCAUTION
!
Filing Status Exemption Amountare met. statement from the custodial parent releasing
Married filing separately . . $104,625the exemption.
1) The decree or agreement is signed by the Single.............. 139,500
custodial parent and states all of the fol- Head of household ...... 174,400Child support.All child support payments ac-
Married filing jointly..... 209,250lowing. tually received from the noncustodial parent areQualifying widow(er)..... 209,250considered used for the support of the child.a) The custodial parent will not claim the You must reduce the dollar amount of yourchild as a dependent for the year. Example. The noncustodial parent providesexemptions by 2% for each $2,500, or part of
$1,200 for the child’s support. This amount isb) The noncustodial parent can claim the $2,500 ($1,250 if you are married filing sepa-
considered support provided by the noncus-child as a dependent without regard rately), that your AGI exceeds the amount
todial parent even if the $1,200 was actuallyto any condition, such as payment of shown above for your filing status. If your AGI
spent on things other than support.support. exceeds the amount shown above by more than
$122,500 ($61,250 if married filing separately),Paid in a later year.If you fail to pay childc) The years for which the noncustodial
the amount of your deduction for exemptions issupport in the year it is due, but pay it in a laterparent, rather than the custodial parent,
reduced to zero.year, your payment of the overdue amount is notcan claim the child as a dependent.
If your AGI exceeds the level for your filingconsidered paid for the support of your child
status, use Table 6 to figure the amount of your2) The noncustodial parent attaches a copy either for the year the payment was due or for
deduction for exemptions.of the following pages of the decree or the year it is paid. It is payment of an amount you
agreement to his or her tax return. owed to the custodial parent, but it is not consid-
Social Securityered paid by you for the support of your child.
a) The cover page (write the other Numbers for Dependentsparent’s social security number on thisExample. You owed but failed to pay child
page). support last year. This year, you pay all of theYou must list the social security number (SSN)
amount owed from last year and the full amountof any person for whom you claim an exemptionb) The pages that contain the information
due for this year. Your payment of this year’sin column (2) of line 6c of your Form 1040 orshown in item (1).
child support counts as your support for thisForm 1040A.
c) The signature page with the other year, but payment of the amount owed from last If you do not list the dependent’s SSNparent’s signature and the date of theyear does not count as support either for this when required or if you list an incorrectagreement. year or for last year. SSN, the exemption may be disal-CAUTION
!
lowed.Third-party support.Support provided by a
third party for a divorced or separated parent is
not included as support provided by that parent.Note. If your dependent does not have and
However, see Remarried parent, below. cannot get an SSN, you must list the individual
Page 17

Page 18 of 23 of Publication 501 15:05 - 20-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
taxpayer identification number (ITIN) or adop- If your eye condition will never improve be-
1) You are married and filing a separate re-yond these limits, the statement should includetion taxpayer identification number (ATIN) in-
turn, and your spouse itemizes deductions,this fact. You must keep the statement in yourstead of an SSN. See Taxpayer identification
records.numbers for aliens or Taxpayer identification2) You are filing a tax return for a short tax
number for adoptees, later. If your vision can be corrected beyond theseyear because of a change in your annual
limits only by contact lenses that you can wearaccounting period, or
only briefly because of pain, infection, or ulcers,No social security number.If a person for 3) You are a nonresident or dual-status alienyou can take the higher standard deduction forwhom you expect to claim an exemption on yourduring the year. You are considered ablindness if you otherwise qualify.return does not have an SSN, either you or thatdual-status alien if you were both a nonresi-person should apply for an SSN as soon as dent and resident alien during the year.possible by filing Form SS–5, Application for a
If you are a nonresident alien who is mar-Spouse 65 or Older or BlindSocial Security Card, with the Social Security
ried to a U.S. citizen or resident at the end ofAdministration (SSA). Information about apply- You can take the higher standard deduction ifthe year, you can choose to be treated as aing for an SSN and Form SS–5 is available at your spouse is age 65 or older or blind and:U.S. resident. (See Publication 519.) If youyour local SSA office.
make this choice, you can take the standardIt usually takes about 2 weeks to get an SSN. 1) You file a joint return, ordeduction.If you do not have a required SSN by the filing
2) You file a separate return and can claimdue date, you can file Form 4868, Application for If an exemption for you can be claimedan exemption for your spouse becauseAutomatic Extension of Time To File U.S. Indi- on another person’s return (such as your spouse had no gross income and anvidual Income Tax Return, for an extension of your parents’ return), your standard exemption for your spouse could not be
CAUTION
!
time to file. deduction may be limited. See Standard Deduc- claimed by another taxpayer.
Born and died in 2003.If your child wastion for Dependents, later.
born and died in 2003, and you do not have an You cannot claim the higher standard
SSN for the child, you may attach a copy of the deduction for an individual other thanStandard Deduction Amountchild’s birth certificate instead. If you do, enter yourself and your spouse.CAUTION
!
“DIED” in column (2) of line 6c of your FormThe standard deduction amount depends on1040 or Form 1040A. your filing status, whether you are 65 or older or
Taxpayer identification numbers for blind, and whether an exemption can be claimedExamples
aliens. If your dependent is a resident or non-for you by another taxpayer. Generally, the stan-
resident alien who does not have and is not The following examples illustrate how to deter-dard deduction amounts are adjusted each year
eligible to get an SSN, your dependent must mine your standard deduction using Tables 7for inflation. The standard deduction amounts
apply for an individual taxpayer identification and 8.for most taxpayers for 2003 are shown in Table
number (ITIN). For details on how to apply, see7.
Form W–7, Application for IRS Individual Tax- Example 1. Larry, 46, and Donna, 33, areThe amount of the standard deduction for a
payer Identification Number. filing a joint return for 2003. Neither is blind.decedent’s final tax return is the same as it
They decide not to itemize their deductions.It usually takes about 4 to 6 weeks to get anwould have been had the decedent continued to
They use Table 7. Their standard deduction isITIN. live. However, if the decedent was not 65 or
$9,500.older at the time of death, the higher standardTaxpayer identification numbers for
deduction for age cannot be claimed.adoptees. If you have a child who was placed Example 2. Assume the same facts as inwith you by an authorized placement agency, Example 1, except that Larry is blind at the endyou may be able to claim an exemption for the of 2003. Larry and Donna use Table 8. TheirHigher Standard Deduction for Agechild. However, if you cannot get an SSN or an standard deduction is $10,450.(65 or Older)ITIN for the child, you must get an adoption
taxpayer identification number (ATIN) for the Example 3. Bill and Terry are filing a jointIf you do not itemize deductions, you are entitledchild from the IRS. See Form W–7A, Applica- return for 2003. Both are over age 65. Neither isto a higher standard deduction if you are age 65tion for Taxpayer Identification Number for blind. If they do not itemize deductions, they useor older at the end of the year. You are consid-Pending U.S. Adoptions, for details. Table 8. Their standard deduction is $11,400.ered 65 on the day before your 65th birthday.
Therefore, you can take a higher standard de-
duction for 2003 if you were born before JanuaryStandard Deduction for
2, 1939. DependentsStandard Deduction Use Table 8 to figure the standard deduction
The standard deduction for an individual foramount.Most taxpayers have a choice of either taking a whom an exemption can be claimed on another
standard deduction or itemizing their deduc- person’s tax return is generally limited to the
tions. The standard deduction is a dollar amount greater of:Higher Standard Deduction forthat reduces the amount of income on which youBlindnessare taxed. It is a benefit that eliminates the need 1) $750, or
for many taxpayers to itemize actual deductions,If you are blind on the last day of the year and2) The individual’s earned income for thesuch as medical expenses, charitable contribu-you do not itemize deductions, you are entitledyear plus $250 (but not more than the reg-tions, and taxes, on Schedule A of Form 1040.to a higher standard deduction. Use Table 8. ular standard deduction amount, generallyThe standard deduction is higher for taxpayersYou qualify for this benefit if you are totally or$4,750).who are 65 or older or blind. If you have apartly blind.
choice, you should use the method that gives However, if the individual is 65 or older or blind,
you the lower tax. the standard deduction may be higher.Partly blind.If you are partly blind, you must
If an exemption for you (or your spouse if youget a certified statement from an eye doctor orYou benefit from the standard deduc-
are married filing jointly) can be claimed onregistered optometrist that:tion if your standard deduction is more
someone else’s return, use Table 9 to determinethan the total of your allowable item-
TIP
1) You cannot see better than 20/200 in theyour standard deduction.ized deductions.
better eye with glasses or contact lenses,Earned income defined.Earned income isorPersons not eligible for the standard deduc- salaries, wages, tips, professional fees and
tion. Your standard deduction is zero and you 2) Your field of vision is not more than 20other amounts received as pay for work you
should itemize any deductions you have if: degrees. actually perform.
Page 18

Page 19 of 23 of Publication 501 15:05 - 20-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Table 7. Standard Deduction Chart for Most People*
IF your filing status is . . .
Your standard
deduction is . . .
Single or Married filing separately
Married filing jointly or Qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child
Head of household
$4,750
9,500
7,000
*DO NOT use this chart if you were 65 or older or blind, OR if someone
else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if married filing
jointly). Use Table 8 or 9 instead.Table 8. Standard Deduction Chart for People Age
65 or Older or Blind*
IF your
filing status
is . . .
THEN your
standard
deduction is . . .
Single
Married filing jointly
or Qualifying
widow(er) with
dependent child
Married filing
separately
Head of household
$5,900
7,050
10,450
11,400
12,350
13,300
5,700
6,650
7,600
8,550
8,150
9,300
10,450
11,600
*If someone else can claim an exemption for you (or your spouse if
married filing jointly), use Table 9, instead.
AND the number
in the box above
is . . .
1
2
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the
chart.
You
Your spouse, if claiming
spouse’s exemption
65 or older Blind
65 or older Blind
Total number of boxes you checked
Table 9. Standard Deduction Worksheet for
Dependents*
If you were 65 or older or blind, check the correct number of
boxes below. Then go to the worksheet.
You
Your spouse, if claiming
spouse’s exemption
65 or older Blind
65 or older Blind
Total number of boxes you checked
1. Enter your earned income (defined
below). If none, enter -0-. 1.
4. Minimum standard deduction 4.
5. Enter the larger of line 3 or line 4. 5.
6. Enter the amount shown below
for your filing status.
6.
● Single or Married filing 
separately—$4,750
● Married filing jointly or Qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child—
$9,500
● Head of household—$7,000
7. Standard deduction.
7a.
Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6.
If under 65 and not blind, stop here.
This is your standard deduction.
Otherwise, go on to line 7b.
a.
If 65 or older or blind, multiply
$1,150 ($950 if married or qualifying
widow(er) with dependent child) by
the number in the box above.
b.
Add lines 7a and 7b. This is your
standard deduction for 2003.
c. 7c.
7b.
Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional
fees, and other compensation received for personal services
you performed. It also includes any amount received as a
scholarship that you must include in your income.
*Use this worksheet ONLY if someone else can claim an exemption for
you (or your spouse if married filing jointly).
$750
2003 Standard Deduction Tables Caution: If you are married filing a separate return and your spouse
itemizes deductions, or if you are a dual-status alien, you cannot
take the standard deduction even if you were 65 or older or blind.
2. Additional amount 2.
3. Add lines 1 and 2 3.
$250
For purposes of the standard deduction, tax return. Joe is married and files a separate line 1. She adds lines 1 and 2 and enters $3,150
earned income also includes any part of a schol- on line 3. On line 5 she enters $3,150, the largerreturn. His wife does not itemize deductions on
arship or fellowship grant that you must include of lines 3 and 4. Since she is single, Amy entersher separate return.
in your gross income. See chapter 1 of Publica- $4,750 on line 6. She enters $3,150 on line 7a.Joe has $1,500 in interest income and
tion 970 for more information on what qualifies This is the smaller of the amounts on lines 5 andwages of $3,800. He has no itemized deduc-
as a scholarship or fellowship grant. 6. Because she checked one box in the top parttions. Joe finds his standard deduction by using
of the worksheet, she enters $1,150 on line 7b.Table 9. He enters his earned income, $3,800,
Example 1. Michael is single. His parents She then adds the amounts on lines 7a and 7bon line 1. He adds lines 1 and 2 and entersclaim an exemption for him on their 2003 tax and enters her standard deduction of $4,300 on$4,050 on line 3. On line 5 he enters $4,050, thereturn. He has interest income of $780 and line 7c.larger of lines 3 and 4. Since Joe is married filingwages of $150. He has no itemized deductions.a separate return, he enters $4,750 on line 6. OnMichael uses Table 9 to find his standard deduc-line 7a he enters $4,050 as his standard deduc-Who Should Itemizetion. He enters $150 (his earned income) on linetion because it is smaller than $4,750, the1, $400 ($150 plus $250) on line 3, $750 (the You should itemize deductions if your total de-amount on line 6.larger of $400 and $750) on line 5, and $4,750 ductions are more than the standard deduction
on line 6. The amount of his standard deduction, amount. Also, you should itemize if you do notExample 3. Amy, who is single, is claimedon line 7a, is $750 (the smaller of $750 and qualify for the standard deduction, as discussedon her parents’ 2003 tax return. She is 18 years$4,750). earlier under Persons not eligible for the stan-old and blind. She has interest income of $1,300
dard deduction.and wages of $2,900. She has no itemized de-
ductions. Amy uses Table 9 to find her standard You should first figure your itemized deduc-Example 2. Joe, a 22-year-old full-time
deduction. She enters her wages of $2,900 oncollege student, is claimed on his parents’ 2003 tions and compare that amount to your standard
Page 19

Page 20 of 23 of Publication 501 15:05 - 20-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
deduction to make sure you are using the • Figure your withholding allowances using
our Form W-4 calculator.method that gives you the greater benefit.How To Get Tax Help
• Send us comments or request help byYou may be subject to a limit on some
You can get help with unresolved tax issues,e-mail.of your itemized deductions if your ad-
order free publications and forms, ask tax ques-justed gross income (AGI) is more thanCAUTION
!
• Sign up to receive local and national taxtions, and get more information from the IRS in$139,500 ($69,750 if you are married filing sep- news by e-mail.several ways. By selecting the method that isarately). See the instructions for Schedule A
best for you, you will have quick and easy ac-• Get information on starting and operating(Form 1040), line 28, for more information on
cess to tax help. a small business.figuring the correct amount of your itemized de-
ductions.
You can also reach us using File TransferContacting your Taxpayer Advocate.If you
When to itemize. You may benefit from Protocol at ftp.irs.gov.have attempted to deal with an IRS problem
itemizing your deductions on Schedule A (Formunsuccessfully, you should contact your Tax- Fax. You can get over 100 of the most1040) if you: payer Advocate. requested forms and instructions 24The Taxpayer Advocate independently rep- hours a day, 7 days a week, by fax.1) Do not qualify for the standard deduction,resents your interests and concerns within theJust call 703–368–9694  from your fax ma-or the amount you can claim is limited,IRS by protecting your rights and resolvingchine. Follow the directions from the prompts.problems that have not been fixed through nor-2) Had large uninsured medical and dental When you order forms, enter the catalog num-mal channels. While Taxpayer Advocates can-expenses during the year, ber for the form you need. The items you requestnot change the tax law or make a technical taxwill be faxed to you.3) Paid interest and taxes on your home,decision, they can clear up problems that re-
For help with transmission problems, callsulted from previous contacts and ensure that4) Had large unreimbursed employee busi- 703–487–4608.your case is given a complete and impartialness expenses or other miscellaneous de-review. Long-distance charges may apply.ductions,
To contact your Taxpayer Advocate:
5) Had large uninsured casualty or theft Phone. Many services are available by
• Call the Taxpayer Advocate toll free at phone.losses,
1–877–777–4778.
6) Made large contributions to qualified chari-
• Call, write, or fax the Taxpayer Advocate• Ordering forms, instructions, and publica-ties, or
office in your area. tions. Call 1–800–829–3676 to order7) Have total itemized deductions that are current-year forms, instructions, and publi-• Call 1–800–829–4059 if you are amore than the standard deduction to which cations and prior-year forms and instruc-TTY/TDD user.you otherwise are entitled. tions. You should receive your order within
• Visit the web site at www.irs.gov/advo- 10 days.If you decide to itemize your deductions, cate.complete Schedule A and attach it to your Form • Asking tax questions. Call the IRS with
1040. Enter the amount from Schedule A, line your tax questions at 1–800–829–1040.For more information, see Publication 1546,28, on Form 1040, line 37. The Taxpayer Advocate Service of the IRS. • Solving problems. You can get
face-to-face help solving tax problemsElecting to itemize for state tax or other pur-
every business day in IRS Taxpayer As-Free tax services.To find out what servicesposes. Even if your itemized deductions are sistance Centers. An employee can ex-are available, get Publication 910, Guide to Freeless than the amount of your standard deduc- plain IRS letters, request adjustments toTax Services. It contains a list of free tax publi-tion, you can elect to itemize deductions on your your account, or help you set up a pay-cations and an index of tax topics. It also de-federal return rather than take the standard de- ment plan. Call your local Taxpayer Assis-scribes other free tax information services,duction. You may want to do this, for example, if tance Center for an appointment. To findincluding tax education and assistance pro-the tax benefit of being able to itemize your the number, go to www.irs.gov or look ingrams and a list of TeleTax topics.deductions on your state tax return is greater the phone book under “United States Gov-Internet. You can access the IRS webthan the tax benefit you lose on your federal ernment, Internal Revenue Service.”site 24 hours a day, 7 days a week atreturn by not taking the standard deduction. To
• TTY/TDD equipment. If you have accesswww.irs.gov to:make this election, you must enter “IE” (itemized
to TTY/TDD equipment, callelected) on the dotted line next to line 37 (Form• E-file. Access commercial tax preparation 1–800–829–4059  to ask tax or account1040). and e-file services available for free to eli-questions or to order forms and publica-gible taxpayers. tions.Changing your mind. If you do not itemize
• Check the amount of advance child taxyour deductions and later find that you should • TeleTax topics. Call 1–800–829–4477  tocredit payments you received in 2003.have itemized — or if you itemize your deduc- listen to pre-recorded messages covering
tions and later find you should not have — you various tax topics.• Check the status of your 2003 refund.
can change your return by filing Form 1040X.Click on “Where’s My Refund” and then on• Refund information. If you would like to“Go Get My Refund Status.” Be sure toMarried persons who filed separate check the status of your 2003 refund, callwait at least 6 weeks from the date youreturns. You can change methods of taking 1–800–829–4477  for automated refundfiled your return (3 weeks if you filed elec-deductions only if you and your spouse both information and follow the recorded in-tronically) and have your 2003 tax returnmake the same changes. Both of you must file a structions or call 1–800–829–1954 . Beavailable because you will need to know sure to wait at least 6 weeks from the dateconsent to assessment for any additional taxyour filing status and the exact whole dol-you filed your return (3 weeks if you filedeither one may owe as a result of the change.lar amount of your refund. electronically) and have your 2003 tax re-You and your spouse can use the method
turn available because you will need to• Download forms, instructions, and publica-that gives you the lower total tax, even though
know your filing status and the exacttions.one of you may pay more tax than you would
whole dollar amount of your refund.have paid by using the other method. You both• Order IRS products on-line.
must use the same method of claiming deduc-• See answers to frequently asked tax ques-tions. If one itemizes deductions, the other Evaluating the quality of our telephone serv-tions.should itemize because he or she will not qualify ices. To ensure that IRS representatives give
for the standard deduction (see Persons not • Search publications on-line by topic or accurate, courteous, and professional answers,
eligible for the standard deduction, earlier). keyword. we use several methods to evaluate the quality
Page 20

Page 21 of 23 of Publication 501 15:05 - 20-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
of our telephone services. One method is for a days to schedule an in-person appoint-• Frequently requested tax forms that may
second IRS representative to sometimes listenment at your convenience. To find the be filled in electronically, printed out for
in on or record telephone calls. Another is to asknumber, go to www.irs.gov or look in the submission, and saved for recordkeeping.
some callers to complete a short survey at thephone book under “United States Govern-• Internal Revenue Bulletins.end of the call. ment, Internal Revenue Service.”
Buy the CD-ROM from National Technical In-Walk-in. Many products and services Mail. You can send your order for formation Service (NTIS) on the Internet atare available on a walk-in basis. forms, instructions, and publications towww.irs.gov/cdorders for $22 (no handlingthe Distribution Center nearest to youfee) or call 1–877–233–6767  toll free to buyand receive a response within 10 workdays after• Products. You can walk in to many post the CD-ROM for $22 (plus a $5 handling fee).your request is received. Use the address thatoffices, libraries, and IRS offices to pick up The first release is available in early Januaryapplies to your part of the country.certain forms, instructions, and publica- and the final release is available in late Febru-
tions. Some IRS offices, libraries, grocery• Western part of U.S.: ary.stores, copy centers, city and county gov-Western Area Distribution Center
ernment offices, credit unions, and office CD-ROM for small businesses. IRSRancho Cordova, CA 95743–0001
supply stores have a collection of products Publication 3207, Small Business Re-• Central part of U.S.:available to print from a CD-ROM or pho- source Guide, is a must for every smallCentral Area Distribution Centertocopy from reproducible proofs. Also, business owner or any taxpayer about to start aP.O. Box 8903some IRS offices and libraries have the business. This handy, interactive CD containsBloomington, IL 61702–8903Internal Revenue Code, regulations, Inter- all the business tax forms, instructions and pub-
nal Revenue Bulletins, and Cumulative • Eastern part of U.S. and foreign lications needed to successfully manage a busi-
Bulletins available for research purposes.addresses: ness. In addition, the CD provides an
Eastern Area Distribution Center abundance of other helpful information, such as• Services. You can walk in to your local
P.O. Box 85074 how to prepare a business plan, finding financ-Taxpayer Assistance Center every busi-
Richmond, VA 23261–5074ness day to ask tax questions or get help ing for your business, and much more. The de-
with a tax problem. An employee can ex- sign of the CD makes finding information easy
plain IRS letters, request adjustments to CD-ROM for tax products. You can and quick and incorporates file formats and
your account, or help you set up a pay- order IRS Publication 1796, Federal browsers that can be run on virtually any
ment plan. You can set up an appointment Tax Products on CD-ROM, and obtain: desktop or laptop computer.
by calling your local Center and, at the• Current-year forms, instructions, and pub-It is available in early April. You can get aprompt, leaving a message requesting lications. free copy by calling 1–800–829–3676  or byEveryday Tax Solutions help. A represen-
visiting the web site at www.irs.gov/smallbiz.tative will call you back within 2 business• Prior-year forms and instructions.
Page 21

Page 22 of 23 of Publication 501 15:05 - 20-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Support test for child..... 1 5 Joint liability............ 5 School defined ......... 1 3A
Signing............... 5 Self-employed persons..... 2Absences, temporary....7 ,  1 0
Joint return test......... 1 1 Separate return.......... 7Adopted child ........... 7 E
Relationship test........ 1 1 Separate return defined.... 6Earned income ........4 ,  1 8
Adoption .............. 1 1 Separate returns.....6 ,  9 ,  2 0KEarned income credit...... 7
Adoption taxpayer Separated parents, supportKeeping up a home ....... 7Exemptions:
identification number test for child.......... 1 5For dependents......... 9 Kidnapped child ....... 7 ,  9
(ATIN) .............. 1 8 Single taxpayers....... 5 ,  9For spouse ............ 9
Age 65 or older........3 ,  1 8 In general............. 9 Social security benefits . . . 13LArmed Forces dependency Personal.............. 9 Social security numbers forLodging .............. 1 4allotments ........... 1 3 Phaseout of........... 1 7 dependents .......... 1 7
Assistance (See Tax help) Spouse:
MAuthorized placement Died ..............5 ,  8 ,  9F Marital status.......... 3 ,  4agency .............. 1 1 Exemption for.......... 9Fair rental value......... 1 4 Marriage annulled........ 5 Filing a joint return....... 5Filing requirements..... 2 ,  4 Nonresident.......... 6 ,  7Married persons ......4 ,  5 ,  9B Filing status............ 4 Standard deduction...... 1 8Medical insuranceBirth of dependent....7 ,  8 ,  1 1Foreign students........ 1 1 premiums ............ 1 4 State benefit payments.... 1 3Blindness ............. 1 8 Form: Medicare benefits....... 1 4 Stepchild.............7 ,  1 11040X ...........5 ,  6 ,  2 0Member of household or Student ............... 1 32120 ............... 1 5C relationship test....... 1 0 Suggestions ............ 22848 ................ 6Canada, resident of.....9 ,  1 1 Mexico, resident of......9 ,  1 1Support test........... 1 38332 ............... 1 5Capital expenses........ 1 4 More information (See Tax help) Multiple support8814 ................ 2Child: agreement .......... 1 5Multiple supportS S – 5............... 1 8Born alive............. 9 State benefit payments . . . 13agreement ........... 1 5W – 7 ............... 1 8Defined.............. 1 3 Total support.......... 1 4W – 7 A .............. 1 8Kidnapped........... 7 ,  9 Foster care expenses..... 1 3 NOf divorced or separated Foster care payments..... 1 3 TNoncustodial parent...... 1 5parents ............ 1 5
Foster child........ 7 ,  11, 13 Tax help .............. 2 0Stillborn.............. 9 Nonresident alien
Free tax services........ 2 0 Tax-exempt income ...... 1 3Support.............. 1 7 spouse ............. 6 ,  7
Under age 19 (Gross Taxpayer Advocate ...... 2 0Nonresident aliens.....2 ,  7 ,  9
income test)......... 1 1 Temporary absences ....7 ,  1 0G
Child care expenses...... 1 5 Tests for exemption...... 1 0GI Bill................ 1 4 O
Child’s income, parent’s Citizen or resident test.... 1 1Gross income .........2 ,  1 1Overseas taxpayers....... 3return ............... 4 Gross income test....... 1 1Gross income test....... 1 1
Joint return test........ 1 1Citizen or resident test.... 1 1
P Member of household orComments ............. 2 H Personal exemption....... 9 relationship test....... 1 0Common law marriage ..... 5 Head of household........ 7 Phaseout of exemptions . . . 17 Support test........... 1 3Community property Help (See Tax help) Publications (See Tax help) Total support........... 1 4states ............. 6 ,  7
Home, keeping up ........ 7 Puerto Rico, residents of . . . 3 TTY/TDD information..... 2 0Considered unmarried ..... 7
Household, member of,Cousin ............... 1 1 test ................ 1 0 QUCustodial parent........ 1 5
Qualifying person........ 7 U.S. citizens abroad....... 3Custody .............. 1 5
I Qualifying widow(er) with Unearned income ......... 4
Individual retirement dependent child........ 8 Unmarried persons ....... 4D arrangements (IRAs)..... 6Death of Individual taxpayer Rdependent ...... 7 ,  8 ,  9 ,  1 1 Widentification number Relationship test........ 1 0Death of spouse ......5 ,  8 ,  9 Who must file ........... 2(ITIN)............... 1 8
Relief from jointDeceased persons ........ 3 Who should file.......... 4Innocent spouse relief..... 5 responsibility.......... 5Dependency tests ....... 1 0 Who should itemize...... 1 9
Rental losses............ 6Dependents ........... 4 ,  9 Widow(er) with dependentJ Rental value, fair........ 1 4 child ................ 8Divorce decree, exemption Joint responsibility:for child............. 1 5 ■Divorced taxpayer........ 5Divorced taxpayers: SJoint return..........5 ,  6 ,  9Exemptions ............ 9 Scholarships....... 4 ,  11, 15Divorced persons........ 5Filing status............ 4
Page 22

Page 23 of 23 of Publication 501 15:05 - 20-NOV-2003
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tax Publications for Individual Taxpayers
General Guides
Your Rights as a Taxpayer
Your Federal Income Tax (For
Individuals)
Farmer’s Tax Guide
Tax Guide for Small Business (For
Individuals Who Use Schedule C or
C-EZ)
Tax Calendars for 2004
Highlights of 2003 Tax Changes
Guide to Free Tax Services
Specialized Publications
Armed Forces’ Tax Guide
Fuel Tax Credits and Refunds
Travel, Entertainment, Gift, and Car
Expenses
Exemptions, Standard Deduction, and
Filing Information
Medical and Dental Expenses (Including
the Health Coverage Tax Credit)
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Divorced or Separated Individuals
Tax Withholding and Estimated Tax
Foreign Tax Credit for Individuals
U.S. Government Civilian Employees
Stationed Abroad
Social Security and Other Information
for Members of the Clergy and
Religious Workers
U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens
Moving Expenses
Selling Your Home
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Taxable and Nontaxable Income
Charitable Contributions
Residential Rental Property
Commonly Used Tax Forms
Miscellaneous Deductions
Tax Information for First-Time
Homeowners
Reporting Tip Income
Self-Employment Tax
Installment Sales
Partnerships
Sales and Other Dispositions of Assets
Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
Investment Income and Expenses
Basis of Assets
Recordkeeping for Individuals
Older Americans’ Tax Guide
Community Property
Examination of Returns, Appeal Rights,
and Claims for Refund
Survivors, Executors, and
Administrators
Determining the Value of Donated
Property
Mutual Fund Distributions
Tax Guide for Individuals With Income
From U.S. Possessions
Pension and Annuity Income
Casualty, Disaster, and Theft Loss
Workbook (Personal-Use Property)
Business Use of Your Home (Including
Use by Daycare Providers)
Individual Retirement Arrangements
(IRAs)
Tax Highlights for U.S. Citizens and
Residents Going Abroad
What You Should Know About the IRS
Collection Process
Earned Income Credit (EIC)
Tax Guide to U.S. Civil Service
Retirement Benefits
Tax Highlights for Persons with
Disabilities
Bankruptcy Tax Guide
Direct Sellers
Social Security and Equivalent
Railroad Retirement Benefits
How Do I Adjust My Tax Withholding?
Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
Household Employer’s Tax Guide
Tax Rules for Children and
Dependents
Home Mortgage Interest Deduction
How To Depreciate Property
Practice Before the IRS and
Power of Attorney
Introduction to Estate and Gift Taxes
The IRS Will Figure Your Tax
Per Diem Rates
Reporting Cash Payments of Over
$10,000 (Received in a Trade or
Business)
The Taxpayer Advocate Service
of the IRS
Derechos del Contribuyente
Cómo Preparar la Declaración de
Impuesto Federal
Crédito por Ingreso del Trabajo
English-Spanish Glossary of Words
and Phrases Used in Publications
Issued by the Internal Revenue
Service
U.S. Tax Treaties
Spanish Language Publications
Tax Highlights for Commercial
Fishermen
910
595
553
509
334
225
17
1
3
378
463
501
502
503
504
505
514
516
517
519
521
523
524
525
526
527
529
530
531
533
537
544
547
550
551
552
554
541
555
556
559
561
564
570
575
584
587
590
593
594
596
721
901
907
908
915
919
925
926
929
946
911
936
950
1542
967
1544
1546
596SP
1SP
850
579SP
Comprendiendo el Proceso de Cobro594SP
947
Tax Benefits for Adoption968
Informe de Pagos en Efectivo en
Exceso de $10,000 (Recibidos en
una Ocupación o Negocio)
1544SP
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get forms, including by computer, fax, phone,
and mail. For fax orders only, use the catalog number when ordering.
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Itemized Deductions & Interest and
Ordinary Dividends
Profit or Loss From Business
Net Profit From Business
Capital Gains and Losses
Supplemental Income and Loss
Earned Income Credit
Profit or Loss From Farming
Credit for the Elderly or the Disabled
Income Tax Return for Single and 
Joint Filers With No Dependents
Self-Employment Tax
U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Interest and Ordinary Dividends for
Form 1040A Filers
Child and Dependent Care
Expenses for Form 1040A Filers
Credit for the Elderly or the 
Disabled for Form 1040A Filers
Estimated Tax for Individuals
Amended U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Unreimbursed Employee Business
Expenses
Underpayment of Estimated Tax by
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
Power of Attorney and Declaration of
Representative
Child and Dependent Care Expenses
Moving Expenses
Depreciation and Amortization
Application for Automatic Extension of Time
To File U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
Investment Interest Expense Deduction
Additional Taxes on Qualified Plans (Including
IRAs) and Other Tax-Favored Accounts
Alternative Minimum Tax—Individuals
Noncash Charitable Contributions
Change of Address
Expenses for Business Use of Your Home
Nondeductible IRAs
Passive Activity Loss Limitations
1040
Sch A&B
Sch C
Sch C-EZ
Sch D
Sch E
Sch EIC
Sch F
Sch H Household Employment Taxes 
Sch R
Sch SE
1040EZ
1040A
Sch 1
Sch 2
Sch 3
1040-ES
1040X
2106 Employee Business Expenses
2106-EZ
2210
2441
2848
3903
4562
4868
4952
5329
6251
8283
8582
8606
8822
8829
Form Number and Title
Catalog
Number
Sch J Farm Income Averaging
Additional Child Tax Credit8812
Education Credits8863
Catalog
Number
11700
20604
11744
11862
11980
12490
12906
13141
13177
13329
13600
62299
63704
63966
10644
12081
13232
25379
11320
Form Number and Title
11330
11334
14374
11338
11344
13339
11346
12187
25513
11359
11358
11327
12075
10749
12064
11329
11340
11360
See How To Get Tax Help for a variety of ways to get publications, including
by computer, phone, and mail.
970 Tax Benefits for Education
971 Innocent Spouse Relief
Sch D-1 Continuation Sheet for Schedule D 10424
972 Child Tax Credit
Tax Guide for U.S. Citizens and
Residents Aliens Abroad
54
Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
536
Tax-Sheltered Annuity Plans (403(b)
Plans)
571
Medical Savings Accounts (MSAs)969
Installment Agreement Request9465 14842
Page 23