Contents
Introduction .................. 1
What's New for 2019 ............. 2
What's New for 2020 ............. 2
Reminders ................... 2
Chapter 1. Deducting 
Business Expenses .......... 3
Chapter 2. Employees' Pay ........ 7
Chapter 3. Rent Expense ........ 10
Chapter 4. Interest ............ 12
Chapter 5. Taxes ............. 17
Chapter 6. Insurance ........... 20
Chapter 7. Costs You Can Deduct 
or Capitalize .............. 24
Chapter 8. Amortization ......... 28
Chapter 9. Depletion ........... 35
Chapter 10. Business Bad Debts .... 40
Chapter 11. Other Expenses ...... 42
Chapter 12. How To Get Tax Help ... 49
The Taxpayer Advocate Service 
(TAS) Is Here To Help You ..... 53
Index ..................... 55
Introduction
This publication discusses common business 
expenses and explains what is and is not de-
ductible. The general rules for deducting busi-
ness expenses are discussed in the opening 
chapter. The chapters that follow cover specific 
expenses and list other publications and forms 
you may need.
Note. Section references within this publica-
tion are to the Internal Revenue Code and regu-
lation references are to the Income Tax Regula-
tions under the Code.
Comments and suggestions.  We welcome 
your comments about this publication and your 
suggestions for future editions.
You can send us comments through 
IRS.gov/FormComments. Or you can write to:
Internal Revenue Service
Tax Forms and Publications
1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6526
Washington, DC 20224
Although we cannot respond individually to 
each comment received, we do appreciate your 
feedback and will consider your comments as 
we revise our tax forms, instructions, and publi-
cations. We can’t answer tax questions sent to 
the above address.
Department 
of the 
Treasury
Internal 
Revenue 
Service
Publication 535
Cat. No. 15065Z
Business 
Expenses
For use in preparing
2019 Returns
Get forms and other information faster and easier at:
• IRS.gov (English) 
• IRS.gov/Spanish (Español) 
• IRS.gov/Chinese (中文) 
• IRS.gov/Korean (한국어) 
• IRS.gov/Russian (Pусский) 
• IRS.gov/Vietnamese (TiếngViệt) 
Userid: CPM Schema: tipx Leadpct: 100% Pt. size: 8  Draft  Ok to Print
AH XSL/XML Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source (Init. & Date) _______
Page 1 of 56  11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Mar 4, 2020

Tax questions. If you have a tax question 
not answered by this publication or How To Get 
Tax Help at the end of this publication, go to the 
IRS Interactive Tax Assistant page at IRS.gov/
Help/ITA where you can find topics using the 
search feature or by viewing the categories lis-
ted.
Getting tax forms, instructions, and pub-
lications. Visit IRS.gov/Forms to download 
current and prior -year forms, instructions, and 
publications.
Ordering tax forms, instructions, and 
publications. Go to IRS.gov/OrderForms to 
order current forms, instructions, and publica-
tions; call 800 -829-3676 to order prior -year 
forms and instructions. Your order should arrive 
within 10 business days.
Future Developments
For the latest information about developments 
related to Pub. 535, such as legislation enacted 
after it was published, go to IRS.gov/Pub535.
What's New for 2019
The following items highlight some changes in 
the tax law for 2019.
New Gig Economy Tax Center.  The IRS 
launched a new Gig Economy Tax Center on 
IRS.gov to help people in this growing area 
meet their tax obligations through more stream-
lined information.
The gig economy is also known as the shar-
ing, on-demand, or access economy. It usually 
includes businesses that operate an app or 
website to connect people to provide services 
to customers. While there are many types of gig 
economy businesses, ride -sharing and home 
rentals are two of the most popular.
The Gig Economy Tax Center streamlines 
various resources, making it easier for taxpay-
ers to find information about the tax implications 
for the companies that provide the services and 
the individuals who perform them. It offers tips 
and resources on a variety of topics including:
• Filing requirements;
• Making quarterly estimated income tax 
payments;
• Paying self-employment taxes;
• Paying FICA, Medicare, and Additional 
Medicare taxes;
• Deductible business expenses; and
• Special rules for reporting vacation home 
rentals.
For more information, go to the new Gig 
Economy Tax Center at IRS.gov/Gig.
Film and television and live theatrical pro-
duction costs.  The election to expense cer-
tain costs of qualified film, television, and live 
theatrical productions has been extended to in-
clude costs of productions that begin before 
January 1, 2021. For more information, see 
chapter 7.
Standard mileage rate.  Beginning in 2019, 
the standard mileage rate for the cost of operat-
ing your car , van, pickup, or panel truck for 
each mile of business use is 58 cents per mile. 
For more information, see chapter 11.
Qualified business income deduction.  For 
tax years beginning after 2017, individual tax-
payers and some trusts and estates may be en-
titled to a deduction of up to 20% of their quali-
fied business income (QBI) from a qualified 
trade or business, including income from a 
pass-through entity, but not from a C corpora-
tion, plus 20% of qualified real estate invest-
ment trust (REIT) dividends and qualified pub-
licly traded partnership (PTP) income. 
Depending on the taxpayer's taxable income, 
the deduction may be subject to multiple limita-
tions based on the type of trade or business, 
the amount of W -2 wages paid in the trade or 
business, and the unadjusted basis immedi-
ately after acquisition (UBIA) of qualified prop-
erty held by the trade or business. The deduc-
tion can be taken in addition to the standard or 
itemized deductions. The chapter on QBI found 
in the 2018 Pub. 535 has been removed. See 
the Instructions for Form 8995 and the Instruc-
tions for Form 8995-A for more information.
What's New for 2020
The following item highlights a change in the tax 
law for 2020.
Standard mileage rate.  Beginning in 2020, 
the standard mileage rate for the cost of operat-
ing your car, van, pickup, or panel truck for 
each mile of business use is 57.5 cents per 
mile.
Reminders
The following reminders and other items may 
help you file your tax return.
IRS e-file (Electronic Filing)
You can file your tax returns electronically 
using an IRS e-file option. The benefits of IRS 
e-file include faster refunds, increased 
accuracy, and acknowledgment of IRS receipt 
of your return. You can use one of the following 
IRS e-file options.
• Use an authorized IRS e-file provider.
• Use a personal computer.
• Visit a Volunteer Income Tax Assistance 
(VITA) or Tax Counseling for the Elderly 
(TCE) site.
For details on these fast filing methods, see 
your income tax package.
Form 1099-MISC. File Form 1099 -MISC, Mis-
cellaneous Income, for each person to whom 
you have paid during the year in the course of 
your trade or business at least $600 in rents, 
services (including parts and materials), prizes 
and awards, other income payments, medical 
and health care payments, and crop insurance 
proceeds. See the Instructions for Form 
1099-MISC for more information and additional 
reporting requirements.
Photographs of missing children.  The Inter-
nal Revenue Service is a proud partner with the 
National Center for Missing & Exploited 
Children® (NCMEC) . Photographs of missing 
children selected by the Center may appear in 
this publication on pages that would otherwise 
be blank. You can help bring these children 
home by looking at the photographs and calling 
800-THE-LOST (800 -843-5678) (24 hours a 
day, 7 days a week) if you recognize a child.
Preventing slavery and human trafficking. 
Human trafficking is a form of modern -day slav-
ery, and involves the use of force, fraud, or co-
ercion to exploit human beings for some type of 
labor or commercial sex purpose. The United 
States is a source, transit, and destination 
country for men, women, and children, both 
U.S. citizens and foreign nationals, who are 
subjected to the injustices of slavery and hu-
man trafficking, including forced labor, debt 
bondage, involuntary servitude, “mail -order” 
marriages, and sex trafficking. Trafficking in 
persons can occur in both lawful and illicit in-
dustries or markets, including in hotel services, 
hospitality, agriculture, manufacturing, janitorial 
services, construction, health and elder care, 
domestic service, brothels, massage parlors, 
and street prostitution, among others.
The President’s Interagency Task Force to 
Monitor and Combat Trafficking in Persons 
(PITF) brings together federal departments and 
agencies to ensure a whole -of-government ap-
proach that addresses all aspects of human 
trafficking. Online resources for recognizing and 
reporting trafficking activities, and assisting vic-
tims include the Department of Homeland Se-
curity (DHS) Blue Campaign at DHS.gov/blue-
campaign, the Department of State Office to 
Monitor and Combat Trafficking in Persons at 
State.gov/j/tip, and the National Human Traf-
ficking Resource Center (NHTRC) at 
humantraffickinghotline.org. DHS is responsible 
for investigating human trafficking, arresting 
traffickers, and protecting victims. DHS also 
provides immigration relief  to non -U.S. citizen 
victims of human trafficking. DHS uses a victim-
centered approach  to combating human traf-
ficking, which places equal value on identifying 
and stabilizing victims and on investigating and 
prosecuting traffickers. Victims are crucial to in-
vestigations and prosecutions; each case and 
every conviction changes lives. DHS under-
stands how difficult it can be for victims to come 
forward and work with law enforcement due to 
their trauma. DHS is committed to helping vic-
tims feel stable, safe, and secure.
To report suspected human trafficking, call 
the DHS domestic 24 -hour toll -free number at 
866-DHS-2-ICE (866 -347-2423) or 
802-872-6199 (non -toll-free international). For 
help from the NHTRC, call the National Human 
Trafficking Hotline toll free at 888 -373-7888 or 
text HELP or INFO to BeFree (233733).
The Department of Treasury’s Financial 
Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) has is-
sued a public advisory to financial institutions 
that contains red flag indicators for potential 
suspicious financial activity associated with hu-
man trafficking. If warranted, financial institu-
tions should file a Suspicious Activity Report 
(FinCEN 112) with FinCEN to report these ac-
tivities. For more information, go to Fincen.gov/
Sites/default/files/advisory/FIN-2014-A008.pdf.
Page 2 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 2 Publication 535 (2019)

1.
Deducting 
Business 
Expenses
Reminder
Deduction for qualified business income. 
For tax years beginning after 2017, you may be 
entitled to take a deduction of up to 20% of your 
qualified business income from your qualified 
trade or business, plus 20% of the aggregate 
amount of qualified real estate investment trust 
(REIT), and qualified publicly traded partnership 
income.
Small business taxpayers.  For tax years be-
ginning after 2017, more small business taxpay-
ers may qualify to use the cash method of ac-
counting and be exempt from capitalizing 
certain expenses under section 263A. In addi-
tion, small business taxpayers may not be re-
quired to account for inventories under section 
471 and are not subject to the business interest 
expenses limitation.
Introduction
This chapter covers the general rules for de-
ducting business expenses. Business expen-
ses are the costs of carrying on a trade or busi-
ness, and they are usually deductible if the 
business is operated to make a profit.
Topics
This chapter discusses:
• What you can deduct
• How much you can deduct
• When you can deduct
• Not-for-profit activities
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
334 Tax Guide for Small Business
463 Travel, Gift, and Car Expenses
525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income
529 Miscellaneous Deductions
536 Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for 
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
538 Accounting Periods and Methods
542 Corporations
547 Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
583 Starting a Business and Keeping 
Records
  334 
  463 
  525 
  529 
  536 
  538 
  542 
  547 
  583 
587 Business Use of Your Home
925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules
936 Home Mortgage Interest
Deduction
946 How To Depreciate Property
Form (and Instructions)
Schedule A (Form 1040 or 1040-SR) 
Itemized Deductions
5213 Election To Postpone
Determination as To Whether the 
Presumption Applies That an
Activity Is Engaged in for Profit
See chapter 12  for information about getting 
publications and forms.
What Can I Deduct?
To be deductible, a business expense must be 
both ordinary and necessary. An ordinary ex-
pense is one that is common and accepted in 
your industry. A necessary expense is one that 
is helpful and appropriate for your trade or busi-
ness. An expense does not have to be indis-
pensable to be considered necessary.
Even though an expense may be ordinary 
and necessary, you may not be allowed to de-
duct the expense in the year you paid or incur-
red it. In some cases, you may not be allowed 
to deduct the expense at all. Therefore, it is im-
portant to distinguish usual business expenses 
from expenses that include the following.
• The expenses used to figure cost of goods 
sold.
• Capital expenses.
• Personal expenses.
Cost of Goods Sold
If your business manufactures products or pur-
chases them for resale, you must generally 
value inventory at the beginning and end of 
each tax year to determine your cost of goods 
sold. Some of your business expenses may be 
included in figuring cost of goods sold. Cost of 
goods sold is deducted from your gross re-
ceipts to figure your gross profit for the year. If 
you include an expense in the cost of goods 
sold, you cannot deduct it again as a business 
expense.
The following are types of expenses that go 
into figuring cost of goods sold.
• The cost of products or raw materials, in-
cluding freight.
• Storage.
• Direct labor (including contributions to pen-
sion or annuity plans) for workers who pro-
duce the products.
• Factory overhead.
Under the uniform capitalization rules, you 
must capitalize the direct costs and part of the 
indirect costs for certain production or resale 
activities. Indirect costs include rent, interest, 
taxes, storage, purchasing, processing, repack-
aging, handling, and administrative costs.
This rule does not apply to small business 
taxpayers. You qualify as a small business tax-
payer if you (a) have average annual gross re-
ceipts of $26 million or less for the 3 prior tax 
  587 
  925 
  936 
  946 
  Schedule A (Form 1040 or 1040-SR)
  5213 
years, and (b) are not a tax shelter (as defined 
in section 448(d)(3)). If your business has not 
been in existence for all of the 3 -tax-year period 
used in figuring average gross receipts, base 
your average on the period it has existed, and if 
your business has a predecessor entity, include 
the gross receipts of the predecessor entity 
from the 3 -tax-year period when figuring aver-
age gross receipts. If your business (or prede-
cessor entity) had short tax years for any of the 
3-tax-year period, annualize your business’ 
gross receipts for the short tax years that are 
part of the 3 -tax-year period. See Pub. 538 for 
more information.
For more information, see the following 
sources.
• Cost of goods sold—chapter 6 of Pub. 
334.
• Inventories—Pub. 538.
• Uniform capitalization rules—Pub. 538 and 
section 263A and the related regulations.
Capital Expenses
You must capitalize, rather than deduct, some 
costs. These costs are a part of your investment 
in your business and are called “capital expen-
ses.” Capital expenses are considered assets 
in your business. In general, you capitalize 
three types of costs.
• Business start-up costs (see Tip below).
• Business assets.
• Improvements.
You can elect to deduct or amortize 
certain business start -up costs. See 
chapters 7 and 8.
Cost recovery. Although you generally cannot 
take a current deduction for a capital expense, 
you may be able to recover the amount you 
spend through depreciation, amortization, or 
depletion. These recovery methods allow you to 
deduct part of your cost each year. In this way, 
you are able to recover your capital expense. 
See Amortization (chapter 8) and Depletion 
(chapter 9) in this publication. A taxpayer can 
elect to deduct a portion of the costs of certain 
depreciable property as a section 179 deduc-
tion. A greater portion of these costs can be de-
ducted if the property is qualified disaster assis-
tance property. See Pub. 946 for details.
Going Into Business
The costs of getting started in business, before 
you actually begin business operations, are 
capital expenses. These costs may include ex-
penses for advertising, travel, or wages for 
training employees.
If you go into business.  When you go into 
business, treat all costs you had to get your 
business started as capital expenses.
Usually, you recover costs for a particular 
asset through depreciation. Generally, you can-
not recover other costs until you sell the busi-
ness or otherwise go out of business. However, 
you can choose to amortize certain costs for 
setting up your business. See Starting a Busi-
ness in chapter 8 for more information on busi-
ness start-up costs.
TIP
Page 3 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 1 Deducting Business Expenses  Page 3

If your attempt to go into business is un-
successful.  If you are an individual and your 
attempt to go into business is not successful, 
the expenses you had in trying to establish 
yourself in business fall into two categories.
1. The costs you had before making a deci-
sion to acquire or begin a specific busi-
ness. These costs are personal and non-
deductible. They include any costs 
incurred during a general search for, or 
preliminary investigation of, a business or 
investment possibility.
2. The costs you had in your attempt to ac-
quire or begin a specific business. These 
costs are capital expenses and you can 
deduct them as a capital loss.
If you are a corporation and your attempt to 
go into a new trade or business is not success-
ful, you may be able to deduct all investigatory 
costs as a loss.
The costs of any assets acquired during 
your unsuccessful attempt to go into business 
are a part of your basis in the assets. You can-
not take a deduction for these costs. You will re-
cover the costs of these assets when you dis-
pose of them.
Business Assets
There are many different kinds of business as-
sets, for example, land, buildings, machinery, 
furniture, trucks, patents, and franchise rights. 
You must fully capitalize the cost of these as-
sets, including freight and installation charges.
Certain property you produce for use in your 
trade or business must be capitalized under the 
uniform capitalization rules. See Regulations 
section 1.263A-2 for information on these rules.
De Minimis Safe Harbor for 
Tangible Property
Although you must generally capitalize costs to 
acquire or produce real or tangible personal 
property used in your trade or business, such 
as buildings, equipment, or furniture, you can 
elect to use a de minimis safe harbor to deduct 
the costs of some tangible property. Under the 
de minimis safe harbor for tangible property, 
you can deduct de minimis amounts paid to ac-
quire or produce certain tangible business prop-
erty if these amounts are deducted by you for fi-
nancial accounting purposes or in keeping your 
books and records. See the following for the re-
quirements for the de minimis safe harbor.
You have an applicable financial statement. 
If you elect the de minimis safe harbor for the 
tax year, you can deduct amounts paid to ac-
quire or produce certain tangible business prop-
erty if:
• You have a trade or business or are a cor-
poration, partnership, or S corporation that 
has an applicable financial statement;
• You have, at the beginning of the tax year, 
written accounting procedures treating as 
an expense for nontax purposes:
 – Amounts paid for property costing 
less than a certain dollar amount, or
 – Amounts paid for property with an 
economic useful life of 12 months or 
less;
• You treat the amount paid during the tax 
year for which you make the election as an 
expense on your applicable financial state-
ments in accordance with your written ac-
counting procedures;
• The amount paid for the property does not 
exceed $5,000 per invoice (or per item 
substantiated by invoice); and
• The uniform capitalization rules do not ap-
ply to the amount.
You do not have an applicable financial 
statement.  If you elect the de minimis safe 
harbor for the tax year, you can deduct amounts 
paid to acquire or produce certain tangible busi-
ness property if:
• You have a trade or business, partnership, 
or S corporation that does not have an ap-
plicable financial statement;
• You have, at the beginning of the tax year, 
accounting procedures treating as an ex-
pense for nontax purposes:
 – Amounts paid for property costing 
less than a certain dollar amount, or
 – Amounts paid for property with an 
economic useful life of 12 months or 
less;
• You treat the amounts paid for the property 
as an expense on your books and records 
in accordance with your accounting proce-
dures;
• The amount paid for the property does not 
exceed $2,500 per invoice (or per item 
substantiated by invoice); and
• The uniform capitalization rules do not ap-
ply to the amounts.
How to make the de minimis safe harbor 
election.  To elect the de minimis safe harbor 
for the tax year, attach a statement to the tax-
payer’s timely filed original tax return (including 
extensions) for the tax year when qualifying 
amounts were paid. The statement must be ti-
tled “Section 1. 263(a)-1(f) de minimis safe har-
bor election” and must include your name, ad-
dress, taxpayer identification number (TIN), and 
a statement that you are making the de minimis 
safe harbor election under section 1.263(a)-1(f). 
In the case of a consolidated group filing a con-
solidated income tax return, the election is 
made for each member of the consolidated 
group.
In the case of a consolidated group filing a 
consolidated income tax return, the election is 
made for each member of the consolidated 
group. In the case of an S corporation or a part-
nership, the election is made by the S corpora-
tion or the partnership and not by the share-
holders or partners. The election applies only 
for the tax year for which it is made.
Example. In 2019, you do not have an ap-
plicable financial statement and you purchase 
five laptop computers for use in your trade or 
business. You paid $2,000 each for a total cost 
of $10,000 and these amounts are substanti-
ated in an invoice. You had an accounting pro-
cedure in place at the beginning of 2019 to ex-
pense the cost of tangible property if the 
property costs $2,000 or less. You treat each 
computer as an expense on your books and re-
cords for 2019 in accordance with this policy. If 
you elect the de minimis safe harbor in your tax 
returns for your 2019 tax year, you can deduct 
the cost of each $2,000 computer.
Improvements
Generally, you must capitalize the costs of mak-
ing improvements to a business asset if the im-
provements result in a betterment to the unit of 
property, restore the unit of property, or adapt 
the unit of property to a new or different use.
Some examples of improvements include 
rewiring or replumbing of a building, replacing 
an entire roof, increasing the production output 
of your equipment, putting an addition on your 
building, strengthening the foundation of a 
building so you can use it for a new purpose, or 
replacing a major component or substantial 
structural part of a machine.
However, you may currently deduct the 
costs of repairs or maintenance that do not im-
prove a unit of property. This generally includes 
the costs of routine repairs and maintenance to 
your property that result from your use of the 
property and that keep your property in an ordi-
nary efficient operating condition. For example, 
deductible repairs include costs such as paint-
ing exteriors or interiors of business buildings, 
repairing broken windowpanes, replacing 
worn-out minor parts, sealing cracks and leaks, 
and changing oil or other fluids to maintain busi-
ness equipment.
Routine maintenance safe harbor.  If you 
determine that your cost was for an improve-
ment to a building or equipment, you can de-
duct your cost under the routine maintenance 
safe harbor. Under the routine maintenance 
safe harbor, you can deduct the costs of an im-
provement that meets all of the following crite-
ria.
• It is paid for recurring activities performed 
on tangible property.
• It arises from the use of the property in 
your trade or business.
• It keeps your property in an ordinarily effi-
cient operating condition.
• You reasonably expect, at the time the 
property is placed in service, to perform 
this activity:
 – For buildings and building systems, 
more than once during the 10-year pe-
riod after you place the building in 
service; or
 – For other property, more than once 
during the class life of the particular 
type of property. For class lives, see 
Revenue Procedure 88-57, 1987-2 
C.B. 674.
Costs incurred during an improvement. 
You must capitalize both the direct and indirect 
costs of an improvement. Indirect costs include 
repairs and other expenses that directly benefit 
or are incurred by reason of your improvement. 
For example, if you improve the electrical sys-
tem in your building, you must also capitalize 
the costs of repairing the holes that you made in 
walls to install the new wiring. This rule applies 
even if this work, performed by itself, would 
Page 4 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 4  Chapter 1 Deducting Business Expenses

otherwise be treated as currently deductible re-
pair costs.
Election to capitalize repair and mainte-
nance costs.  You can elect to capitalize and 
depreciate certain amounts paid for repair and 
maintenance of tangible property, even if they 
do not improve your property. To qualify for this 
election, you must treat these amounts as capi-
tal expenditures on your books and records 
used in figuring your income. If you make this 
election, you must apply it to all repair and 
maintenance costs of tangible property that you 
treat as capital expenditures on your books and 
records for this tax year. To make the election 
to treat repairs and maintenance as capital ex-
penditures, attach a statement titled “Section 
1.263(a)-3(n) Election” to your timely filed origi-
nal tax return (including extensions) and include 
your name and address, TIN, and a statement 
that you elect to capitalize repair and mainte-
nance costs under section 1. 263(a)-3(n). You 
must treat these amounts as improvements to 
your tangible property and begin to depreciate 
these amounts when the improvement is placed 
in service.
Capital Versus Deductible 
Expenses
To help you distinguish between capital and de-
ductible expenses, different examples are given 
below.
Motor vehicles.  You usually capitalize the 
cost of a motor vehicle you use in your busi-
ness. You can recover its cost through annual 
deductions for depreciation.
There are dollar limits on the depreciation 
you can claim each year on passenger automo-
biles used in your business. See Pub. 463 for 
more information.
Generally, repairs you make to your busi-
ness vehicle are currently deductible. However, 
amounts you pay to improve your business ve-
hicle are generally capital expenditures and are 
recovered through depreciation.
Roads and driveways.  The cost of building a 
private road on your business property and the 
cost of replacing a gravel driveway with a con-
crete one are capital expenses you may be able 
to depreciate. The cost of maintaining a private 
road on your business property is a deductible 
expense.
Tools. Unless the uniform capitalization rules 
apply, amounts spent for tools used in your 
business are deductible expenses if the tools 
have a life expectancy of less than 1 year or 
they cost $200 or less per item or invoice.
Machinery parts.  Unless the uniform capitali-
zation rules apply, the cost of replacing 
short-lived parts of a machine to keep it in good 
working condition, but not to improve the ma-
chine, is a deductible expense.
Heating equipment.  The cost of changing 
from one heating system to another is a capital 
expense.
Deduction for qualified business income. 
For tax years beginning after 2017, you may be 
entitled to take a deduction of up to 20% of your 
qualified business income from your qualified 
trade or business, plus 20% of the aggregate 
amount of qualified real estate investment trust 
(REIT), and qualified publicly traded partnership 
income. The deduction is subject to various lim-
itations, such as limitations based on the type of 
your trade or business, your taxable income, 
the amount of W -2 wages paid with respect to 
the qualified trade or business, and the unad-
justed basis of qualified property held by your 
trade or business. You will claim this deduction 
on Form 1040 or 1040 -SR, not on Schedule C. 
Unlike other deductions, this deduction can be 
taken in addition to the standard or itemized de-
ductions. For more information, see the Instruc-
tions for Forms 1040 and 1040-SR.
Personal Versus Business 
Expenses
Generally, you cannot deduct personal, living, 
or family expenses. However, if you have an ex-
pense for something that is used partly for busi-
ness and partly for personal purposes, divide 
the total cost between the business and per-
sonal parts. You can deduct the business part.
For example, if you borrow money and use 
70% of it for business and the other 30% for a 
family vacation, you can generally deduct 70% 
of the interest as a business expense. The re-
maining 30% is personal interest and is gener-
ally not deductible. See chapter 4  for informa-
tion on deducting interest and the allocation 
rules.
Business use of your home.  If you use part 
of your home for business, you may be able to 
deduct expenses for the business use of your 
home. These expenses may include mortgage 
interest, insurance, utilities, repairs, and depre-
ciation.
To qualify to claim expenses for the busi-
ness use of your home, you must meet both of 
the following tests.
1. The business part of your home must be 
used exclusively and regularly for your 
trade or business.
2. The business part of your home must be:
a. Your principal place of business;
b. A place where you meet or deal with 
patients, clients, or customers in the 
normal course of your trade or busi-
ness; or
c. A separate structure (not attached to 
your home) used in connection with 
your trade or business.
You generally do not have to meet the ex-
clusive use test for the part of your home that 
you regularly use either for the storage of inven-
tory or product samples, or as a daycare facility.
Your home office qualifies as your principal 
place of business if you meet the following re-
quirements.
• You use the office exclusively and regu-
larly for administrative or management ac-
tivities of your trade or business.
• You have no other fixed location where 
you conduct substantial administrative or 
management activities of your trade or 
business.
If you have more than one business loca-
tion, determine your principal place of business 
based on the following factors.
• The relative importance of the activities 
performed at each location.
• If the relative importance factor does not 
determine your principal place of business, 
consider the time spent at each location.
Optional safe harbor method.  Individual 
taxpayers can use the optional safe harbor 
method to determine the amount of deductible 
expenses attributable to certain business use of 
a residence during the tax year. This method is 
an alternative to the calculation, allocation, and 
substantiation of actual expenses.
The deduction under the optional method is 
limited to $1,500 per year based on $5 per 
square foot for up to 300 square feet. Under this 
method, you claim your allowable mortgage in-
terest, real estate taxes, and casualty losses on 
the home as itemized deductions on Sched-
ule A (Form 1040 or 1040 -SR). You are not re-
quired to allocate these deductions between 
personal and business use, as is required un-
der the regular method. If you use the optional 
method, you cannot depreciate the portion of 
your home used in a trade or business.
Business expenses unrelated to the home, 
such as advertising, supplies, and wages paid 
to employees, are still fully deductible. All of the 
requirements discussed earlier under Business 
use of your home still apply.
For more information on the deduction for 
business use of your home, including the op-
tional safe harbor method, see Pub. 587.
If you were entitled to deduct deprecia-
tion on the part of your home used for 
business, you cannot exclude the part 
of the gain from the sale of your home that 
equals any depreciation you deducted (or could 
have deducted) for periods after May 6, 1997.
Business use of your car.  If you use your car 
exclusively in your business, you can deduct 
car expenses. If you use your car for both busi-
ness and personal purposes, you must divide 
your expenses based on actual mileage. Gen-
erally, commuting expenses between your 
home and your business location, within the 
area of your tax home, are not deductible.
You can deduct actual car expenses, which 
include depreciation (or lease payments), gas 
and oil, tires, repairs, tune -ups, insurance, and 
registration fees. Or, instead of figuring the 
business part of these actual expenses, you 
may be able to use the standard mileage rate to 
figure your deduction. For 2019, the standard 
mileage rate is 58 cents per mile. Beginning in 
2020, the standard mileage rate decreased to 
57.5 cents per mile.
If you are self -employed, you can also de-
duct the business part of interest on your car 
loan, state and local personal property tax on 
the car, parking fees, and tolls, whether or not 
you claim the standard mileage rate.
For more information on car expenses and 
the rules for using the standard mileage rate, 
see Pub. 463.
CAUTION
!
Page 5 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 1 Deducting Business Expenses  Page 5

How Much Can I 
Deduct?
Generally, you can deduct the full amount of a 
business expense if it meets the criteria of ordi-
nary and necessary and it is not a capital ex-
pense.
Recovery of amount deducted (tax benefit 
rule). If you recover part of an expense in the 
same tax year in which you would have claimed 
a deduction, reduce your current year expense 
by the amount of the recovery. If you have a re-
covery in a later year, include the recovered 
amount in income in that year. However, if part 
of the deduction for the expense did not reduce 
your tax, you do not have to include that part of 
the recovered amount in income.
For more information on recoveries and the 
tax benefit rule, see Pub. 525.
Payments in kind.  If you provide services to 
pay a business expense, the amount you can 
deduct is limited to your out -of-pocket costs. 
You cannot deduct the cost of your own labor.
Similarly, if you pay a business expense in 
goods or other property, you can deduct only 
what the property costs you. If these costs are 
included in the cost of goods sold, do not de-
duct them again as a business expense.
Limits on losses.  If your deductions for an in-
vestment or business activity are more than the 
income it brings in, you have a loss. There may 
be limits on how much of the loss you can de-
duct.
Not-for-profit limits.  If you carry on your 
business activity without the intention of making 
a profit, you cannot use a loss from it to offset 
other income. For more information, see 
Not-for-Profit Activities, later.
At-risk limits. Generally, a deductible loss 
from a trade or business or other income -pro-
ducing activity is limited to the investment you 
have “at risk” in the activity. You are at risk in 
any activity for the following.
1. The money and adjusted basis of property 
you contribute to the activity.
2. Amounts you borrow for use in the activity 
if:
a. You are personally liable for repay-
ment, or
b. You pledge property (other than prop-
erty used in the activity) as security for 
the loan.
For more information, see Pub. 925.
Passive activities. Generally, you are in a 
passive activity if you have a trade or business 
activity in which you do not materially partici-
pate, or a rental activity. In general, deductions 
for losses from passive activities only offset in-
come from passive activities. You cannot use 
any excess deductions to offset other income. 
In addition, passive activity credits can only off-
set the tax on net passive income. Any excess 
loss or credits are carried over to later years. 
Suspended passive losses are fully deductible 
in the year you completely dispose of the activ-
ity. For more information, see Pub. 925.
Net operating loss (NOL).  If your deduc-
tions are more than your income for the year, 
you may have an NOL. You can use an NOL to 
lower your taxes in other years. See Pub. 536 
for more information.
See Pub. 542 for information about NOLs of 
corporations.
When Can I
Deduct an Expense?
When you can deduct an expense depends on 
your accounting method. An accounting 
method is a set of rules used to determine when 
and how income and expenses are reported. 
The two basic methods are the cash method 
and the accrual method. Whichever method 
you choose must clearly reflect income.
For more information on accounting meth-
ods, see Pub. 538.
Cash method.  Under the cash method of ac-
counting, you generally deduct business expen-
ses in the tax year you pay them.
Accrual method.  Under an accrual method of 
accounting, you generally deduct business ex-
penses when both of the following apply.
1. The all-events test has been met. The test 
is met when:
a. All events have occurred that fix the 
fact of liability, and
b. The liability can be determined with 
reasonable accuracy.
2. Economic performance has occurred.
Economic performance.  You generally 
cannot deduct or capitalize a business expense 
until economic performance occurs. If your ex-
pense is for property or services provided to 
you, or for your use of property, economic per-
formance occurs as the property or services are 
provided, or the property is used. If your ex-
pense is for property or services you provide to 
others, economic performance occurs as you 
provide the property or services.
Example.  Your tax year is the calendar 
year. In December 2019, the Field Plumbing 
Company did some repair work at your place of 
business and sent you a bill for $600. You paid 
it by check in January 2020. If you use the ac-
crual method of accounting, deduct the $600 on 
your tax return for 2019 because all events 
have occurred to “fix” the fact of liability (in this 
case, the work was completed), the liability can 
be determined, and economic performance oc-
curred in that year.
If you use the cash method of accounting, 
deduct the expense on your 2020 tax return.
Prepayment. You generally cannot deduct ex-
penses in advance, even if you pay them in ad-
vance. This applies to prepaid interest, prepaid 
insurance premiums, and any other prepaid ex-
pense that creates an intangible asset. If you 
pay an amount that creates an intangible asset, 
then you must capitalize the amounts paid and 
begin to amortize the payment over the appro-
priate period.
However, you do not have to capitalize 
amounts for creating an intangible asset if the 
right or benefit created does not extend beyond 
the earlier of 12 months after the date that you 
first receive the right or benefit or the end of the 
tax year following the year in which you made 
the advance payment. If you are a cash method 
taxpayer and your advance payment qualifies 
for this exception, then you can generally de-
duct the amount when paid. If you are an ac-
crual method taxpayer, you cannot deduct the 
amount until the all -events test has been met 
and economic performance has occurred.
Example 1.  In 2019, you sign a 10 -year 
lease and immediately pay your rent for the first 
3 years. Even though you paid the rent for 
2019, 2020, and 2021, you can only deduct the 
rent for 2019 on your 2019 tax return. You can 
deduct the rent for 2020 and 2021 on your tax 
returns for those years.
Example 2.  You are a cash method calen-
dar year taxpayer. On December 1, 2019, you 
sign a 12-month lease, effective beginning Jan-
uary 1, 2020, and immediately pay your rent for 
the entire 12-month period that begins on Janu-
ary 1, 2020. The right or benefit attributable to 
the payment neither extends more than 12 
months beyond January 1, 2020 (the first day 
that you are entitled to use the property) nor be-
yond the tax year ending December 31, 2020 
(the year following the year in which you made 
the advance payment). Therefore, your prepay-
ment does not have to be capitalized, and you 
can deduct the entire payment in the year you 
pay it.
Contested liability.  Under the cash method, 
you can deduct a contested liability only in the 
year you pay the liability. Under the accrual 
method, you can deduct contested liabilities 
such as taxes (except foreign or U.S. posses-
sion income, war profits, and excess profits 
taxes) either in the tax year you pay the liability 
(or transfer money or other property to satisfy 
the obligation) or in the tax year you settle the 
contest. However, to take the deduction in the 
year of payment or transfer, you must meet cer-
tain conditions. See Regulations section 
1.461-2.
Related person.  Under an accrual method of 
accounting, you generally deduct expenses 
when you incur them, even if you have not yet 
paid them. However, if you and the person you 
owe are related and that person uses the cash 
method of accounting, you must pay the ex-
pense before you can deduct it. Your deduction 
is allowed when the amount is includible in in-
come by the related cash method payee. For 
more information, see Related Persons in Pub. 
538.
Not-for-Profit Activities
If you do not carry on your business or invest-
ment activity to make a profit, you cannot use a 
loss from the activity to offset other income. Ac-
tivities you do as a hobby, or mainly for sport or 
recreation, are often not entered into for profit.
Page 6 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 6  Chapter 1 Deducting Business Expenses

The limit on not -for-profit losses applies to 
individuals, partnerships, estates, trusts, and S 
corporations. It does not apply to corporations 
other than S corporations.
In determining whether you are carrying on 
an activity for profit, several factors are taken 
into account. No one factor alone is decisive. 
Among the factors to consider are whether:
• You carry on the activity in a businesslike 
manner,
• The time and effort you put into the activity 
indicate you intend to make it profitable,
• You depend on the income for your liveli-
hood,
• Your losses are due to circumstances be-
yond your control (or are normal in the 
start-up phase of your type of business),
• You change your methods of operation in 
an attempt to improve profitability,
• You (or your advisors) have the knowledge 
needed to carry on the activity as a suc-
cessful business,
• You were successful in making a profit in 
similar activities in the past,
• The activity makes a profit in some years, 
and
• You can expect to make a future profit from 
the appreciation of the assets used in the 
activity.
Presumption of profit.  An activity is pre-
sumed carried on for profit if it produced a profit 
in at least 3 of the last 5 tax years, including the 
current year. Activities that consist primarily of 
breeding, training, showing, or racing horses 
are presumed carried on for profit if they pro-
duced a profit in at least 2 of the last 7 tax 
years, including the current year. The activity 
must be substantially the same for each year 
within this period. You have a profit when the 
gross income from an activity exceeds the de-
ductions.
If a taxpayer dies before the end of the 
5-year (or 7-year) period, the “test” period ends 
on the date of the taxpayer's death.
If your business or investment activity 
passes this 3 - (or 2 -) years -of-profit test, the 
IRS will presume it is carried on for profit. This 
means the limits discussed here will not apply. 
You can take all your business deductions from 
the activity, even for the years that you have a 
loss. You can rely on this presumption unless 
the IRS later shows it to be invalid.
Using the presumption later.  If you are start-
ing an activity and do not have 3 (or 2) years 
showing a profit, you can elect to have the pre-
sumption made after you have the 5 (or 7) years 
of experience allowed by the test.
You can elect to do this by filing Form 5213. 
Filing this form postpones any determination 
that your activity is not carried on for profit until 
5 (or 7) years have passed since you started 
the activity.
The benefit gained by making this election is 
that the IRS will not immediately question 
whether your activity is engaged in for profit. 
Accordingly, it will not restrict your deductions. 
Rather, you will gain time to earn a profit in the 
required number of years. If you show 3 (or 2) 
years of profit at the end of this period, your de-
ductions are not limited under these rules. If you 
do not have 3 (or 2) years of profit, the limit can 
be applied retroactively to any year with a loss 
in the 5-year (or 7-year) period.
Filing Form 5213 automatically extends the 
period of limitations on any year in the 5 -year 
(or 7-year) period to 2 years after the due date 
of the tax return for the last year of the period. 
The period is extended only for deductions of 
the activity and any related deductions that 
might be affected.
You must file Form 5213 within 3 years 
after the due date of your tax return 
(determined without extensions) for the 
year in which you first carried on the activity, or, 
if earlier, within 60 days after receiving written 
notice from the IRS proposing to disallow de-
ductions attributable to the activity.
Gross Income
Gross income from a not -for-profit activity in-
cludes the total of all gains from the sale, ex-
change, or other disposition of property, and all 
other gross receipts derived from the activity. 
Gross income from the activity also includes 
capital gains and rents received for the use of 
property that is held in connection with the ac-
tivity.
You can determine gross income from any 
not-for-profit activity by subtracting the cost of 
goods sold from your gross receipts. However, 
if you determine gross income by subtracting 
cost of goods sold from gross receipts, you 
must do so consistently, and in a manner that 
follows generally accepted methods of account-
ing.
Limit on Deductions
You can no longer claim any miscella-
neous itemized deductions. Miscella-
neous itemized deductions are those 
deductions that would have been subject to the 
2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limitation. You 
can still claim certain expenses as itemized de-
ductions on Schedule A (Form 1040 or 
1040-SR).
Deductions you can take for personal as well as 
for business activities are allowed in full. For in-
dividuals, all nonbusiness deductions, such as 
those for home mortgage interest, taxes, and 
casualty losses, may also be deducted. Deduct 
them on the appropriate lines of Schedule A 
(Form 1040 or 1040-SR).
For the limits that apply to home mortgage 
interest, see Pub. 936.
Generally, you can deduct a casualty loss 
on property you own for personal use only to 
the extent each casualty loss is more than 
$100, and the total of all casualty losses ex-
ceeds 10% of your adjusted gross income 
(AGI). See Pub. 547 for more information on 
casualty losses.
Disaster tax relief.  For personal casualty 
losses resulting from federally declared disas-
ters that occurred before 2018, you may be en-
titled to disaster tax relief. As a result, you may 
be required to figure your casualty loss differ-
ently. In 2018, casualty and theft loss are 
allowed only to the extent it is attributable to a 
TIP
CAUTION
!
federally declared disaster. For more informa-
tion, see Pub. 976, Disaster Relief.
Partnerships and S corporations.  If a part-
nership or S corporation carries on a 
not-for-profit activity, these limits apply at the 
partnership or S corporation level. They are re-
flected in the individual shareholder's or part-
ner's distributive shares.
More than one activity.  If you have several 
undertakings, each may be a separate activity 
or several undertakings may be combined. The 
following are the most significant facts and cir-
cumstances in making this determination.
• The degree of organizational and eco-
nomic interrelationship of various under-
takings.
• The business purpose that is (or might be) 
served by carrying on the various under-
takings separately or together in a busi-
ness or investment setting.
• The similarity of the undertakings.
The IRS will generally accept your charac-
terization if it is supported by facts and circum-
stances.
If you are carrying on two or more dif-
ferent activities, keep the deductions 
and income from each one separate. 
Figure separately whether each is a 
not-for-profit activity. Then figure the limit on de-
ductions and losses separately for each activity 
that is not for profit.
2.
Employees' Pay
Introduction
You can generally deduct the amount you pay 
your employees for the services they perform. 
The pay may be in cash, property, or services. It 
may include wages, salaries, bonuses, commis-
sions, or other noncash compensation such as 
vacation allowances and fringe benefits. For in-
formation about deducting employment taxes, 
see chapter 5.
You may be able to claim employment 
credits, such as the credits listed be-
low, if you meet certain requirements. 
You must reduce your deduction for employee 
wages by the amount of employment credits 
that you claim. For more information about 
these credits, see the form on which the credit 
is claimed; you can find a list of these forms in 
Form (and Instructions)  under Useful Items , 
later.
• Work opportunity credit.
• Empowerment zone employment credit.
• Indian employment credit.
• Credit for employer differential wage pay-
ments.
TIP
TIP
Page 7 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 2 Employees' Pay  Page 7

• Employer credit for paid family and medi-
cal leave.
Topics
This chapter discusses:
• Tests for deducting pay
• Kinds of pay
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
15 Employer's Tax Guide
15-A Employer's Supplemental Tax Guide
15-B Employer's Tax Guide to Fringe 
Benefits
Form (and Instructions)
1099-MISC Miscellaneous Income
5884 Work Opportunity Credit
8844 Empowerment Zone Employment 
Credit
8845 Indian Employment Credit
8932 Credit for Employer Differential 
Wage Payments
8994 Employer Credit for Paid Family and 
Medical Leave
W-2 Wage and Tax Statement
See chapter 12 for information about getting 
publications and forms.
Tests for Deducting Pay
To be deductible, your employees' pay must be 
an ordinary and necessary business expense 
and you must pay or incur it. These and other 
requirements that apply to all business expen-
ses are explained in chapter 1.
In addition, the pay must meet both of the 
following tests.
• Test 1. It must be reasonable.
• Test 2. It must be for services performed.
The form or method of figuring the pay doesn't 
affect its deductibility. For example, bonuses 
and commissions based on sales or earnings, 
and paid under an agreement made before the 
services were performed, are both deductible.
Test 1—Reasonableness
You must be able to prove that the pay is rea-
sonable. Whether the pay is reasonable de-
pends on the circumstances that existed when 
you contracted for the services, not those that 
exist when reasonableness is questioned. If the 
pay is excessive, the excess pay is disallowed 
as a deduction.
Factors to consider.  Determine the reasona-
bleness of pay by the facts and circumstances. 
Generally, reasonable pay is the amount that a 
similar business would pay for the same or simi-
lar services.
  15 
  15-A 
  15-B 
  1099-MISC 
  5884 
  8844 
  8845 
  8932 
  8994 
  W-2 
To determine if pay is reasonable, also con-
sider the following items and any other pertinent 
facts.
• The duties performed by the employee.
• The volume of business handled.
• The character and amount of responsibil-
ity.
• The complexities of your business.
• The amount of time required.
• The cost of living in the locality.
• The ability and achievements of the indi-
vidual employee performing the service.
• The pay compared with the gross and net 
income of the business, as well as with dis-
tributions to shareholders if the business is 
a corporation.
• Your policy regarding pay for all your em-
ployees.
• The history of pay for each employee.
Compensation in excess of $1 million.  Pub-
licly held corporations can't deduct compensa-
tion to a “covered employee” to the extent that 
the compensation exceeds $1 million. For more 
information, including the definition of a “cov-
ered employee,” see the Instructions for Form 
1125-E. Also see Notice 2018 -68, 2018 -36 
I.R.B. 418, available at IRS.gov/irb/
2018-36_IRB#NOT-2018-68.
Test 2—For Services 
Performed
You must be able to prove the payment was 
made for services actually performed.
Employee-shareholder salaries.  If a corpo-
ration pays an employee who is also a share-
holder a salary that is unreasonably high con-
sidering the services actually performed, the 
excessive part of the salary may be treated as a 
constructive dividend to the employee -share-
holder. The excessive part of the salary 
wouldn't be allowed as a salary deduction by 
the corporation. For more information on corpo-
rate distributions to shareholders, see Pub. 542.
Kinds of Pay
Some of the ways you may provide pay to your 
employees in addition to regular wages or salar-
ies are discussed next. For specialized and de-
tailed information on employees' pay and the 
employment tax treatment of employees' pay, 
see Pubs. 15, 15-A, and 15-B.
Awards
You can generally deduct amounts you pay to 
your employees as awards, whether paid in 
cash or property. If you give property to an em-
ployee as an employee achievement award, 
your deduction may be limited.
Achievement awards. An achievement award 
is an item of tangible personal property that 
meets all the following requirements.
• It is given to an employee for length of 
service or safety achievement.
• It is awarded as part of a meaningful pre-
sentation.
• It is awarded under conditions and circum-
stances that don't create a significant likeli-
hood of disguised pay.
Tangible personal property.  An award 
isn't an item of tangible personal property if it is 
an award of cash, cash equivalents, gift cards, 
gift coupons, or gift certificates (other than ar-
rangements granting only the right to select and 
receive tangible personal property from a limi-
ted assortment of items preselected or preap-
proved by you). Also, tangible personal prop-
erty doesn't include vacations, meals, lodging, 
tickets to theater or sporting events, stocks, 
bonds, other securities, and other similar items.
Length-of-service award.  An award will 
qualify as a length -of-service award only if ei-
ther of the following applies.
• The employee receives the award after his 
or her first 5 years of employment.
• The employee didn't receive another 
length-of-service award (other than one of 
very small value) during the same year or 
in any of the prior 4 years.
Safety achievement award.  An award for 
safety achievement will qualify as an achieve-
ment award unless one of the following applies.
1. It is given to a manager, administrator, 
clerical employee, or other professional 
employee.
2. During the tax year, more than 10% of 
your employees, excluding those listed in 
(1), have already received a safety ach-
ievement award (other than one of very 
small value).
Deduction limit.  Your deduction for the 
cost of employee achievement awards given to 
any one employee during the tax year is limited 
to the following.
• $400 for awards that aren't qualified plan 
awards.
• $1,600 for all awards, whether or not quali-
fied plan awards.
A qualified plan award is an achievement 
award given as part of an established written 
plan or program that doesn't favor highly com-
pensated employees as to eligibility or benefits.
A highly compensated employee is an em-
ployee who meets either of the following tests.
1. The employee was a 5% owner at any 
time during the year or the preceding year.
2. The employee received more than 
$120,000 in pay for 2018.
You can choose to ignore test (2) if the em-
ployee wasn't also in the top 20% of employees 
ranked by pay for the preceding year.
An award isn't a qualified plan award if the 
average cost of all the employee achievement 
awards given during the tax year (that would be 
qualified plan awards except for this limit) is 
more than $400. To figure this average cost, ig-
nore awards of nominal value.
Deduct achievement awards, up to the max-
imum amounts listed earlier, as a nonwage 
business expense on your return or business 
schedule.
Page 8 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 8  Chapter 2 Employees' Pay

You may not owe employment taxes on 
the value of some achievement awards 
you provide to an employee. See Pub. 
15-B.
Bonuses
You can generally deduct a bonus paid to an 
employee if you intended the bonus as addi-
tional pay for services, not as a gift, and the 
services were performed. However, the total 
bonuses, salaries, and other pay must be rea-
sonable for the services performed. If the bonus 
is paid in property, see Property, later.
Gifts of nominal value.  If, to promote em-
ployee goodwill, you distribute merchandise of 
nominal value or other de minimis items to your 
employees at holidays, you can deduct the cost 
of these items as a nonwage business ex-
pense. See Pub. 15-B for additional information 
on de minimis fringe benefits. If you provide 
food to your employees, your business deduc-
tion may be limited; see Meals and lodging , 
later.
Education Expenses
If you pay or reimburse education expenses for 
an employee, you can deduct the payments if 
they are part of a qualified educational assis-
tance program. Deduct them on the “Employee 
benefit programs” or other appropriate line of 
your tax return. For information on educational 
assistance programs, see Educational Assis-
tance in section 2 of Pub. 15-B.
Fringe Benefits
A fringe benefit is a form of pay for the perform-
ance of services. You can generally deduct the 
cost of fringe benefits.
You may be able to exclude all or part of the 
value of some fringe benefits from your employ-
ees' pay. You also may not owe employment 
taxes on the value of the fringe benefits. See 
Table 2-1 in Pub. 15-B for details.
Generally, no deduction is allowed for activi-
ties generally considered entertainment, 
amusement, or recreation, or for a facility used 
in connection with such activity. However, you 
may deduct these expenses if the goods, serv-
ices, or facilities are treated as compensation to 
the recipient and reported on Form W -2 for an 
employee or on Form 1099 -MISC for an inde-
pendent contractor. If the recipient is an officer, 
director, beneficial owner (directly or indirectly), 
or other “specified individual” (as defined in 
section 274(e)(2)(B) and Regulations section 
1.274-9(b)), special rules apply. See section 
274(e)(2) and Regulations sections 1.274-9 and 
1.274-10.
Certain fringe benefits are discussed next. 
See Pub. 15 -B for more details on these and 
other fringe benefits.
Meals and lodging.  Generally, you can de-
duct 50% of certain meal expenses and 100% 
of certain lodging expenses provided to your 
employees. If the amounts are deductible, de-
TIP
duct the cost in whatever category the expense 
falls.
Deduction limit on meals.  You can gen-
erally deduct only 50% of the cost of furnishing 
meals to your employees. However, you can 
deduct the full cost of certain meals; see sec-
tion 274(n)(2) for more information. For exam-
ple, you can deduct the full cost of the following 
meals.
• Meals whose value you include in an em-
ployee's wages.
• Meals you furnish to your employees as 
part of the expense of providing recrea-
tional or social activities, such as holiday 
parties or annual picnics, when made pri-
marily for the benefit of your employees 
other than employees who are officers, 
shareholders or other owners who own a 
10% or greater interest in your business, or 
other highly compensated employees.
• Meals you’re required by federal law to fur-
nish to crew members of certain commer-
cial vessels (or would be required to fur-
nish if the vessels were operated at sea). 
This doesn't include meals you furnish on 
vessels primarily providing luxury water 
transportation.
• Meals you furnish on an oil or gas platform 
or drilling rig located offshore or in Alaska. 
This includes meals you furnish at a sup-
port camp that is near and integral to an oil 
or gas drilling rig located in Alaska.
P.L. 115 -97, Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, 
changed the rules for the deduction of 
food or beverage expenses that are ex-
cludable from employee income as a de mini-
mis fringe benefit. For amounts incurred or paid 
after 2017, the 50% limit on deductions for food 
or beverage expenses also applies to food or 
beverage expenses excludable from employee 
income as a de minimis fringe benefit. While 
your business deduction may be limited, the 
rules that allow you to exclude certain de mini-
mis meals and meals on your business prem-
ises from your employee's wages still apply. 
See Meals in section 2 of Pub. 15-B.
Food and beverage expense incurred to-
gether with entertainment expenses.  P.L. 
115-97 changed the rules for the deduction of 
business entertainment expenses. For amounts 
incurred or paid after 2017, no business deduc-
tion is allowed for any item generally consid-
ered to be entertainment, amusement, or recre-
ation. As discussed earlier, you can deduct 
50% of the cost of business meals. If food and 
beverages are provided during or at an enter-
tainment activity, and the food and beverages 
are purchased separately from the entertain-
ment, or the cost of the food and beverages is 
stated separately from the cost of the entertain-
ment on one or more bills, invoices, or receipts, 
you may continue to deduct 50% of the busi-
ness meal expenses. However, if you purchase 
food and beverages together with entertain-
ment expenses and the cost of the food and 
beverages isn't stated separately on the in-
voice, the cost of the food and beverages is 
also an entertainment expense and none of the 
expenses are deductible. For more information, 
including details about four additional require-
ments that must be met for a business meal to 
be deductible, see Notice 2018 -76, 2018 -42 
CAUTION
!
I.R.B. 599, available at IRS.gov/irb/
2018-42_IRB#NOT-2018-76.
Transportation (commuting) benefits.  If 
you provide your employees with qualified 
transportation benefits, such as transportation 
in a commuter highway vehicle, transit passes, 
or qualified parking, you may no longer deduct 
these amounts. P.L. 115 -97 provides that no 
deduction is allowed for qualified transportation 
benefits (whether provided directly by you, 
through a bona fide reimbursement arrange-
ment, or through a compensation reduction 
agreement) incurred or paid after 2017. Also, 
no deduction is allowed for any expense incur-
red for providing any transportation, or any pay-
ment or reimbursement to your employee, in 
connection with travel between your employee's 
residence and place of employment, except as 
necessary for ensuring the safety of your em-
ployee or for qualified bicycle commuting reim-
bursements as described in section 132(f)(5)
(F). While you may no longer deduct payments 
for qualified transportation benefits, the fringe 
benefit exclusion rules still apply and the pay-
ments, except for qualified bicycle commuting 
reimbursements, may be excluded from your 
employee's wages. Although the value of a 
qualified transportation fringe benefit is relevant 
in determining the fringe benefit exclusion and 
whether the section 274(e)(2) exception for ex-
penses treated as compensation applies, the 
deduction that is disallowed relates to the ex-
pense of providing a qualified transportation 
fringe, not its value. See Pub. 15 -B for more in-
formation about qualified transportation bene-
fits.
Employee benefit programs.  Employee ben-
efit programs include the following.
• Accident and health plans.
• Adoption assistance.
• Cafeteria plans.
• Dependent care assistance.
• Education assistance.
• Life insurance coverage.
• Welfare benefit funds.
You can generally deduct amounts you 
spend on employee benefit programs on the 
applicable line of your tax return. For example, 
if you provide dependent care by operating a 
dependent care facility for your employees, de-
duct your costs in whatever categories they fall 
(utilities, salaries, etc.).
Life insurance coverage.  You can't de-
duct the cost of life insurance coverage for you, 
an employee, or any person with a financial in-
terest in your business if you’re directly or indi-
rectly the beneficiary of the policy. See Regula-
tions section 1.264-1 for more information.
Welfare benefit funds.  A welfare benefit 
fund is a funded plan (or a funded arrangement 
having the effect of a plan) that provides welfare 
benefits to your employees, independent con-
tractors, or their beneficiaries. Welfare benefits 
are any benefits other than deferred compensa-
tion or transfers of restricted property.
Your deduction for contributions to a welfare 
benefit fund is limited to the fund's qualified cost 
for the tax year. If your contributions to the fund 
are more than its qualified cost, carry the ex-
cess over to the next tax year.
Page 9 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 2 Employees' Pay  Page 9

Generally, the fund's “qualified cost” is the 
total of the following amounts, reduced by the 
after-tax income of the fund.
• The cost you would’ve been able to deduct 
using the cash method of accounting if you 
had paid for the benefits directly.
• The contributions added to a reserve ac-
count that are needed to fund claims incur-
red but not paid as of the end of the year. 
These claims can be for supplemental un-
employment benefits, severance pay, or 
disability, medical, or life insurance bene-
fits.
For more information, see sections 419(c) 
and 419A and the related regulations.
Loans or Advances
You can generally deduct as wages an advance 
you make to an employee for services to be 
performed if you don't expect the employee to 
repay the advance. However, if the employee 
performs no services, treat the amount you ad-
vanced as a loan; if the employee doesn't repay 
the loan, treat it as income to the employee.
Below-market interest rate loans.  On cer-
tain loans you make to an employee or share-
holder, you’re treated as having received inter-
est income and as having paid compensation or 
dividends equal to that interest. See Be-
low-Market Loans in chapter 4.
Property
If you transfer property (including your compa-
ny's stock) to an employee as payment for serv-
ices, you can generally deduct it as wages. The 
amount you can deduct is the property's fair 
market value (FMV) on the date of the transfer 
less any amount the employee paid for the 
property.
You can claim the deduction only for the tax 
year in which your employee includes the prop-
erty's value in income. Your employee is 
deemed to have included the value in income if 
you report it on Form W-2 in a timely manner.
You treat the deductible amount as received 
in exchange for the property, and you must rec-
ognize any gain or loss realized on the transfer, 
unless it is the company's stock transferred as 
payment for services. Your gain or loss is the 
difference between the FMV of the property and 
its adjusted basis on the date of transfer.
These rules also apply to property transfer-
red to an independent contractor for services, 
generally reported on Form 1099-MISC.
Restricted property.  If the property you 
transfer for services is subject to restrictions 
that affect its value, you generally can't deduct it 
and don't report gain or loss until it is substan-
tially vested in the recipient. However, if the re-
cipient pays for the property, you must report 
any gain at the time of the transfer up to the 
amount paid.
“Substantially vested” means the property 
isn't subject to a substantial risk of forfeiture. 
This means that the recipient isn't likely to have 
to give up his or her rights in the property in the 
future.
Reimbursements for 
Business Expenses
You can generally deduct the amount you pay 
or reimburse employees for business expenses 
incurred for your business. However, your de-
duction may be limited.
If you make the payment under an account-
able plan, deduct it in the category of the ex-
pense paid. For example, if you pay an em-
ployee for travel expenses incurred on your 
behalf, deduct this payment as a travel ex-
pense. If you make the payment under a nonac-
countable plan, deduct it as wages and include 
it in the employee's Form W-2.
See Reimbursement of Travel and Non -En-
tertainment Related Meals , in chapter 11, for 
more information about deducting reimburse-
ments and an explanation of accountable and 
nonaccountable plans.
Sick and Vacation Pay
Sick pay.  You can deduct amounts you pay to 
your employees for sickness and injury, includ-
ing lump -sum amounts, as wages. However, 
your deduction is limited to amounts not com-
pensated by insurance or other means.
Vacation pay.  Vacation pay is an employee 
benefit. It includes amounts paid for unused va-
cation leave. You can deduct vacation pay only 
in the tax year in which the employee actually 
receives it. This rule applies regardless of 
whether you use the cash or accrual method of 
accounting.
3.
Rent Expense
Reminder
Small business taxpayers.  P.L. 115 -97, Tax 
Cuts and Jobs Act, made changes to uniform 
capitalization rules for small business taxpay-
ers. See Uniform capitalization rules, later.
Introduction
This chapter discusses the tax treatment of rent 
or lease payments you make for property you 
use in your business but do not own. It also dis-
cusses how to treat other kinds of payments 
you make that are related to your use of this 
property. These include payments you make for 
taxes on the property.
Topics
This chapter discusses:
• The definition of rent
• Taxes on leased property
• The cost of getting a lease
• Improvements by the lessee
• Capitalizing rent expenses
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
538 Accounting Periods and Methods
544 Sales and Other Dispositions of 
Assets
946 How To Depreciate Property
See chapter 12  for information about getting 
publications and forms.
Rent
Rent is any amount you pay for the use of prop-
erty you do not own. In general, you can deduct 
rent as an expense only if the rent is for prop-
erty you use in your trade or business. If you 
have or will receive equity in or title to the prop-
erty, the rent is not deductible.
Unreasonable rent.  You can’t take a rental 
deduction for unreasonable rent. Ordinarily, the 
issue of reasonableness arises only if you and 
the lessor are related. Rent paid to a related 
person is reasonable if it is the same amount 
you would pay to a stranger for use of the same 
property. Rent isn’t unreasonable just because 
it is figured as a percentage of gross sales. For 
examples of related persons, see Related per-
sons in chapter 2 of Pub. 544.
Rent on your home.  If you rent your home 
and use part of it as your place of business, you 
may be able to deduct the rent you pay for that 
part. You must meet the requirements for busi-
ness use of your home. For more information, 
see Business use of your home in chapter 1.
Rent paid in advance. Generally, rent paid for 
use of property in your trade or business is de-
ductible in the year paid or incurred. If you are 
an accrual method taxpayer and pay rent in ad-
vance, you can deduct only the amount of rent 
that applies to your use of rented property dur-
ing the tax year. You can deduct the rest of the 
rent payment only over the period to which it 
applies. If you are a cash method taxpayer, you 
may deduct the entire amount of rent you paid 
in advance in the year of payment if the pay-
ment applies to the right to use property that 
does not extend beyond the earlier of 12 
months after the first date you have the right to 
use the property or the end of the tax year fol-
lowing the year in which you paid the advance 
rent. If your payment applies to the right to use 
property beyond this period, then you must cap-
italize the rent payment and deduct it over the 
period to which it applies.
Example 1.  You are an accrual method 
calendar year taxpayer and you lease a building 
at a monthly rental rate of $1,000 beginning 
July 1, 2019. On June 30, 2019, you pay ad-
vance rent of $12,000 for the last 6 months of 
2019 and the first 6 months of 2020. You can 
deduct only $6,000 for 2019, for the right to use 
  538 
  544 
  946 
Page 10 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 10  Chapter 3 Rent Expense

property in 2019. You deduct the other $6,000 
in 2020.
Example 2.  Assume the same facts as Ex-
ample 1, except you are a cash method calen-
dar year taxpayer. You may deduct the entire 
$12,000 payment for 2019. The payment ap-
plies to your right to use the property that does 
not extend beyond 12 months after the date you 
received this right. If you deduct the $12,000 in 
2019, you should not deduct any part of this 
payment in 2020.
Example 3.  You are either a cash or ac-
crual calendar year taxpayer. Last January, you 
leased property for 3 years for $6,000 per year. 
You pay the full $18,000 (3 x $6,000) during the 
first year of the lease. Because this amount is a 
prepaid expense that must be capitalized, you 
can deduct only $6,000 per year, the amount al-
locable to your use of the property in each year.
Canceling a lease.  You can generally deduct 
as rent an amount you pay to cancel a business 
lease.
Lease or purchase.  There may be instances 
in which you must determine whether your pay-
ments are for rent or for the purchase of the 
property. You must first determine whether your 
agreement is a lease or a conditional sales con-
tract. Payments made under a conditional sales 
contract are not deductible as rent expense.
Conditional sales contract.  Whether an 
agreement is a conditional sales contract de-
pends on the intent of the parties. Determine in-
tent based on the provisions of the agreement 
and the facts and circumstances that exist 
when you make the agreement. No single test, 
or special combination of tests, always applies. 
However, in general, an agreement may be 
considered a conditional sales contract rather 
than a lease if any of the following is true.
• The agreement applies part of each pay-
ment toward an equity interest you will re-
ceive.
• You get title to the property after you make 
a stated amount of required payments.
• The amount you must pay to use the prop-
erty for a short time is a large part of the 
amount you would pay to get title to the 
property.
• You pay much more than the current fair 
rental value of the property.
• You have an option to buy the property at a 
nominal price compared to the value of the 
property when you may exercise the op-
tion. Determine this value when you make 
the agreement.
• You have an option to buy the property at a 
nominal price compared to the total 
amount you have to pay under the agree-
ment.
• The agreement designates part of the pay-
ments as interest, or that part is easy to 
recognize as interest.
Leveraged leases. Leveraged lease trans-
actions may not be considered leases. Lever-
aged leases generally involve three parties: a 
lessor, a lessee, and a lender to the lessor. 
Usually, the lease term covers a large part of 
the useful life of the leased property, and the 
lessee's payments to the lessor are enough to 
cover the lessor's payments to the lender.
If you plan to take part in what appears to be 
a leveraged lease, you may want to get an ad-
vance ruling.
• Revenue Procedure 2001-28 contains the 
guidelines the IRS will use to determine if a 
leveraged lease is a lease for federal in-
come tax purposes.
• Revenue Procedure 2001-29 provides the 
information required to be furnished in a 
request for an advance ruling on a lever-
aged lease transaction.
These two revenue procedures can be found in 
I.R.B. 2001 -19, which is available at 
IRS.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb01-19.pdf.
For advance ruling purposes only, the IRS 
will consider the lessor in a leveraged lease 
transaction to be the owner of the property and 
the transaction to be a valid lease if all the fac-
tors in the revenue procedure are met, including 
the following.
• The lessor must maintain a minimum un-
conditional “at risk” equity investment in 
the property (at least 20% of the cost of the 
property) during the entire lease term.
• The lessee may not have a contractual 
right to buy the property from the lessor at 
less than FMV when the right is exercised.
• The lessee may not invest in the property, 
except as provided by Revenue Procedure 
2001-28.
• The lessee may not lend any money to the 
lessor to buy the property or guarantee the 
loan used by the lessor to buy the prop-
erty.
• The lessor must show that it expects to re-
ceive a profit apart from the tax deduc-
tions, allowances, credits, and other tax at-
tributes.
The IRS may charge you a user fee for issu-
ing a tax ruling. For more information, see Rev-
enue Procedure 2019-1, available at
IRS.gov/irb/2019-01_IRB#RP-2019-1.
Leveraged leases of limited -use prop-
erty.  The IRS won’t issue advance rulings on 
leveraged leases of so -called limited-use prop-
erty. Limited -use property is property not ex-
pected to be either useful to or usable by a les-
sor at the end of the lease term except for 
continued leasing or transfer to a lessee. See 
Revenue Procedure 2001 -28 for examples of 
limited-use property and property that isn’t limi-
ted-use property.
Leases over $250,000.  Special rules are pro-
vided for certain leases of tangible property. 
The rules apply if the lease calls for total pay-
ments of more than $250,000 and any of the fol-
lowing apply.
• Rents increase during the lease.
• Rents decrease during the lease.
• Rents are deferred (rent is payable after 
the end of the calendar year following the 
calendar year in which the use occurs and 
the rent is allocated).
• Rents are prepaid (rent is payable before 
the end of the calendar year preceding the 
calendar year in which the use occurs and 
the rent is allocated).
These rules do not apply if your lease specifies 
equal amounts of rent for each month in the 
lease term and all rent payments are due in the 
calendar year to which the rent relates (or in the 
preceding or following calendar year).
Generally, if the special rules apply, you 
must use an accrual method of accounting (and 
time value of money principles) for your rental 
expenses, regardless of your overall method of 
accounting. In addition, in certain cases in 
which the IRS has determined that a lease was 
designed to achieve tax avoidance, you must 
take rent and stated or imputed interest into ac-
count under a constant rental accrual method in 
which the rent is treated as accruing ratably 
over the entire lease term. For details, see sec-
tion 467.
Taxes on
Leased Property
If you lease business property, you can deduct 
as additional rent any taxes you have to pay to 
or for the lessor. When you can deduct these 
taxes as additional rent depends on your ac-
counting method.
Cash method.  If you use the cash method of 
accounting, you can deduct the taxes as addi-
tional rent only for the tax year in which you pay 
them.
Accrual method.  If you use an accrual 
method of accounting, you can deduct the 
taxes as additional rent for the tax year in which 
you can determine all the following.
• That you have a liability for taxes on the 
leased property.
• How much the liability is.
• That economic performance occurred.
The liability and amount of taxes are deter-
mined by state or local law and the lease agree-
ment. Economic performance occurs as you 
use the property.
Example 1.  Oak Corporation is a calendar 
year taxpayer that uses an accrual method of 
accounting. Oak leases land for use in its busi-
ness. Under state law, owners of real property 
become liable (incur a lien on the property) for 
real estate taxes for the year on January 1 of 
that year. However, they don’t have to pay 
these taxes until July 1 of the next year (18 
months later) when tax bills are issued. Under 
the terms of the lease, Oak becomes liable for 
the real estate taxes in the later year when the 
tax bills are issued. If the lease ends before the 
tax bill for a year is issued, Oak isn’t liable for 
the taxes for that year.
Oak cannot deduct the real estate taxes as 
rent until the tax bill is issued. This is when 
Oak's liability under the lease becomes fixed.
Example 2.  The facts are the same as in 
Example 1, except that, according to the terms 
of the lease, Oak becomes liable for the real es-
tate taxes when the owner of the property be-
comes liable for them. As a result, Oak will de-
duct the real estate taxes as rent on its tax 
return for the earlier year. This is the year in 
which Oak's liability under the lease becomes 
fixed.
Page 11 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 3 Rent Expense  Page 11

Cost of Getting a Lease
You may either enter into a new lease with the 
lessor of the property or get an existing lease 
from another lessee. Very often when you get 
an existing lease from another lessee, you must 
pay the previous lessee money to get the lease, 
besides having to pay the rent on the lease.
If you get an existing lease on property or 
equipment for your business, you must gener-
ally amortize any amount you pay to get that 
lease over the remaining term of the lease. For 
example, if you pay $10,000 to get a lease and 
there are 10 years remaining on the lease with 
no option to renew, you can deduct $1,000 
each year.
The cost of getting an existing lease of tan-
gible property is not subject to the amortization 
rules for section 197 intangibles discussed in 
chapter 8.
Option to renew.  The term of the lease for 
amortization includes all renewal options plus 
any other period for which you and the lessor 
reasonably expect the lease to be renewed. 
However, this applies only if less than 75% of 
the cost of getting the lease is for the term re-
maining on the purchase date (not including 
any period for which you may choose to renew, 
extend, or continue the lease). Allocate the 
lease cost to the original term and any option 
term based on the facts and circumstances. In 
some cases, it may be appropriate to make the 
allocation using a present value calculation. For 
more information, see Regulations section 
1.178-1(b)(5).
Example 1.  You paid $10,000 to get a 
lease with 20 years remaining on it and two op-
tions to renew for 5 years each. Of this cost, 
you paid $7,000 for the original lease and 
$3,000 for the renewal options. Because 
$7,000 is less than 75% of the total $10,000 
cost of the lease (or $7,500), you must amortize 
the $10,000 over 30 years. That is the remain-
ing life of your present lease plus the periods for 
renewal.
Example 2.  The facts are the same as in 
Example 1, except that you paid $8,000 for the 
original lease and $2,000 for the renewal op-
tions. You can amortize the entire $10,000 over 
the 20-year remaining life of the original lease. 
The $8,000 cost of getting the original lease 
was not less than 75% of the total cost of the 
lease (or $7,500).
Cost of a modification agreement.  You may 
have to pay an additional “rent” amount over 
part of the lease period to change certain provi-
sions in your lease. You must capitalize these 
payments and amortize them over the remain-
ing period of the lease. You can’t deduct the 
payments as additional rent, even if they are 
described as rent in the agreement.
Example.  You are a calendar year tax-
payer and sign a 20 -year lease to rent part of a 
building starting on January 1. However, before 
you occupy it, you decide that you really need 
less space. The lessor agrees to reduce your 
rent from $7,000 to $6,000 per year and to re-
lease the excess space from the original lease. 
In exchange, you agree to pay an additional 
rent amount of $3,000, payable in 60 monthly 
installments of $50 each.
You must capitalize the $3,000 and amortize 
it over the 20-year term of the lease. Your amor-
tization deduction each year will be $150 
($3,000 ÷ 20). You can’t deduct the $600 (12 × 
$50) that you will pay during each of the first 5 
years as rent.
Commissions, bonuses, and fees.  Commis-
sions, bonuses, fees, and other amounts you 
pay to get a lease on property you use in your 
business are capital costs. You must amortize 
these costs over the term of the lease.
Loss on merchandise and fixtures.  If you 
sell at a loss merchandise and fixtures that you 
bought solely to get a lease, the loss is a cost of 
getting the lease. You must capitalize the loss 
and amortize it over the remaining term of the 
lease.
Improvements
by Lessee
If you add buildings or make other permanent 
improvements to leased property, depreciate 
the cost of the improvements using the modified 
accelerated cost recovery system (MACRS). 
Depreciate the property over its appropriate re-
covery period. You can’t amortize the cost over 
the remaining term of the lease.
If you don’t keep the improvements when 
you end the lease, figure your gain or loss 
based on your adjusted basis in the improve-
ments at that time.
For more information, see the discussion of 
MACRS in chapter 4 of Pub. 946.
Assignment of a lease.  If a long -term lessee 
who makes permanent improvements to land 
later assigns all lease rights to you for money 
and you pay the rent required by the lease, the 
amount you pay for the assignment is a capital 
investment. If the rental value of the leased land 
increased since the lease began, part of your 
capital investment is for that increase in the 
rental value. The rest is for your investment in 
the permanent improvements.
The part that is for the increased rental value 
of the land is a cost of getting a lease, and you 
amortize it over the remaining term of the lease. 
You can depreciate the part that is for your in-
vestment in the improvements over the recov-
ery period of the property as discussed earlier, 
without regard to the lease term.
Capitalizing
Rent Expenses
Under the uniform capitalization rules, you must 
capitalize the direct costs and part of the indi-
rect costs for certain production or resale activi-
ties. Include these costs in the basis of property 
you produce or acquire for resale, rather than 
claiming them as a current deduction. You re-
cover the costs through depreciation, amortiza-
tion, or cost of goods sold when you use, sell, 
or otherwise dispose of the property.
Indirect costs include amounts incurred for 
renting or leasing equipment, facilities, or land.
Uniform capitalization rules.  You may be 
subject to the uniform capitalization rules if you 
do any of the following, unless the property is 
produced for your use other than in a business 
or an activity carried on for profit.
1. Produce real property or tangible personal 
property.
2. Acquire property for resale. However, this 
rule does not apply to personal property if 
your average annual gross receipts are 
$10 million or less.
Effective for tax years beginning after 2017, 
if you are a small business taxpayer (see Cost 
of Goods Sold  in chapter 1), you are not re-
quired to capitalize costs under section 263A. 
See section 263A(i).
Producing property.  You produce prop-
erty if you construct, build, install, manufacture, 
develop, improve, create, raise, or grow the 
property. Property produced for you under a 
contract is treated as produced by you to the 
extent you make payments or otherwise incur 
costs in connection with the property.
Example 1.  You rent construction equip-
ment to build a storage facility. If you are sub-
ject to the uniform capitalization rules, you must 
capitalize as part of the cost of the building the 
rent you paid for the equipment. You recover 
your cost by claiming a deduction for deprecia-
tion on the building.
Example 2.  You rent space in a facility to 
conduct your business of manufacturing tools. If 
you are subject to the uniform capitalization 
rules, you must include the rent you paid to oc-
cupy the facility in the cost of the tools you pro-
duce.
More information.  For exceptions and more 
information on these rules, see Uniform Capital-
ization Rules  in Pub. 538 and the regulations 
under section 263A.
4.
Interest
Introduction
This chapter discusses the tax treatment of 
business interest expense. Business interest 
expense is an amount charged for the use of 
money you borrowed for business activities.
Page 12 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 12  Chapter 4 Interest

Topics
This chapter discusses:
• Allocation of interest
• Interest expense limitation
• Interest you can deduct
• Interest you cannot deduct
• Capitalization of interest
• When to deduct interest
• Below-market loans
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
537 Installment Sales
550 Investment Income and Expenses
936 Home Mortgage Interest Deduction
Form (and Instructions)
Schedule A (Form 1040 or 1040-SR) 
Itemized Deductions
Schedule E (Form 1040 or 1040-SR) 
Supplemental Income and Loss
Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) Partner's 
Share of Income,
Deductions, Credits, etc.
Schedule K-1 (Form 1120-S) 
Shareholder's Share of Income,
Deductions, Credits, etc.
1098 Mortgage Interest Statement
3115 Application for Change in 
Accounting Method
4952 Investment Interest Expense 
Deduction
8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitations
8990 Limitation on Business Interest 
Expense Under Section 163(j)
See chapter 12 for information about getting 
publications and forms.
Allocation of Interest
The rules for deducting interest vary, depending 
on whether the loan proceeds are used for busi-
ness, personal, or investment activities. If you 
use the proceeds of a loan for more than one 
type of expense, you must allocate the interest 
based on the use of the loan's proceeds.
Allocate your interest expense to the follow-
ing categories.
• Nonpassive trade or business activity inter-
est.
• Passive trade or business activity interest.
• Investment interest.
• Portfolio interest.
• Personal interest.
In general, you allocate interest on a loan the 
same way you allocate the loan proceeds. You 
allocate loan proceeds by tracing disburse-
ments to specific uses.
  537
  550
  936
  Schedule A (Form 1040 or 1040-SR)
  Schedule E (Form 1040 or 1040-SR)
  Schedule K-1 (Form 1065)
  Schedule K-1 (Form 1120-S)
  1098
  3115
  4952
  8582
  8990
The easiest way to trace disburse-
ments to specific uses is to keep the 
proceeds of a particular loan separate 
from any other funds.
Secured loan. The allocation of loan proceeds 
and the related interest is not generally affected 
by the use of property that secures the loan.
Example. You secure a loan with property 
used in your business. You use the loan pro-
ceeds to buy an automobile for personal use. 
You must allocate interest expense on the loan 
to personal use (purchase of the automobile) 
even though the loan is secured by business 
property.
P.L. 115-97, section 11043, limited the 
deduction for mortgage interest paid on 
home equity loans and line of credit. 
For more information, see Pub. 936.
Allocation period. The period for which a loan 
is allocated to a particular use begins on the 
date the proceeds are used and ends on the 
earlier of the following dates.
• The date the loan is repaid.
• The date the loan is reallocated to another 
use.
Proceeds not disbursed to borrower.  Even 
if the lender disburses the loan proceeds to a 
third party, the allocation of the loan is still 
based on your use of the funds. This applies 
whether you pay for property, services, or any-
thing else by incurring a loan, or you take prop-
erty subject to a debt.
Proceeds deposited in borrower's account. 
Treat loan proceeds deposited in an account as 
property held for investment. It does not matter 
whether the account pays interest. Any interest 
you pay on the loan is investment interest ex-
pense. If you withdraw the proceeds of the loan, 
you must reallocate the loan based on the use 
of the funds.
Example. Celina, a calendar year taxpayer, 
borrows $100,000 on January 4 and immedi-
ately uses the proceeds to open a checking ac-
count. No other amounts are deposited in the 
account during the year and no part of the loan 
principal is repaid during the year. On April 2, 
Celina uses $20,000 from the checking account 
for a passive activity expenditure. On Septem-
ber 4, Celina uses an additional $40,000 from 
the account for personal purposes.
Under the interest allocation rules, the entire 
$100,000 loan is treated as property held for in-
vestment for the period from January 4 through 
April 1. From April 2 through September 3, Cel-
ina must treat $20,000 of the loan as used in the 
passive activity and $80,000 of the loan as 
property held for investment. From September 
4 through December 31, she must treat 
$40,000 of the loan as used for personal purpo-
ses, $20,000 as used in the passive activity, 
and $40,000 as property held for investment.
Order of funds spent. Generally, you treat 
loan proceeds deposited in an account as used 
(spent) before either of the following amounts.
• Any unborrowed amounts held in the same 
account.
TIP
CAUTION
!
• Any amounts deposited after these loan 
proceeds.
Example. On January 9, Olena opened a 
checking account, depositing $500 of the pro-
ceeds of Loan A and $1,000 of unborrowed 
funds. The following table shows the transac-
tions in her account during the tax year.
Date Transaction
January 9 $500 proceeds of Loan A and 
$1,000 unborrowed funds 
deposited
January 14 $500 proceeds of Loan B 
deposited
February 19 $800 used for personal purposes
February 27 $700 used for passive activity
June 19 $1,000 proceeds of Loan C 
deposited
November 20 $800 used for an investment
December 18 $600 used for personal purposes
Olena treats the $800 used for personal pur-
poses as made from the $500 proceeds of Loan 
A and $300 of the proceeds of Loan B. She 
treats the $700 used for a passive activity as 
made from the remaining $200 proceeds of 
Loan B and $500 of unborrowed funds. She 
treats the $800 used for an investment as made 
entirely from the proceeds of Loan C. She treats 
the $600 used for personal purposes as made 
from the remaining $200 proceeds of Loan C 
and $400 of unborrowed funds.
For the periods during which loan proceeds 
are held in the account, Olena treats them as 
property held for investment.
Payments from checking accounts. 
Generally, you treat a payment from a checking 
or similar account as made at the time the 
check is written if you mail or deliver it to the 
payee within a reasonable period after you write 
it. You can treat checks written on the same day 
as written in any order.
Amounts paid within 15 days.  If you re-
ceive loan proceeds in cash or if the loan pro-
ceeds are deposited in an account, you can 
treat any payment (up to the amount of the pro-
ceeds) made from any account you own, or 
from cash, as made from those proceeds. This 
applies to any payment made within 15 days 
before or after the proceeds are received in 
cash or deposited in your account.
If the loan proceeds are deposited in an ac-
count, you can apply this rule even if the rules 
stated earlier under Order of funds spent  would 
otherwise require you to treat the proceeds as 
used for other purposes. If you apply this rule to 
any payments, disregard those payments (and 
the proceeds from which they are made) when 
applying the rules stated earlier under Order of 
funds spent.
If you received the loan proceeds in cash, 
you can treat the payment as made on the date 
you received the cash instead of the date you 
actually made the payment.
Example. Giovanni gets a loan of $1,000 
on August 4 and receives the proceeds in cash. 
Giovanni deposits $1,500 in an account on Au-
gust 8 and on August 18 writes a check on the 
account for a passive activity expense. Also, 
Page 13 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 4 Interest  Page 13

Giovanni deposits his paycheck, deposits other 
loan proceeds, and pays his bills during the 
same period. Regardless of these other trans-
actions, Giovanni can treat $1,000 of the de-
posit he made on August 8 as being paid on Au-
gust 4 from the loan proceeds. In addition, 
Giovanni can treat the passive activity expense 
he paid on August 18 as made from the $1,000 
loan proceeds treated as deposited in the ac-
count.
Optional method for determining date of 
reallocation. You can use the following 
method to determine the date loan proceeds 
are reallocated to another use. You can treat all 
payments from loan proceeds in the account 
during any month as taking place on the later of 
the following dates.
• The first day of that month.
• The date the loan proceeds are deposited 
in the account.
However, you can use this optional method only 
if you treat all payments from the account dur-
ing the same calendar month in the same way.
Interest on a segregated account.  If you 
have an account that contains only loan pro-
ceeds and interest earned on the account, you 
can treat any payment from that account as be-
ing made first from the interest. When the inter-
est earned is used up, any remaining payments 
are from loan proceeds.
Example. You borrowed $20,000 and used 
the proceeds of this loan to open a new savings 
account. When the account had earned interest 
of $867, you withdrew $20,000 for personal pur-
poses. You can treat the withdrawal as coming 
first from the interest earned on the account, 
$867, and then from the loan proceeds, 
$19,133 ($20,000 − $867). All the interest 
charged on the loan from the time it was depos-
ited in the account until the time of the with-
drawal is investment interest expense. The in-
terest charged on the part of the proceeds used 
for personal purposes ($19,133) from the time 
you withdrew it until you either repay it or reallo-
cate it to another use is personal interest ex-
pense. The interest charged on the loan pro-
ceeds you left in the account ($867) continues 
to be investment interest expense until you ei-
ther repay it or reallocate it to another use.
Loan repayment. When you repay any part of 
a loan allocated to more than one use, treat it as 
being repaid in the following order.
1. Personal use.
2. Investments and passive activities (other 
than those included in (3)).
3. Passive activities in connection with a 
rental real estate activity in which you ac-
tively participate.
4. Former passive activities.
5. Trade or business use and expenses for 
certain low-income housing projects.
Line of credit (continuous borrowings). The 
following rules apply if you have a line of credit 
or similar arrangement.
1. Treat all borrowed funds on which interest 
accrues at the same fixed or variable rate 
as a single loan.
2. Treat borrowed funds or parts of borrowed 
funds on which interest accrues at differ-
ent fixed or variable rates as different 
loans. Treat these loans as repaid in the 
order shown on the loan agreement.
Loan refinancing.  Allocate the replacement 
loan to the same uses to which the repaid loan 
was allocated. Make the allocation only to the 
extent you use the proceeds of the new loan to 
repay any part of the original loan.
Debt-financed distribution.  A debt -financed 
distribution occurs when a partnership or S cor-
poration borrows funds and allocates those 
funds to distributions made to partners or 
shareholders. The manner in which you report 
the interest expense associated with the distrib-
uted debt proceeds depends on your use of 
those proceeds.
How to report.  If the proceeds were used 
in a nonpassive trade or business activity, re-
port the interest on Schedule E (Form 1040 or 
1040-SR), line 28; enter “interest expense” and 
the name of the partnership or S corporation in 
column (a) and the amount in column (h). If the 
proceeds were used in a passive activity, follow 
the Instructions for Form 8582 to determine the 
amount of interest expense that can be repor-
ted on Schedule E (Form 1040 or 1040 -SR), 
line 28; enter “interest expense” and the name 
of the partnership in column (a) and the amount 
in column (f). If the proceeds were used in an 
investment activity, enter the interest on Form 
4952. If the proceeds are used for personal pur-
poses, the interest is generally not deductible.
Interest Expense 
Limitation
You must generally limit business interest ex-
pense you pay or accrue during the tax year, 
unless an exception to the limitation is met.
The business interest expense deduction al-
lowed for a tax year is generally limited to the 
sum of:
1. Business interest income,
2. 30% of the adjustable taxable income, and
3. Floor plan financing interest.
If the section 163(j) limitation applies, gener-
ally the amount of any business interest ex-
pense that is not allowed as a deduction under 
section 163(j) for the tax year is carried forward 
to the following year as a disallowed business 
interest expense carryforward. See the Instruc-
tions for Form 8990, Limitation on Business In-
terest Expense Under Section 163(j), for more 
information.
Interest You Can Deduct
Your trade or business interest expense may be 
limited. See the Instructions for Form 8990 for 
more information. Interest relates to your trade 
or business if you use the proceeds of the loan 
for a trade or business expense. It does not 
matter what type of property secures the loan. 
You can deduct interest on a debt only if you 
meet all the following requirements.
• You are legally liable for that debt.
• Both you and the lender intend that the 
debt be repaid.
• You and the lender have a true 
debtor-creditor relationship.
Partial liability.  If you are liable for part of a 
business debt, only your share of the total inter-
est paid or accrued is included in your interest 
limitation calculation.
Example. You and your brother borrow 
money. You are liable for 50% of the note. You 
use your half of the loan in your business, and 
you make one -half of the loan payments. Your 
business interest is half of the total interest pay-
ments. However, the current year interest ex-
pense deduction may be limited.
Mortgage. Generally, mortgage interest paid 
or accrued on real estate you own legally or 
equitably is deductible. However, rather than 
deducting the interest currently, you may have 
to add it to the cost basis of the property as ex-
plained later under Capitalization of Interest.
Statement. If you paid $600 or more of 
mortgage interest (including certain points) dur-
ing the year on any one mortgage, you will gen-
erally receive a Form 1098 or a similar state-
ment. You will receive the statement if you pay 
interest to a person (including a financial institu-
tion or a cooperative housing corporation) in the 
course of that person's trade or business. A 
governmental unit is a person for purposes of 
furnishing the statement.
If you receive a refund of interest you over-
paid in an earlier year, this amount will be repor-
ted in box 4 of Form 1098. You cannot deduct 
this amount. For information on how to report 
this refund, see Refunds of interest, later in this 
chapter.
Expenses paid to obtain a mortgage.
Certain expenses you pay to obtain a mortgage 
cannot be deducted as interest. These expen-
ses, which include mortgage commissions, ab-
stract fees, and recording fees, are capital ex-
penses. If the property mortgaged is business 
or income -producing property, you can amor-
tize the costs over the life of the mortgage.
Prepayment penalty.  If you pay off your 
mortgage early and pay the lender a penalty for 
doing this, you can deduct the penalty as inter-
est.
Interest on employment tax deficiency.  In-
terest charged on employment taxes assessed 
on your business is deductible.
Original issue discount (OID).  OID is a form 
of interest. A loan (mortgage or other debt) gen-
erally has OID when its proceeds are less than 
its principal amount. The OID is the difference 
between the stated redemption price at maturity 
and the issue price of the loan.
A loan's stated redemption price at maturity 
is the sum of all amounts (principal and interest) 
payable on it other than qualified stated inter-
est. Qualified stated interest is stated interest 
that is unconditionally payable in cash or prop-
erty (other than another loan of the issuer) at 
Page 14 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 14  Chapter 4 Interest

least annually over the term of the loan at a sin-
gle fixed rate.
You generally deduct OID over the term of 
the loan. Figure the amount to deduct each year 
using the constant -yield method, unless the 
OID on the loan is de minimis.
De minimis OID. The OID is de minimis if it 
is less than one -fourth of 1% (0.0025) of the 
stated redemption price of the loan at maturity 
multiplied by the number of full years from the 
date of original issue to maturity (the term of the 
loan).
If the OID is de minimis, you can choose one 
of the following ways to figure the amount you 
can deduct each year.
• On a constant-yield basis over the term of 
the loan.
• On a straight-line basis over the term of the 
loan.
• In proportion to stated interest payments.
• In its entirety at maturity of the loan.
You make this choice by deducting the OID in a 
manner consistent with the method chosen on 
your timely filed tax return for the tax year in 
which the loan is issued.
Example. On January 1, 2019, you took out 
a $100,000 discounted loan and received 
$98,500 in proceeds. The loan will mature on 
January 1, 2029 (a 10 -year term), and the 
$100,000 principal is payable on that date. In-
terest of $10,000 is payable on January 1 of 
each year, beginning January 1, 2020. The 
$1,500 OID on the loan is de minimis because it 
is less than $2,500 ($100,000 × 0.0025 × 10). 
You choose to deduct the OID on a straight -line 
basis over the term of the loan. Beginning in 
2019, you can deduct $150 each year for 10 
years.
Constant-yield method.  If the OID is not 
de minimis, you must use the constant -yield 
method to figure how much you can deduct 
each year. You figure your deduction for the first 
year using the following steps.
1. Determine the issue price of the loan. 
Generally, this equals the proceeds of the 
loan. If you paid points on the loan (as dis-
cussed later), the issue price is generally 
the difference between the proceeds and 
the points.
2. Multiply the result in (1) by the yield to ma-
turity.
3. Subtract any qualified stated interest pay-
ments from the result in (2). This is the 
OID you can deduct in the first year.
To figure your deduction in any subsequent 
year, follow the above steps, except determine 
the adjusted issue price in step 1. To get the 
adjusted issue price, add to the issue price any 
OID previously deducted. Then follow steps 2 
and 3 above.
The yield to maturity is generally shown in 
the literature you receive from your lender. If 
you do not have this information, consult your 
lender or tax advisor. In general, the yield to 
maturity is the discount rate that, when used in 
figuring the present value of all principal and in-
terest payments, produces an amount equal to 
the principal amount of the loan.
Example. The facts are the same as in the 
previous example, except that you deduct the 
OID on a constant -yield basis over the term of 
the loan. The yield to maturity on your loan is 
10.2467%, compounded annually. For 2019, 
you can deduct $93 [($98,500 × 0.102467) − 
$10,000]. For 2020, you can deduct $103 
[($98,593 × 0.102467) − $10,000].
Loan or mortgage ends.  If your loan or 
mortgage ends, you may be able to deduct any 
remaining OID in the tax year in which the loan 
or mortgage ends. A loan or mortgage may end 
due to a refinancing, prepayment, foreclosure, 
or similar event.
If you refinance with the original lender, 
you generally cannot deduct the re-
maining OID in the year in which the re-
financing occurs, but you may be able to deduct 
it over the term of the new mortgage or loan. 
See Interest paid with funds borrowed from 
original lender  under Interest You Cannot De-
duct, later.
Points. The term “points” is used to describe 
certain charges paid, or treated as paid, by a 
borrower to obtain a loan or a mortgage. These 
charges are also called loan origination fees, 
maximum loan charges, discount points, or pre-
mium charges. If any of these charges (points) 
are solely for the use of money, they are inter-
est.
Because points are prepaid interest, you 
generally cannot deduct the full amount in the 
year paid. However, you can choose to fully de-
duct points in the year paid if you meet certain 
tests. For exceptions to the general rule, see 
Pub. 936.
The points reduce the issue price of the loan 
and result in OID, deductible as explained in the 
preceding discussion.
Partial payments on a nontax debt.  If you 
make partial payments on a debt (other than a 
debt owed to the IRS), the payments are ap-
plied, in general, first to interest and any re-
mainder to principal. You can deduct only the 
interest. This rule does not apply when it can be 
inferred that the borrower and lender under-
stood that a different allocation of the payments 
would be made.
Installment purchase. If you make an install-
ment purchase of business property, the con-
tract between you and the seller generally pro-
vides for the payment of interest. If no interest 
or a low rate of interest is charged under the 
contract, a portion of the stated principal 
amount payable under the contract may be re-
characterized as interest (unstated interest). 
The amount recharacterized as interest reduces 
your basis in the property and increases your 
interest expense. For more information on in-
stallment sales and unstated interest, see Pub. 
537.
Interest You
Cannot Deduct
Certain interest payments cannot be deducted. 
In addition, certain other expenses that may 
CAUTION
!
seem to be interest, but are not, cannot be de-
ducted as interest.
You cannot currently deduct interest that 
must be capitalized, and you generally cannot 
deduct personal interest.
Interest paid with funds borrowed from 
original lender. If you use the cash method of 
accounting, you cannot deduct interest you pay 
with funds borrowed from the original lender 
through a second loan, an advance, or any 
other arrangement similar to a loan. You can 
deduct the interest expense once you start 
making payments on the new loan.
When you make a payment on the new loan, 
you first apply the payment to interest and then 
to the principal. All amounts you apply to the in-
terest on the first loan are deductible, along with 
any interest you pay on the second loan, sub-
ject to any limits that apply.
Capitalized interest. You cannot currently de-
duct interest you are required to capitalize un-
der the uniform capitalization rules. See Capi-
talization of Interest, later. In addition, if you buy 
property and pay interest owed by the seller (for 
example, by assuming the debt and any interest 
accrued on the property), you cannot deduct 
the interest. Add this interest to the basis of the 
property.
Commitment fees or standby charges. Fees 
you incur to have business funds available on a 
standby basis, but not for the actual use of the 
funds, are not deductible as interest payments. 
You may be able to deduct them as business 
expenses.
If the funds are for inventory or certain prop-
erty used in your business, the fees are indirect 
costs and you must generally capitalize them 
under the uniform capitalization rules. See Cap-
italization of Interest, later.
Interest on income tax.  Interest charged on 
income tax assessed on your individual income 
tax return is not a business deduction even 
though the tax due is related to income from 
your trade or business. Treat this interest as a 
business deduction only in figuring an net oper-
ating loss deduction.
Penalties. Penalties on underpaid deficien-
cies and underpaid estimated tax are not inter-
est. You cannot deduct them. Generally, you 
cannot deduct any fines or penalties.
Interest on loans with respect to life insur-
ance policies.  You generally cannot deduct 
interest on a debt incurred with respect to any 
life insurance, annuity, or endowment contract 
that covers any individual unless that individual 
is a key person.
If the policy or contract covers a key person, 
you can deduct the interest on up to $50,000 of 
debt for that person. However, the deduction for 
any month cannot be more than the interest fig-
ured using Moody's Composite Yield on Seas-
oned Corporate Bonds (formerly known as 
Moody's Corporate Bond Yield Aver-
age—Monthly Average Corporates) (Moody's 
rate) for that month.
Who is a key person?  A key person is an 
officer or 20% owner. However, the number of 
Page 15 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 4 Interest  Page 15

individuals you can treat as key persons is limi-
ted to the greater of the following.
• Five individuals.
• The lesser of 5% of the total officers and 
employees of the company or 20 individu-
als.
Exceptions for pre -June 1997 contracts. 
You can generally deduct the interest if the con-
tract was issued before June 9, 1997, and the 
covered individual is someone other than an 
employee, officer, or someone financially inter-
ested in your business. If the contract was pur-
chased before June 21, 1986, you can gener-
ally deduct the interest no matter who is 
covered by the contract.
Interest allocated to unborrowed policy 
cash value.  Corporations and partnerships 
generally cannot deduct any interest expense 
allocable to unborrowed cash values of life in-
surance, annuity, or endowment contracts. This 
rule applies to contracts issued after June 8, 
1997, that cover someone other than an officer, 
director, employee, or 20% owner. For more in-
formation, see section 264(f).
Capitalization of Interest
Under the uniform capitalization rules, you must 
generally capitalize interest on debt equal to 
your expenditures to produce real property or 
certain tangible personal property. The property 
must be produced by you for use in your trade 
or business or for sale to customers. You can-
not capitalize interest related to property that 
you acquire in any other manner.
Interest you paid or incurred during the pro-
duction period must be capitalized if the prop-
erty produced is designated property. Designa-
ted property is any of the following.
• Real property.
• Tangible personal property with a class life 
of 20 years or more.
• Tangible personal property with an estima-
ted production period of more than 2 
years.
• Tangible personal property with an estima-
ted production period of more than 1 year if 
the estimated cost of production is more 
than $1 million.
Property you produce. You produce property 
if you construct, build, install, manufacture, de-
velop, improve, create, raise, or grow it. Treat 
property produced for you under a contract as 
produced by you up to the amount you pay or 
incur for the property.
Carrying charges.  Carrying charges include 
taxes you pay to carry or develop real estate or 
to carry, transport, or install personal property. 
You can choose to capitalize carrying charges 
not subject to the uniform capitalization rules if 
they are otherwise deductible. For more infor-
mation, see chapter 7.
Capitalized interest. Treat capitalized interest 
as a cost of the property produced. You recover 
your interest when you sell or use the property. 
If the property is inventory, recover capitalized 
interest through cost of goods sold. If the prop-
erty is used in your trade or business, recover 
capitalized interest through an adjustment to 
basis, depreciation, amortization, or other 
method.
Partnerships and S corporations.  The inter-
est capitalization rules are applied first at the 
partnership or S corporation level. The rules are 
then applied at the partners' or shareholders' 
level to the extent the partnership or S corpora-
tion has insufficient debt to support the produc-
tion or construction costs.
If you are a partner or a shareholder, you 
may have to capitalize interest you incur during 
the tax year for the production costs of the part-
nership or S corporation. You may also have to 
capitalize interest incurred by the partnership or 
S corporation for your own production costs. To 
properly capitalize interest under these rules, 
you must be given the required information in 
an attachment to the Schedule K -1 you receive 
from the partnership or S corporation.
Additional information.  The procedures for 
applying the uniform capitalization rules are be-
yond the scope of this publication. For more in-
formation, see sections 1. 263A-8 through 
1.263A-15 of the regulations and Notice 88 -99. 
Notice 88-99 is in Cumulative Bulletin 1988-2.
When To Deduct Interest
If the uniform capitalization rules, discussed un-
der Capitalization of Interest , earlier, and the 
business interest expense deduction limitation 
rules discussed under Interest Expense Limita-
tion, earlier, do not apply, deduct interest as fol-
lows.
Cash method.  Under the cash method, you 
can generally deduct only the interest you ac-
tually paid during the tax year. You cannot de-
duct a promissory note you gave as payment 
because it is a promise to pay and not an actual 
payment.
Prepaid interest. You generally cannot de-
duct any interest paid before the year it is due. 
Interest paid in advance can be deducted only 
in the tax year in which it is due.
Discounted loan.  If interest or a discount 
is subtracted from your loan proceeds, it is not a 
payment of interest and you cannot deduct it 
when you get the loan. For more information, 
see Original issue discount (OID) under Interest 
You Can Deduct, earlier.
Refunds of interest.  If you pay interest 
and then receive a refund in the same tax year 
of any part of the interest, reduce your interest 
deduction by the refund. If you receive the re-
fund in a later tax year, include the refund in 
your income to the extent the deduction for the 
interest reduced your tax.
Accrual method.  Under an accrual method, 
you can deduct only interest that has accrued 
during the tax year.
Prepaid interest. You generally cannot de-
duct any interest paid before the year it is due. 
Interest paid in advance can be deducted only 
in the tax year in which it is due.
Discounted loan.  If interest or a discount 
is subtracted from your loan proceeds, it is not a 
payment of interest and you cannot deduct it 
when you get the loan. For more information, 
see Original issue discount (OID) under Interest 
You Can Deduct, earlier.
Tax deficiency. If you contest a federal in-
come tax deficiency, interest does not accrue 
until the tax year the final determination of liabil-
ity is made. If you do not contest the deficiency, 
then the interest accrues in the year the tax was 
asserted and agreed to by you.
However, if you contest but pay the pro-
posed tax deficiency and interest, and you do 
not designate the payment as a cash bond, 
then the interest is deductible in the year paid.
Related person.  If you use an accrual 
method, you cannot deduct interest owed to a 
related person who uses the cash method until 
payment is made and the interest is includible in 
the gross income of that person. The relation-
ship is determined as of the end of the tax year 
for which the interest would otherwise be de-
ductible. See section 267 for more information.
Below-Market Loans
If you receive a below -market gift or demand 
loan and use the proceeds in your trade or busi-
ness, you may be able to deduct the forgone in-
terest. See Treatment of gift and demand loans, 
later, in this discussion.
A below -market loan is a loan on which no 
interest is charged or on which interest is 
charged at a rate below the applicable federal 
rate (AFR). A gift or demand loan that is a be-
low-market loan is generally considered an 
arm's-length transaction in which you, the bor-
rower, are considered as having received both 
the following.
• A loan in exchange for a note that requires 
the payment of interest at the AFR.
• An additional payment in an amount equal 
to the forgone interest.
The additional payment is treated as a gift, divi-
dend, contribution to capital, payment of com-
pensation, or other payment, depending on the 
substance of the transaction.
Forgone interest. For any period, forgone in-
terest is:
1. The interest that would be payable for that 
period if interest accrued on the loan at the 
AFR and was payable annually on De-
cember 31, minus
2. Any interest actually payable on the loan 
for the period.
AFRs are published by the IRS each 
month in the Internal Revenue Bulletin 
(I.R.B.) I.R.B.s are available on the IRS 
website at IRS.gov/IRB. You can also contact 
an IRS office to get these rates.
Loans subject to the rules.  The rules for be-
low-market loans apply to the following.
1. Gift loans (below-market loans where the 
forgone interest is in the nature of a gift).
TIP
Page 16 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 16  Chapter 4 Interest

2. Compensation-related loans (below-mar-
ket loans between an employer and an 
employee or between an independent 
contractor and a person for whom the con-
tractor provides services).
3. Corporation-shareholder loans.
4. Tax avoidance loans (below-market loans 
where the avoidance of federal tax is one 
of the main purposes of the interest ar-
rangement).
5. Loans to qualified continuing care facilities 
under a continuing care contract (made af-
ter October 11, 1985).
Except as noted in (5) above, these rules 
apply to demand loans (loans payable in full at 
any time upon the lender's demand) outstand-
ing after June 6, 1984, and to term loans (loans 
that are not demand loans) made after that 
date.
Treatment of gift and demand loans.  If you 
receive a below -market gift loan or demand 
loan, you are treated as receiving an additional 
payment (as a gift, dividend, etc.) equal to the 
forgone interest on the loan. You are then trea-
ted as transferring this amount back to the 
lender as interest. These transfers are consid-
ered to occur annually, generally on December 
31. If you use the loan proceeds in your trade or 
business, you can deduct the forgone interest 
each year as a business interest expense. The 
lender must report it as interest income.
Limit on forgone interest for gift loans of 
$100,000 or less.  For gift loans between indi-
viduals, forgone interest treated as transferred 
back to the lender is limited to the borrower's 
net investment income for the year. This limit 
applies if the outstanding loans between the 
lender and borrower total $100,000 or less. If 
the borrower's net investment income is $1,000 
or less, it is treated as zero. This limit does not 
apply to a loan if the avoidance of any federal 
tax is one of the main purposes of the interest 
arrangement.
Treatment of term loans.  If you receive a be-
low-market term loan other than a gift or de-
mand loan, you are treated as receiving an ad-
ditional cash payment (as a dividend, etc.) on 
the date the loan is made. This payment is 
equal to the loan amount minus the present 
value, at the AFR, of all payments due under 
the loan. The same amount is treated as OID on 
the loan. See Original issue discount (OID)  un-
der Interest You Can Deduct, earlier.
Exceptions for loans of $10,000 or less. 
The rules for below -market loans do not apply 
to any day on which the total outstanding loans 
between the borrower and lender is $10,000 or 
less. This exception applies only to the follow-
ing.
1. Gift loans between individuals if the loan is 
not directly used to buy or carry in-
come-producing assets.
2. Compensation-related loans or corpora-
tion-shareholder loans if the avoidance of 
any federal tax is not a principal purpose 
of the interest arrangement.
This exception does not apply to a term loan 
described in (2) above that was previously sub-
ject to the below -market loan rules. Those rules 
will continue to apply even if the outstanding 
balance is reduced to $10,000 or less.
Exceptions for loans without significant tax 
effect. The following loans are specifically ex-
empted from the rules for below -market loans 
because their interest arrangements do not 
have a significant effect on the federal tax liabil-
ity of the borrower or the lender.
1. Loans made available by lenders to the 
general public on the same terms and 
conditions that are consistent with the 
lender's customary business practices.
2. Loans subsidized by a federal, state, or 
municipal government that are made avail-
able under a program of general applica-
tion to the public.
3. Certain employee-relocation loans.
4. Certain loans to or from a foreign person, 
unless the interest income would be effec-
tively connected with the conduct of a U.S. 
trade or business and not exempt from 
U.S. tax under an income tax treaty.
5. Any other loan if the taxpayer can show 
that the interest arrangement has no sig-
nificant effect on the federal tax liability of 
the lender or the borrower. Whether an in-
terest arrangement has a significant effect 
on the federal tax liability of the lender or 
the borrower will be determined by all the 
facts and circumstances. Consider all the 
following factors.
a. Whether items of income and deduc-
tion generated by the loan offset each 
other.
b. The amount of the items.
c. The cost of complying with the be-
low-market loan provisions if they 
were to apply.
d. Any reasons, other than taxes, for 
structuring the transaction as a be-
low-market loan.
Exception for loans to qualified continuing 
care facilities.  The below -market interest 
rules do not apply to a loan owed by a qualified 
continuing care facility under a continuing care 
contract if the lender or lender's spouse is age 
62 or older by the end of the calendar year.
A qualified continuing care facility is one or 
more facilities (excluding nursing homes) meet-
ing the requirements listed below.
1. Designed to provide services under con-
tinuing care contracts (defined below).
2. Includes an independent living unit, and 
either an assisted living or nursing facility, 
or both.
3. Substantially all of the independent living 
unit residents are covered by continuing 
care contracts.
A continuing care contract is a written con-
tract between an individual and a qualified con-
tinuing care facility that includes all of the fol-
lowing conditions.
1. The individual or individual's spouse must 
be entitled to use the facility for the rest of 
their life or lives.
2. The individual or individual's spouse will 
be provided with housing, as appropriate 
for the health of the individual or individu-
al's spouse in an:
a. Independent living unit (which has ad-
ditional available facilities outside the 
unit for the provision of meals and 
other personal care), and
b. Assisted living or nursing facility avail-
able in the continuing care facility.
3. The individual or individual's spouse will 
be provided with assisted living or nursing 
care available in the continuing care fa-
cility, as required for the health of the indi-
vidual or the individual's spouse.
For more information, see section 7872(h).
Sale or exchange of property.  Different rules 
generally apply to a loan connected with the 
sale or exchange of property. If the loan does 
not provide adequate stated interest, part of the 
principal payment may be considered interest. 
However, there are exceptions that may require 
you to apply the below -market interest rate 
rules to these loans. See Unstated Interest and 
Original Issue Discount (OID) in Pub. 537.
More information.  For more information on 
below-market loans, see section 7872 and sec-
tion 1.7872-5 of the regulations.
5.
Taxes
Introduction
You can deduct various federal, state, local, 
and foreign taxes directly attributable to your 
trade or business as business expenses.
You cannot deduct federal income 
taxes, estate and gift taxes, or state in-
heritance, legacy, and succession 
taxes.
Topics
This chapter discusses:
• When to deduct taxes
• Real estate taxes
• Income taxes
• Employment taxes
• Other taxes
CAUTION
!
Page 17 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 5 Taxes  Page 17

Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
15 (Circular E), Employer's Tax Guide
334 Tax Guide for Small Business
510 Excise Taxes
538 Accounting Periods and Methods
551 Basis of Assets
Form (and Instructions)
1040 or 1040-SR U.S. Individual Income 
Tax Return
Schedule A (Form 1040 or 1040-SR) 
Itemized Deductions
Schedule SE (Form 1040 or 1040-SR) 
Self-Employment Tax
3115 Application for Change in 
Accounting Method
8959 Additional Medicare Tax
See chapter 12  for information about getting 
publications and forms.
When To Deduct Taxes
Generally, you can only deduct taxes in the 
year you pay them. This applies whether you 
use the cash method or an accrual method of 
accounting.
Under an accrual method, you can deduct a 
tax before you pay it if you meet the exception 
for recurring items discussed under Economic 
Performance in Pub. 538. You can also elect to 
ratably accrue real estate taxes as discussed 
later under Real Estate Taxes.
Limit on accrual of taxes.  A taxing jurisdic-
tion can require the use of a date for accruing 
taxes that is earlier than the date it originally re-
quired. However, if you use an accrual method, 
and can deduct the tax before you pay it, use 
the original accrual date for the year of change 
and all future years to determine when you can 
deduct the tax.
Example. Your state imposes a tax on per-
sonal property used in a trade or business con-
ducted in the state. This tax is assessed and 
becomes a lien as of July 1 (accrual date). In 
2019, the state changed the assessment and 
lien dates from July 1, 2020, to December 31, 
2019, for property tax year 2020. Use the origi-
nal accrual date (July 1, 2020) to determine 
when you can deduct the tax. You must also 
use the July 1 accrual date for all future years to 
determine when you can deduct the tax.
Uniform capitalization rules. Uniform capital-
ization rules apply to certain taxpayers who pro-
duce real property or tangible personal property 
for use in a trade or business or for sale to cus-
tomers. They also apply to certain taxpayers 
who acquire property for resale. Under these 
rules, you either include certain costs in inven-
tory or capitalize certain expenses related to the 
property, such as taxes. For more information, 
see chapter 1.
  15
  334
  510
  538
  551
  1040 or 1040-SR
  Schedule A (Form 1040 or 1040-SR)
  Schedule SE (Form 1040 or 1040-SR)
  3115
  8959
Carrying charges.  Carrying charges include 
taxes you pay to carry or develop real estate or 
to carry, transport, or install personal property. 
You can elect to capitalize carrying charges not 
subject to the uniform capitalization rules if they 
are otherwise deductible. For more information, 
see chapter 7.
Refunds of taxes.  If you receive a refund for 
any taxes you deducted in an earlier year, in-
clude the refund in income to the extent the de-
duction reduced your federal income tax in the 
earlier year. For more information, see Recov-
ery of amount deducted (tax benefit rule)  in 
chapter 1.
You must include in income any inter-
est you receive on tax refunds.
Real Estate Taxes
Deductible real estate taxes are any state, local, 
or foreign taxes on real estate levied for the 
general public welfare. The taxing authority 
must base the taxes on the assessed value of 
the real estate and charge them uniformly 
against all property under its jurisdiction. De-
ductible real estate taxes generally do not in-
clude taxes charged for local benefits and im-
provements that increase the value of the 
property. See Taxes for local benefits, later.
If you use an accrual method, you generally 
cannot accrue real estate taxes until you pay 
them to the government authority. However, 
you can elect to ratably accrue the taxes during 
the year. See Electing to ratably accrue, later.
Taxes for local benefits.  Generally, you can-
not deduct taxes charged for local benefits and 
improvements that tend to increase the value of 
your property. These include assessments for 
streets, sidewalks, water mains, sewer lines, 
and public parking facilities. You should in-
crease the basis of your property by the amount 
of the assessment.
You can deduct taxes for these local bene-
fits only if the taxes are for maintenance, re-
pairs, or interest charges related to those bene-
fits. If part of the tax is for maintenance, repairs, 
or interest, you must be able to show how much 
of the tax is for these expenses to claim a de-
duction for that part of the tax.
Example. To improve downtown commer-
cial business, Waterfront City converted a 
downtown business area street into an en-
closed pedestrian mall. The city assessed the 
full cost of construction, financed with 10 -year 
bonds, against the affected properties. The city 
is paying the principal and interest with the an-
nual payments made by the property owners.
The assessments for construction costs are 
not deductible as taxes or as business expen-
ses, but are depreciable capital expenses. The 
part of the payments used to pay the interest 
charges on the bonds is deductible as taxes.
Charges for services.  Water bills, sewerage, 
and other service charges assessed against 
your business property are not real estate 
taxes, but are deductible as business expen-
ses.
TIP
Purchase or sale of real estate.  If real estate 
is sold, the real estate taxes must be allocated 
between the buyer and the seller.
The buyer and seller must allocate the real 
estate taxes according to the number of days in 
the real property tax year (the period to which 
the tax imposed relates) that each owned the 
property. Treat the seller as paying the taxes up 
to but not including the date of sale. Treat the 
buyer as paying the taxes beginning with the 
date of sale. You can usually find this informa-
tion on the settlement statement you received at 
closing.
If you (the seller) use an accrual method and 
have not elected to ratably accrue real estate 
taxes, you are considered to have accrued your 
part of the tax on the date you sell the property.
Example. Alberto Verde, a calendar year 
accrual method taxpayer, owns real estate in 
Olmo County. He has not elected to ratably ac-
crue property taxes. November 30 of each year 
is the assessment and lien date for the current 
real property tax year, which is the calendar 
year. He sold the property on June 30, 2019. 
Under his accounting method, he would not be 
able to claim a deduction for the taxes because 
the sale occurred before November 30. He is 
treated as having accrued his part of the tax, 
181/365  (January 1–June 29), on June 30, and 
he can deduct it for 2019.
Electing to ratably accrue.  If you use an ac-
crual method, you can elect to accrue real es-
tate tax related to a definite period ratably over 
that period.
Example. Juan Sanchez is a calendar year 
taxpayer who uses an accrual method. His real 
estate taxes for the real property tax year, July 
1, 2019, to June 30, 2020, are $1,200. July 1 is 
the assessment and lien date.
If Juan elects to ratably accrue the taxes, 
$600 will accrue in 2019 ($1,200 × 6/12, July 1–
December 31) and the balance will accrue in 
2020.
Separate elections. You can elect to rata-
bly accrue the taxes for each separate trade or 
business and for nonbusiness activities if you 
account for them separately. Once you elect to 
ratably accrue real estate taxes, you must use 
that method unless you get permission from the 
IRS to change. See Form 3115, later.
Making the election. If you elect to ratably 
accrue the taxes for the first year in which you 
incur real estate taxes, attach a statement to 
your income tax return for that year. The state-
ment should show all the following items.
• The trades or businesses to which the 
election applies and the accounting 
method or methods used.
• The period to which the taxes relate.
• The calculation of the real estate tax de-
duction for that first year.
Generally, you must file your return by the 
due date (including extensions). However, if 
you timely filed your return for the year without 
electing to ratably accrue, you can still make the 
election by filing an amended return within 6 
months after the due date of the return (exclud-
ing extensions). Attach the statement to the 
amended return and write “Filed pursuant to 
Page 18 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 18  Chapter 5 Taxes

section 301. 9100-2” on the statement. File the 
amended return at the same address where you 
filed the original return.
Form 3115.  If you elect to ratably accrue 
real estate taxes for a year after the first year in 
which you incur real estate taxes, or if you want 
to revoke your election to ratably accrue real 
estate taxes, file Form 3115. For more informa-
tion, including applicable time frames for filing, 
see the Instructions for Form 3115.
Income Taxes
This section discusses federal, state, local, and 
foreign income taxes.
Federal income taxes.  You cannot deduct 
federal income taxes.
State and local income taxes.  A corporation 
or partnership can deduct state and local in-
come taxes imposed on the corporation or part-
nership as business expenses.
An individual can deduct state and local in-
come taxes only as an itemized deduction on 
Schedule A (Form 1040 or 1040-SR), subject to 
limitations. The deduction is limited to $10,000 
as a total of the following taxes.
1. State and local income taxes or general 
sales taxes. See the Schedule A (Form 
1040 or 1040-SR) instructions.
2. State and local real estate taxes. See the 
Schedule A (Form 1040 or 1040-SR) in-
structions.
3. State and local personal property taxes.
4. Other taxes. See the Schedule A (Form 
1040 or 1040-SR) instructions.
However, an individual can deduct a state 
tax on gross income (as distinguished from net 
income) directly attributable to a trade or busi-
ness as a business expense.
Accrual of contested income taxes.  If 
you use an accrual method, and you contest a 
state or local income tax liability, you must ac-
crue and deduct any contested amount in the 
tax year in which the liability is finally deter-
mined.
If additional state or local income taxes for a 
prior year are assessed in a later year, you can 
deduct the taxes in the year in which they were 
originally imposed (the prior year) if the tax lia-
bility is not contested. You cannot deduct them 
in the year in which the liability is finally deter-
mined.
The filing of an income tax return is not 
considered a contest and, in the ab-
sence of an overt act of protest, you 
can deduct the tax in the prior year. Also, you 
can deduct any additional taxes in the prior year 
if you do not show some affirmative evidence of 
denial of the liability.
However, if you consistently deduct addi-
tional assessments in the year they are paid or 
finally determined (including those for which 
there was no contest), you must continue to do 
so. You cannot take a deduction in the earlier 
year unless you receive permission to change 
your method of accounting. For more 
TIP
information on accounting methods, see When 
Can I Deduct an Expense in chapter 1.
Foreign income taxes.  Generally, you can 
take either a deduction or a credit for income 
taxes imposed on you by a foreign country or a 
U.S. possession, subject to limitations. How-
ever, an individual cannot take a deduction or 
credit for foreign income taxes paid on income 
that is exempt from U.S. tax under the foreign 
earned income exclusion or the foreign housing 
exclusion. For information on these exclusions, 
see Pub. 54. For information on the foreign tax 
credit, see Pub. 514.
Employment Taxes
If you have employees, you must withhold vari-
ous taxes from your employees' pay. Most em-
ployers must withhold their employees' share of 
social security, Medicare taxes, and Additional 
Medicare Tax (if applicable), along with state 
and federal income taxes. You may also need 
to pay certain employment taxes from your own 
funds. These include your share of social secur-
ity and Medicare taxes as an employer, along 
with unemployment taxes.
Your deduction for wages paid is not re-
duced by the social security and Medicare 
taxes, Additional Medicare Tax, and income 
taxes you withhold from your employees. You 
can deduct the employment taxes you must pay 
from your own funds as taxes.
Example. You pay your employee $18,000 
a year. However, after you withhold various 
taxes, your employee receives $14,500. You 
also pay an additional $1,500 in employment 
taxes. You should deduct the full $18,000 as 
wages. You can deduct the $1,500 you pay 
from your own funds as taxes.
Additional Medicare Tax.  You must withhold 
a 0.9% Additional Medicare Tax from wages 
you pay to an employee in excess of $200,000 
in a calendar year. The Additional Medicare Tax 
is only imposed on the employee. There is no 
employer share of Additional Medicare Tax.
For more information on the Additional Med-
icare Tax, see Form 8959 and its instructions.
For more information on employment 
taxes, see Pub. 15 (Circular E).
Unemployment fund taxes.  As an employer, 
you may have to make payments to a state un-
employment compensation fund or to a state 
disability benefit fund. Deduct these payments 
as taxes.
Self-employment tax. You can deduct part of 
your self -employment tax as a business ex-
pense in figuring your adjusted gross income. 
This deduction only affects your income tax. It 
does not affect your net earnings from self -em-
ployment or your self-employment tax.
To deduct the tax, enter on Schedule 1 
(Form 1040 or 1040 -SR), line 14, the amount 
shown on the Deduction for one -half of self-em-
ployment tax line of Schedule SE (Form 1040 or 
1040-SR).
TIP
For more information on self -employment 
tax, see Pub. 334.
Additional Medicare Tax.  You may be re-
quired to pay Additional Medicare Tax on 
self-employment income. See Form 8959 and 
the Instructions for Form 8959 for more informa-
tion on the Additional Medicare Tax.
Other Taxes
The following are other taxes you can deduct if 
you incur them in the ordinary course of your 
trade or business.
Excise taxes. Generally, you can deduct as a 
business expense all excise taxes that are ordi-
nary and necessary expenses of carrying on 
your trade or business. However, see Fuel 
taxes, later.
For more information on excise taxes, see 
Pub. 510.
Franchise taxes.  You can deduct corporate 
franchise taxes as a business expense.
Fuel taxes. Generally, taxes on gasoline, die-
sel fuel, and other motor fuels that you use in 
your business are included as part of the cost of 
the fuel. Do not deduct these taxes as a sepa-
rate item.
You may be entitled to a credit or refund for 
federal excise tax you paid on fuels used for 
certain purposes. For more information, see 
Pub. 510.
Occupational taxes.  You can deduct as a 
business expense an occupational tax charged 
at a flat rate by a locality for the privilege of 
working or conducting a business in the locality.
Personal property tax.  You can deduct any 
tax imposed by a state or local government on 
personal property used in your trade or busi-
ness.
Sales tax. Any sales tax you pay on a service 
for your business, or on the purchase or use of 
property in your business is treated as part of 
the cost of the service or property. If the service 
or the cost or use of the property is a deductible 
business expense, you can deduct the tax as 
part of that service or cost. If the property is 
merchandise bought for resale, the sales tax is 
part of the cost of the merchandise. If the prop-
erty is depreciable, add the sales tax to the ba-
sis for depreciation. For more information on 
basis, see Pub. 551.
Do not deduct state and local sales 
taxes imposed on the buyer that you 
must collect and pay over to the state 
or local government. Also, do not include these 
taxes in gross receipts or sales.
CAUTION
!
Page 19 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 5 Taxes  Page 19

6.
Insurance
Reminder
Premium tax credit. You may have to use the 
worksheets in Pub. 974 instead of the work-
sheet in this chapter if the insurance plan estab-
lished, or considered to be established, under 
your business was obtained through the Health 
Insurance Marketplace and you are claiming 
the premium tax credit. See Pub. 974 for de-
tails.
Introduction
You generally can deduct the ordinary and nec-
essary cost of insurance as a business expense 
if it is for your trade, business, or profession. 
However, you may have to capitalize certain in-
surance costs under the uniform capitalization 
rules. For more information, see Capitalized 
Premiums, later.
Topics
This chapter discusses:
• Deductible premiums
• Nondeductible premiums
• Capitalized premiums
• When to deduct premiums
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
15-B Employer's Tax Guide to Fringe 
Benefits
525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income
538 Accounting Periods and Methods
547 Casualties, Disasters, and Thefts
Form (and Instructions)
1040 U.S. Individual Income Tax Return
1040-NR U.S. Nonresident Alien Income 
Tax Return
Schedule A (Form 1040 or 1040-SR) 
Itemized Deductions
Schedule C (Form 1040 or 1040-SR) 
Profit or Loss From Business
Schedule F (Form 1040 or 1040-SR) 
Profit or Loss From Farming
Schedule SE (Form 1040 or 1040-SR) 
Self-Employment Tax
Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) Partner's 
Share of Income, Deductions, 
Credits, etc.
1099-H Health Coverage Tax Credit 
(HCTC) Advance Payments
  15-B 
  525 
  538 
  547 
  1040 
  1040-NR 
  Schedule A (Form 1040 or 1040-SR)
  Schedule C (Form 1040 or 1040-SR)
  Schedule F (Form 1040 or 1040-SR)
  Schedule SE (Form 1040 or 1040-SR)
  Schedule K-1 (Form 1065)
  1099-H 
2555 Foreign Earned Income
8885 Health Coverage Tax Credit
W-2 Wage and Tax Statement
See chapter 12  for information about getting 
publications and forms.
Deductible Premiums
You generally can deduct premiums you pay for 
the following kinds of insurance related to your 
trade or business.
1. Insurance that covers fire, storm, theft, ac-
cident, or similar losses.
2. Credit insurance that covers losses from 
business bad debts.
3. Group hospitalization and medical insur-
ance for employees, including long-term 
care insurance.
a. If a partnership pays accident and 
health insurance premiums for its 
partners, it generally can deduct them 
as guaranteed payments to partners.
b. If an S corporation pays accident and 
health insurance premiums for its 
more-than-2% shareholder-employ-
ees, it generally can deduct them, but 
also must include them in the share-
holder's wages subject to federal in-
come tax withholding. See Pub.15-B.
4. Liability insurance.
5. Malpractice insurance that covers your 
personal liability for professional negli-
gence resulting in injury or damage to pa-
tients or clients.
6. Workers' compensation insurance set by 
state law that covers any claims for bodily 
injuries or job-related diseases suffered by 
employees in your business, regardless of 
fault.
a. If a partnership pays workers' com-
pensation premiums for its partners, it 
generally can deduct them as guaran-
teed payments to partners.
b. If an S corporation pays workers' 
compensation premiums for its 
more-than-2% shareholder-employ-
ees, it generally can deduct them, but 
also must include them in the share-
holder's wages.
7. Contributions to a state unemployment in-
surance fund are deductible as taxes if 
they are considered taxes under state law.
8. Overhead insurance that pays for busi-
ness overhead expenses you have during 
long periods of disability caused by your 
injury or sickness.
9. Car and other vehicle insurance that cov-
ers vehicles used in your business for lia-
bility, damages, and other losses. If you 
operate a vehicle partly for personal use, 
deduct only the part of the insurance pre-
mium that applies to the business use of 
the vehicle. If you use the standard mile-
age rate to figure your car expenses, you 
can’t deduct any car insurance premiums.
  2555 
  8885 
  W-2 
10. Life insurance covering your officers and 
employees if you aren’t directly or indi-
rectly a beneficiary under the contract.
11. Business interruption insurance that pays 
for lost profits if your business is shut 
down due to a fire or other cause.
Self-Employed Health 
Insurance Deduction
You may be able to deduct the amount you paid 
for medical and dental insurance and qualified 
long-term care insurance for yourself, your 
spouse, and your dependents. The insurance 
also can cover your child who was under age 
27 at the end of 2019, even if the child wasn’t 
your dependent. A child includes your son, 
daughter, stepchild, adopted child, or foster 
child. A foster child is any child placed with you 
by an authorized placement agency or by judg-
ment, decree, or other order of any court of 
competent jurisdiction.
One of the following statements must be 
true.
• You were self-employed and had a net 
profit for the year reported on Schedule C 
(Form 1040 or 1040-SR) or Schedule F 
(Form 1040 or 1040-SR).
• You were a partner with net earnings from 
self-employment for the year reported on 
Schedule K-1 (Form 1065), box 14, code 
A.
• You used one of the optional methods to 
figure your net earnings from self-employ-
ment on Schedule SE.
• You received wages in 2019 from an S cor-
poration in which you were a 
more-than-2% shareholder. Health insur-
ance premiums paid or reimbursed by the 
S corporation are shown as wages on 
Form W-2.
The insurance plan must be established, or 
considered to be established as discussed in 
the following bullets, under your business.
• For self-employed individuals filing a 
Schedule C or F, a policy can be either in 
the name of the business or in the name of 
the individual.
• For partners, a policy can be either in the 
name of the partnership or in the name of 
the partner. You can either pay the premi-
ums yourself or the partnership can pay 
them and report the premium amounts on 
Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) as guaranteed 
payments to be included in your gross in-
come. However, if the policy is in your 
name and you pay the premiums yourself, 
the partnership must reimburse you and 
report the premium amounts on Sched-
ule K-1 (Form 1065) as guaranteed pay-
ments to be included in your gross income. 
Otherwise, the insurance plan won’t be 
considered to be established under your 
business.
• For more-than-2% shareholders, a policy 
can be either in the name of the S corpora-
tion or in the name of the shareholder. You 
can either pay the premiums yourself or 
the S corporation can pay them and report 
the premium amounts on Form W-2 as wa-
ges to be included in your gross income. 
However, if the policy is in your name and 
Page 20 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 20  Chapter 6 Insurance

you pay the premiums yourself, the S cor-
poration must reimburse you and report 
the premium amounts on Form W-2 in 
box 1 as wages to be included in your 
gross income. Otherwise, the insurance 
plan won’t be considered to be established 
under your business.
Medicare premiums you voluntarily pay to 
obtain insurance in your name that is similar to 
qualifying private health insurance can be used 
to figure the deduction. Amounts paid for health 
insurance coverage from retirement plan distri-
butions that were nontaxable because you are a 
retired public safety officer can’t be used to fig-
ure the deduction.
Take the deduction on Schedule 1 (Form 
1040 or 1040-SR), line 16.
Qualified long -term care insurance.  You 
can include premiums paid on a qualified 
long-term care insurance contract when figuring 
your deduction. But, for each person covered, 
you can include only the smaller of the following 
amounts.
1. The amount paid for that person.
2. The amount shown below. Use the per-
son's age at the end of the tax year.
a. Age 40 or younger–$420
b. Age 41 to 50–$790
c. Age 51 to 60–$1,580
d. Age 61 to 70–$4,220
e. Age 71 or older–$5,270
Qualified long-term care insurance con-
tract. A qualified long -term care insurance 
contract is an insurance contract that only pro-
vides coverage of qualified long-term care serv-
ices. The contract must meet all the following 
requirements.
• It must be guaranteed renewable.
• It must provide that refunds, other than re-
funds on the death of the insured or com-
plete surrender or cancellation of the con-
tract, and dividends under the contract 
may be used only to reduce future premi-
ums or increase future benefits.
• It must not provide for a cash surrender 
value or other money that can be paid, as-
signed, pledged, or borrowed.
• It generally must not pay or reimburse ex-
penses incurred for services or items that 
would be reimbursed under Medicare, ex-
cept where Medicare is a secondary payer 
or the contract makes per diem or other 
periodic payments without regard to ex-
penses.
Qualified long-term care services. Quali-
fied long-term care services are:
• Necessary diagnostic, preventive, thera-
peutic, curing, treating, mitigating, and re-
habilitative services; and
• Maintenance or personal care services.
The services must be required by a chronically 
ill individual and prescribed by a licensed health 
care practitioner.
Page 21 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 6 Insurance  Page 21

Worksheet 6-A. Self-Employed Health Insurance Deduction Worksheet Keep for Your Records
Caution. You may have to use the worksheets in Pub. 974 instead of this worksheet if the insurance plan established, or 
considered to be established, under your business was obtained through the Health Insurance Marketplace and you are 
claiming the premium tax credit. See Pub. 974 for details.
Note. Use a separate worksheet for each trade or business under which an insurance plan is established.
1. Enter the total amount paid in 2019 for health insurance coverage established under your 
business (or the S corporation in which you were a more-than-2% shareholder) for 2019 for you, 
your spouse, and your dependents. Your insurance also can cover your child who was under age 
27 at the end of 2019, even if the child was not your dependent. But don’t include the following.
• Amounts for any month you were eligible to participate in a health plan subsidized by your or 
your spouse’s employer or the employer of either your dependent or your child who was 
under the age of 27 at the end of 2019.
• Any amounts paid from retirement plan distributions that were nontaxable because you are a 
retired public safety officer.
• Any qualified health insurance coverage payments that you included on Form 8885, line 4, to 
claim the HCTC or on Form 14095 to receive a reimbursement of the HCTC during the year.
• Any advance monthly payments of the HCTC that your health plan administrator received 
from the IRS, as shown on Form 1099-H.
• Any qualified health insurance coverage payments you paid for eligible coverage months for 
which you received the benefit of the HCTC monthly advance payment program.
• Any payments for qualified long-term care insurance (see line 2) ........... ........... 1.  
2. For coverage under a qualified long-term care insurance contract, enter for each person covered 
the smaller of the following amounts.
a) Total payments made for that person during the year.
b) The amount shown below. Use the person's age at the end of the tax year.
 $420— if that person is age 40 or younger 
$790— if age 41 to 50
$1,580— if age 51 to 60
$4,220— if age 61 to 70
$5,270— if age 71 or older
Don’t include payments for any month you were eligible to participate in a long-term care 
insurance plan subsidized by your or your spouse’s employer or the employer of either your 
dependent or your child who was under the age of 27 at the end of 2019. If more than one 
person is covered, figure separately the amount to enter for each person. Then enter the 
total of those amounts ......................................................... 2.  
3. Add lines 1 and 2 ................................................................. 3.  
4. Enter your net profit* and any other earned income** from the trade or business under which the 
insurance plan is established. Don’t include Conservation Reserve Program payments exempt 
from self-employment tax. If the business is an S corporation, skip to line 11 ................ 4.  
5. Enter the total of all net profits* from: Schedule C (Form 1040 or 1040-SR), line 31; Schedule F 
(Form 1040 or 1040-SR), line 34; or Schedule K-1 (Form 1065), box 14, code A; plus any other 
income allocable to the profitable businesses. Don’t include Conservation Reserve Program 
payments exempt from self-employment tax. See the Instructions for Schedule SE (Form 1040 or 
1040-SR). Don’t include any net losses shown on these schedules ........................ 5.  
6. Divide line 4 by line 5 .............................................................. 6.  
7. Multiply Schedule 1 (Form 1040 or 1040-SR), line 14, (or Form 1040-NR, line 27) by the 
percentage on line 6 ............................................................... 7.  
8. Subtract line 7 from line 4 .......................................................... 8.  
9. Enter the amount, if any, from Schedule 1 (Form 1040 or 1040-SR), line 15, (or Form 1040-NR, 
line 28) attributable to the same trade or business in which the insurance plan is 
established ...................................................................... 9.  
10. Subtract line 9 from line 8 .......................................................... 10.  
11. Enter your Medicare wages (Form W-2, box 5) from an S corporation in which you are a 
more-than-2% shareholder and in which the insurance plan is established .................. 11.  
12. Enter any amount from Form 2555, line 45, attributable to the amount entered on line 4 or 11 
above .......................................................................... 12.  
13. Subtract line 12 from line 10 or 11, whichever applies ................................... 13.  
14. Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 13 here and on Schedule 1 (Form 1040 or 1040-SR) line 16 (or 
Form 1040-NR, line 29). Don’t include this amount when figuring any medical expense 
deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040 or 1040-SR) ..................................... 14.  
* If you used either optional method to figure your net earnings from self-employment from any business, don’t enter your net profit from the 
business. Instead, enter the amount attributable to that business from Schedule SE (Form 1040 or 1040-SR), Section B, line 4b.
* * Earned Income includes net earnings and gains from the sale, transfer, or licensing of property you created. However, it doesn’t include 
capital gain income.
Chronically ill individual.  A chronically ill 
individual is a person who has been certified as 
one of the following.
• An individual who has been unable, due to 
loss of functional capacity for at least 90 
days, to perform at least two activities of 
daily living without substantial assistance 
from another individual. Activities of daily 
living are eating, toileting, transferring 
(general mobility), bathing, dressing, and 
continence.
• An individual who requires substantial su-
pervision to be protected from threats to 
Page 22 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 22  Chapter 6 Insurance

health and safety due to severe cognitive 
impairment.
The certification must have been made by a li-
censed health care practitioner within the previ-
ous 12 months.
Benefits received.  For information on ex-
cluding benefits you receive from a long -term 
care contract from gross income, see Pub. 525.
Other coverage. You can’t take the deduction 
for any month you were eligible to participate in 
any employer (including your spouse's) subsi-
dized health plan at any time during that month, 
even if you didn’t actually participate. In addi-
tion, if you were eligible for any month or part of 
a month to participate in any subsidized health 
plan maintained by the employer of either your 
dependent or your child who was under age 27 
at the end of 2019, don’t use amounts paid for 
coverage for that month to figure the deduction.
These rules are applied separately to plans 
that provide long-term care insurance and plans 
that don’t provide long -term care insurance. 
However, any medical insurance payments not 
deductible on Schedule 1 (Form 1040 or 
1040-SR), line 16, can be included as medical 
expenses on Schedule A (Form 1040 or 
1040-SR), if you itemize deductions.
Effect on itemized deductions.  Subtract the 
health insurance deduction from your medical 
insurance when figuring medical expenses on 
Schedule A (Form 1040 or 1040 -SR) if you 
itemize deductions.
Effect on self -employment tax.  For tax 
years beginning before or after 2010, you can’t 
subtract the self-employed health insurance de-
duction when figuring net earnings for your 
self-employment tax from the business under 
which the insurance plan is established, or con-
sidered to be established, as discussed earlier. 
For more information, see Schedule SE (Form 
1040 or 1040-SR).
How to figure the deduction.  Generally, you 
can use the worksheet in the Form 1040 or 
1040-SR instructions to figure your deduction. 
However, if any of the following apply, you must 
use Worksheet 6-A in this chapter.
• You had more than one source of income 
subject to self-employment tax.
• You file Form 2555.
• You are using amounts paid for qualified 
long-term care insurance to figure the de-
duction.
If you are claiming the HCTC, complete 
Form 8885 before you figure this deduction.
Health coverage tax credit.  You elect to 
take this credit only if you were an eligible trade 
adjustment assistance (TAA) recipient, alterna-
tive TAA (ATAA) recipient, reemployment trade 
adjustment assistance (RTAA) recipient, or 
Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (PBGC) 
pension recipient. Use Form 8885 to figure the 
amount, if any, of this credit. When figuring the 
amount to enter on line 1 of Worksheet 6 -A, 
don’t include any amounts you included on 
Form 8885, line 4.
There is coordination of tax benefits be-
tween advance monthly payments of the HCTC 
and the HCTC. In general, you can’t claim the 
HCTC for a payment you made for qualifying 
health insurance when you file your tax return if 
you previously received the benefit of the ad-
vance monthly payment program for that cover-
age month. If you benefited from the advance 
monthly payment program, you will receive a 
Form 1099 -H that reports the amount of the 
payments that were forwarded directly to your 
health plan administrator for each coverage 
month. Don’t report these amounts on Form 
8885.
More than one health plan and business.
If you have more than one health plan during 
the year and each plan is established under a 
different business, you must use separate work-
sheets (Worksheet 6 -A) to figure each plan's 
net earnings limit. Include the premium you paid 
under each plan on line 1 or line 2 of that sepa-
rate worksheet and your net profit (or wages) 
from that business on line 4 (or line 11). For a 
plan that provides long-term care insurance, the 
total of the amounts entered for each person on 
line 2 of all worksheets can’t be more than the 
appropriate limit shown on line 2 for that per-
son.
Nondeductible 
Premiums
You can’t deduct premiums on the following 
kinds of insurance.
1. Self-insurance reserve funds. You can’t 
deduct amounts credited to a reserve set 
up for self-insurance. This applies even if 
you can’t get business insurance cover-
age for certain business risks. However, 
your actual losses may be deductible. See 
Pub. 547.
2. Loss of earnings. You can’t deduct premi-
ums for a policy that pays for lost earnings 
due to sickness or disability. However, see 
the discussion on overhead insurance, 
item (8), under Deductible Premiums, ear-
lier.
3. Certain life insurance and annuities.
a. For contracts issued before June 9, 
1997, you can’t deduct the premiums 
on a life insurance policy covering 
you, an employee, or any person with 
a financial interest in your business if 
you are directly or indirectly a benefi-
ciary of the policy. You are included 
among possible beneficiaries of the 
policy if the policy owner is obligated 
to repay a loan from you using the 
proceeds of the policy. A person has 
a financial interest in your business if 
the person is an owner or part owner 
of the business or has lent money to 
the business.
b. For contracts issued after June 8, 
1997, you generally can’t deduct the 
premiums on any life insurance policy, 
endowment contract, or annuity con-
tract if you are directly or indirectly a 
beneficiary. The disallowance applies 
without regard to whom the policy 
covers.
c. Partners. If, as a partner in a partner-
ship, you take out an insurance policy 
on your own life and name your part-
ners as beneficiaries to induce them 
to retain their investments in the part-
nership, you are considered a benefi-
ciary. You can't deduct the insurance 
premiums.
4. Insurance to secure a loan. If you take out 
a policy on your life or on the life of an-
other person with a financial interest in 
your business to get or protect a business 
loan, you can't deduct the premiums as a 
business expense. Nor can you deduct 
the premiums as interest on business 
loans or as an expense of financing loans. 
In the event of death, the proceeds of the 
policy are generally not taxed as income 
even if they are used to liquidate the debt.
Capitalized Premiums
Under the uniform capitalization rules, you must 
capitalize the direct costs and part of the indi-
rect costs for certain production or resale activi-
ties. Include these costs in the basis of property 
you produce or acquire for resale, rather than 
claiming them as a current deduction. You re-
cover the costs through depreciation, amortiza-
tion, or cost of goods sold when you use, sell, 
or otherwise dispose of the property.
Indirect costs include premiums for insur-
ance on your plant or facility, machinery, equip-
ment, materials, property produced, or property 
acquired for resale.
Uniform capitalization rules.  You may be 
subject to the uniform capitalization rules if you 
do any of the following, unless the property is 
produced for your use other than in a business 
or an activity carried on for profit.
1. Produce real property or tangible personal 
property. For this purpose, tangible per-
sonal property includes a film, sound re-
cording, video tape, book, or similar prop-
erty.
2. Acquire property for resale.
However, these rules don't apply to the follow-
ing property.
1. Personal property you acquire for resale if 
your average annual gross receipts are 
$26 million or less for the 3 prior tax years.
2. Property you produce if you meet either of 
the following conditions.
a. Your indirect costs of producing the 
property are $200,000 or less.
b. You use the cash method of account-
ing and don't account for inventories.
More information.  For more information on 
these rules, see Uniform Capitalization Rules in 
Pub. 538 and the regulations under section 
263A.
Page 23 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 6 Insurance  Page 23

When To Deduct 
Premiums
You can usually deduct insurance premiums in 
the tax year to which they apply.
Cash method.  If you use the cash method of 
accounting, you generally deduct insurance 
premiums in the tax year you actually paid 
them, even if you incurred them in an earlier 
year. However, see Prepayment, later.
Accrual method.  If you use an accrual 
method of accounting, you can't deduct insur-
ance premiums before the tax year in which you 
incur a liability for them. In addition, you can't 
deduct insurance premiums before the tax year 
in which you actually pay them (unless the ex-
ception for recurring items applies). For more 
information about the accrual method of ac-
counting, see chapter 1 . For information about 
the exception for recurring items, see Pub. 538.
Prepayment. You can't deduct expenses in 
advance, even if you pay them in advance. This 
rule applies to any expense paid far enough in 
advance to, in effect, create an asset with a 
useful life extending substantially beyond the 
end of the current tax year.
Expenses such as insurance are generally 
allocable to a period of time. You can deduct in-
surance expenses for the year to which they are 
allocable.
Example.  In 2019, you signed a 3 -year in-
surance contract. Even though you paid the 
premiums for 2019, 2020, and 2021 when you 
signed the contract, you can only deduct the 
premium for 2019 on your 2019 tax return. You 
can deduct in 2020 and 2021 the premium allo-
cable to those years.
Dividends received.  If you receive dividends 
from business insurance and you deducted the 
premiums in prior years, at least part of the divi-
dends generally are income. For more informa-
tion, see Recovery of amount deducted (tax 
benefit rule) in chapter 1 under How Much Can I 
Deduct.
7.
Costs You Can 
Deduct or 
Capitalize
What’s New
Film and television production costs.  The 
election to expense certain costs of qualified 
film, television, and live theatrical productions 
has been extended to include costs of produc-
tions that begin before January 1, 2021. See 
Film and Television Production Costs, later.
Introduction
This chapter discusses costs you can elect to 
deduct or capitalize.
You generally deduct a cost as a current 
business expense by subtracting it from your in-
come in either the year you incur it or the year 
you pay it.
If you capitalize a cost, you may be able to 
recover it over a period of years through peri-
odic deductions for amortization, depletion, or 
depreciation. When you capitalize a cost, you 
add it to the basis of property to which it relates.
A partnership, corporation, estate, or trust 
makes the election to deduct or capitalize the 
costs discussed in this chapter except for ex-
ploration costs for mineral deposits. Each indi-
vidual partner, shareholder, or beneficiary 
elects whether to deduct or capitalize explora-
tion costs.
Individuals, estates, and trusts may be 
subject to AMT if they deduct certain 
research and experimental, intangible 
drilling, exploration, development, circulation, or 
business organizational costs.
For more information on the AMT, see the 
Instructions for Form 6251 and the Instructions 
for Schedule I (Form 1041).
Topics
This chapter discusses:
• Carrying charges
• Research and experimental costs
• Intangible drilling costs
• Exploration costs
• Development costs
• Circulation costs
• Business start-up and organizational costs
• Reforestation costs
• Retired asset removal costs
• Barrier removal costs
• Film and television production costs
• Repair and maintenance costs
CAUTION
!
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
544 Sales and Other Dispositions of 
Assets
Form (and Instructions)
Schedule C (Form 1040 or 1040-SR) 
Profit or Loss From Business
3468 Investment Credit
6765 Credit for Increasing Research 
Activities
8826 Disabled Access Credit
T (Timber) Forest Activities Schedule
See chapter 12  for information about getting 
publications and forms.
Carrying Charges
Carrying charges include the taxes and interest 
you pay to carry or develop real property or to 
carry, transport, or install personal property. 
Certain carrying charges must be capitalized 
under the uniform capitalization rules. (For infor-
mation on capitalization of interest, see chap-
ter 4 .) You can elect to capitalize carrying 
charges not subject to the uniform capitalization 
rules, but only if they are otherwise deductible.
You can elect to capitalize carrying charges 
separately for each project you have and for 
each type of carrying charge. Your election is 
good for only 1 year for unimproved and unpro-
ductive real property. You must decide whether 
to capitalize carrying charges each year the 
property remains unimproved and unproduc-
tive. For other real property, your election to 
capitalize carrying charges remains in effect un-
til construction or development is completed. 
For personal property, your election is effective 
until the date you install or first use it, whichever 
is later.
How to make the election.  To make the elec-
tion to capitalize a carrying charge, attach a 
statement to your original tax return for the year 
the election is to be effective indicating which 
charges you are electing to capitalize. However, 
if you timely filed your return for the year without 
making the election, you can still make the elec-
tion by filing an amended return within 6 months 
of the due date of the return (excluding exten-
sions). Attach the statement to the amended re-
turn and write “Filed pursuant to section 
301.9100-2” on the statement. File the amen-
ded return at the same address you filed the 
original return.
Research and 
Experimental Costs
The costs of research and experimentation are 
generally capital expenses. However, you can 
elect to deduct these costs as a current busi-
ness expense. Your election to deduct these 
costs is binding for the year it is made and for 
  544
  Schedule C (Form 1040 or 1040-SR)
  3468
  6765
  8826
  T (Timber)
Page 24 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 24  Chapter 7 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize

all later years unless you get IRS approval to 
make a change.
If you meet certain requirements, you may 
elect to defer and amortize research and exper-
imental costs. For information on electing to de-
fer and amortize these costs, see Research and 
Experimental Costs in chapter 8.
Research and experimental costs defined. 
Research and experimental costs are reasona-
ble costs you incur in your trade or business for 
activities intended to provide information that 
would eliminate uncertainty about the develop-
ment or improvement of a product. Uncertainty 
exists if the information available to you does 
not establish how to develop or improve a prod-
uct or the appropriate design of a product. 
Whether costs qualify as research and experi-
mental costs depends on the nature of the ac-
tivity to which the costs relate rather than on the 
nature of the product or improvement being de-
veloped or the level of technological advance-
ment.
The costs of obtaining a patent, including at-
torneys' fees paid or incurred in making and 
perfecting a patent application, are research 
and experimental costs. However, costs paid or 
incurred to obtain another's patent are not re-
search and experimental costs.
Product. The term “product” includes any 
of the following items.
• Formula.
• Invention.
• Patent.
• Pilot model.
• Process.
• Technique.
• Property similar to the items listed above.
It also includes products used by you in your 
trade or business or held for sale, lease, or li-
cense.
Costs not included. Research and experi-
mental costs do not include expenses for any of 
the following activities.
• Advertising or promotions.
• Consumer surveys.
• Efficiency surveys.
• Management studies.
• Quality control testing.
• Research in connection with literary, his-
torical, or similar projects.
• The acquisition of another's patent, model, 
production, or process.
When and how to elect.  You make the elec-
tion to deduct research and experimental costs 
by deducting them on your tax return for the 
year in which you first pay or incur research and 
experimental costs. If you do not make the elec-
tion to deduct research and experimental costs 
in the first year in which you pay or incur the 
costs, you can deduct the costs in a later year 
only with approval from the IRS.
Research credit.  If you pay or incur qualified 
research expenses, you may be able to take the 
research credit. For more information, see Form 
6765 and its instructions.
Payroll tax credit.  The payroll tax credit is an 
annual election made by a qualified small busi-
ness specifying the amount of research credit, 
not to exceed $250,000, that may be used 
against the employer portion of social security 
liability. The credit is the smallest of the current 
year research credit, an elected amount not to 
exceed $250,000, or the general business 
credit carryforward for the tax year. The election 
must be made on or before the due date of the 
originally filed return (including extensions). An 
election cannot be made for a tax year if an 
election was made for 5 or more preceding tax 
years. The election made by a partnership or S 
corporation is made at the entity level.
A qualified small business that elects to 
claim the payroll tax credit and files quarterly 
employment tax returns will claim the payroll tax 
credit against the employer's portion of social 
security tax on its employment tax return for the 
first quarter that begins after it files the return re-
flecting the payroll tax election. For more infor-
mation, see the Instructions for Form 6765.
Intangible
Drilling Costs
The costs of developing oil, gas, or geothermal 
wells are ordinarily capital expenditures. You 
can usually recover them through depreciation 
or depletion. However, you can elect to deduct 
intangible drilling costs (IDCs) as a current busi-
ness expense. These are certain drilling and 
development costs for wells in the United 
States in which you hold an operating or work-
ing interest. You can deduct only costs for drill-
ing or preparing a well for the production of oil, 
gas, or geothermal steam or hot water.
You can elect to deduct only the costs of 
items with no salvage value. These include wa-
ges, fuel, repairs, hauling, and supplies related 
to drilling wells and preparing them for produc-
tion. Your cost for any drilling or development 
work done by contractors under any form of 
contract is also an IDC. However, see Amounts 
paid to contractor that must be capitalized , 
later.
You can also elect to deduct the cost of drill-
ing exploratory bore holes to determine the lo-
cation and delineation of offshore hydrocarbon 
deposits if the shaft is capable of conducting 
hydrocarbons to the surface on completion. It 
does not matter whether there is any intent to 
produce hydrocarbons.
If you do not elect to deduct your IDCs as a 
current business expense, you can elect to de-
duct them over the 60 -month period beginning 
with the month they were paid or incurred.
Amounts paid to contractor that must be 
capitalized. Amounts paid to a contractor 
must be capitalized if they are either:
• Amounts properly allocable to the cost of 
depreciable property, or
• Amounts paid only out of production or 
proceeds from production if these amounts 
are depletable income to the recipient.
How to make the election.  You elect to de-
duct IDCs as a current business expense by 
taking the deduction on your income tax return 
for the first tax year you have eligible costs. No 
formal statement is required. If you file Sched-
ule C (Form 1040 or 1040 -SR), enter these 
costs under “Other expenses.”
For oil and gas wells, your election is bind-
ing for the year it is made and for all later years. 
For geothermal wells, your election can be re-
voked by the filing of an amended return on 
which you do not take the deduction. You can 
file the amended return for the year up to the 
normal time of expiration for filing a claim for 
credit or refund, generally, within 3 years after 
the date you filed the original return or within 2 
years after the date you paid the tax, whichever 
is later.
Energy credit for costs of geothermal wells. 
If you capitalize the drilling and development 
costs of geothermal wells that you place in serv-
ice during the tax year, you may be able to 
claim a business energy credit. See the Instruc-
tions for Form 3468 for more information.
Nonproductive well.  If you capitalize your 
IDCs, you have another option if the well is non-
productive. You can deduct the IDCs of the 
nonproductive well as an ordinary loss. You 
must indicate and clearly state your election on 
your tax return for the year the well is comple-
ted. Once made, the election for oil and gas 
wells is binding for all later years. You can re-
voke your election for a geothermal well by filing 
an amended return that does not claim the loss.
Costs incurred outside the United States. 
You cannot deduct as a current business ex-
pense all the IDCs paid or incurred for an oil, 
gas, or geothermal well located outside the Uni-
ted States. However, you can elect to include 
the costs in the adjusted basis of the well to fig-
ure depletion or depreciation. If you do not 
make this election, you can deduct the costs 
over the 10 -year period beginning with the tax 
year in which you paid or incurred them. These 
rules do not apply to a nonproductive well.
Exploration Costs
The costs of determining the existence, loca-
tion, extent, or quality of any mineral deposit are 
ordinarily capital expenditures if the costs lead 
to the development of a mine. You recover 
these costs through depletion as the mineral is 
removed from the ground. However, you can 
elect to deduct domestic exploration costs paid 
or incurred before the beginning of the develop-
ment stage of the mine (except those for oil and 
gas wells).
How to make the election.  You elect to de-
duct exploration costs by taking the deduction 
on your income tax return, or on an amended 
income tax return, for the first tax year for which 
you wish to deduct the costs paid or incurred 
during the tax year. Your return must ade-
quately describe and identify each property or 
mine, and clearly state how much is being de-
ducted for each one. The election applies to the 
tax year you make this election and all later tax 
years.
Partnerships and S corporations.  Each 
partner, not the partnership, elects whether to 
capitalize or to deduct that partner's share of 
exploration costs. Each shareholder, not the S 
Page 25 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 7 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize  Page 25

corporation, elects whether to capitalize or to 
deduct that shareholder's share of exploration 
costs.
Reduced corporate deductions for explora-
tion costs. A corporation (other than an S cor-
poration) can deduct only 70% of its domestic 
exploration costs. It must capitalize the remain-
ing 30% of costs and amortize them over the 
60-month period starting with the month the ex-
ploration costs are paid or incurred. A corpora-
tion may also elect to capitalize and amortize 
mining exploration costs over a 10 -year period. 
For more information on this method of amorti-
zation, see section 59(e).
The 30% that the corporation capitalizes 
cannot be added to its basis in the property to 
figure cost depletion. However, the amount 
amortized is treated as additional depreciation 
and is subject to recapture as ordinary income 
on a disposition of the property. See Section 
1250 Property under Depreciation Recapture in 
chapter 3 of Pub. 544.
These rules also apply to the deduction of 
development costs by corporations. See Devel-
opment Costs, later.
Recapture of exploration expenses.  When 
your mine reaches the producing stage, you 
must recapture any exploration costs you elec-
ted to deduct. Use either of the following meth-
ods.
 Method 1—Include the deducted costs in 
gross income for the tax year the mine rea-
ches the producing stage. Your election 
must be clearly indicated on the return. In-
crease your adjusted basis in the mine by 
the amount included in income. Generally, 
you must elect this recapture method by 
the due date (including extensions) of your 
return. However, if you timely filed your re-
turn for the year without making the elec-
tion, you can still make the election by filing 
an amended return within 6 months of the 
due date of the return (excluding exten-
sions). Make the election on your amended 
return and write “Filed pursuant to section 
301.9100-2” on the form where you are in-
cluding the income. File the amended re-
turn at the same address you filed the origi-
nal return.
 Method 2—Do not claim any depletion de-
duction for the tax year the mine reaches 
the producing stage and any later tax years 
until the depletion you would have deduc-
ted equals the exploration costs you de-
ducted.
You must also recapture deducted explora-
tion costs if you receive a bonus or royalty from 
mine property before it reaches the producing 
stage. Do not claim any depletion deduction for 
the tax year you receive the bonus or royalty 
and any later tax years until the depletion you 
would have deducted equals the exploration 
costs you deducted.
Generally, if you dispose of the mine before 
you have fully recaptured the exploration costs 
you deducted, recapture the balance by treating 
all or part of your gain as ordinary income. Un-
der these circumstances, you generally treat as 
ordinary income all of your gain if it is less than 
your adjusted exploration costs with respect to 
the mine. If your gain is more than your adjusted 
exploration costs, treat as ordinary income only 
a part of your gain, up to the amount of your ad-
justed exploration costs.
Foreign exploration costs. If you pay or incur 
exploration costs for a mine or other natural de-
posit located outside the United States, you 
cannot deduct all the costs in the current year. 
You can elect to include the costs (other than 
for an oil, gas, or geothermal well) in the adjus-
ted basis of the mineral property to figure cost 
depletion. (Cost depletion is discussed in chap-
ter 9.) If you do not make this election, you must 
deduct the costs over the 10 -year period begin-
ning with the tax year in which you pay or incur 
them. These rules also apply to foreign devel-
opment costs.
Development Costs
You can deduct costs paid or incurred during 
the tax year for developing a mine or any other 
natural deposit (other than an oil or gas well) lo-
cated in the United States. These costs must be 
paid or incurred after the discovery of ores or 
minerals in commercially marketable quantities. 
Development costs also include depreciation 
on improvements used in the development of 
ores or minerals and costs incurred for you by a 
contractor. Development costs do not include 
the costs for the acquisition or improvement of 
depreciable property.
Instead of deducting development costs in 
the year paid or incurred, you can elect to treat 
the costs as deferred expenses and deduct 
them ratably as the units of produced ores or 
minerals benefited by the expenses are sold. 
This election applies each tax year to expenses 
paid or incurred in that year. Once made, the 
election is binding for the year and cannot be 
revoked for any reason.
How to make the election.  The election to 
deduct development costs ratably as the ores 
or minerals are sold must be made for each 
mine or other natural deposit by a clear indica-
tion on your return or by a statement filed with 
the IRS office where you file your return. Gener-
ally, you must make the election by the due 
date of the return (including extensions). How-
ever, if you timely filed your return for the year 
without making the election, you can still make 
the election by filing an amended return within 6 
months of the due date of the return (excluding 
extensions). Clearly indicate the election on 
your amended return and write “Filed pursuant 
to section 301.9100-2.” File the amended return 
at the same address you filed the original re-
turn.
Foreign development costs.  The rules dis-
cussed earlier for Foreign exploration costs  ap-
ply to foreign development costs.
Reduced corporate deductions for develop-
ment costs.  The rules discussed earlier for 
Reduced corporate deductions for exploration 
costs also apply to corporate deductions for de-
velopment costs.
Circulation Costs
A publisher can deduct as a current business 
expense the costs of establishing, maintaining, 
or increasing the circulation of a newspaper, 
magazine, or other periodical. For example, a 
publisher can deduct the cost of hiring extra 
employees for a limited time to get new sub-
scriptions through telephone calls. Circulation 
costs may be deducted even if they would nor-
mally be capitalized.
This rule does not apply to the following 
costs that must be capitalized.
• The purchase of land or depreciable prop-
erty.
• The acquisition of circulation through the 
purchase of any part of the business of an-
other publisher of a newspaper, magazine, 
or other periodical, including the purchase 
of another publisher's list of subscribers.
Other treatment of circulation costs.  If you 
do not want to deduct circulation costs as a cur-
rent business expense, you can elect one of the 
following ways to recover these costs.
• Capitalize all circulation costs that are 
properly chargeable to a capital account 
(see chapter 1).
• Amortize circulation costs over the 3-year 
period beginning with the tax year they 
were paid or incurred.
How to make the election.  You elect to capi-
talize circulation costs by attaching a statement 
to your return for the first tax year the election 
applies. Your election is binding for the year it is 
made and for all later years, unless you get IRS 
approval to revoke it.
Business Start-up and 
Organizational Costs
Business start -up and organizational costs are 
generally capital expenditures. However, you 
can elect to deduct up to $5,000 of business 
start-up and $5,000 of organizational costs paid 
or incurred after October 22, 2004. The $5,000 
deduction is reduced by the amount your total 
start-up or organizational costs exceed 
$50,000. Any remaining costs must be amor-
tized. For information about amortizing start -up 
and organizational costs, see chapter 8.
Start-up costs include any amounts paid or 
incurred in connection with creating an active 
trade or business or investigating the creation 
or acquisition of an active trade or business. Or-
ganizational costs include the costs of creating 
a corporation or partnership.
How to make the election.  You elect to de-
duct the start -up or organizational costs by 
claiming the deduction on your income tax re-
turn (filed by the due date including extensions) 
for the tax year in which the active trade or busi-
ness begins. For costs paid or incurred after 
September 8, 2008, you are not required to at-
tach a statement to your return to elect to de-
duct such costs. However, for start-up or organ-
izational costs paid or incurred before 
Page 26 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 26  Chapter 7 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize

September 9, 2008, you may be required to at-
tach a statement to your return to elect to de-
duct such costs. If you timely filed your return 
for the year without making the election, you 
can still make the election by filing an amended 
return within 6 months of the due date of the re-
turn (excluding extensions). Clearly indicate the 
election on your amended return and write 
“Filed pursuant to section 301.9100-2.”
File the amended return at the same ad-
dress you filed the original return. The election 
applies when figuring taxable income for the 
current tax year and all subsequent years. Once 
made, the election is irrevocable. For more in-
formation on start -up and organizational costs, 
see chapter 8.
Reforestation Costs
Reforestation costs are generally capital expen-
ditures. However, you can elect to deduct up to 
$10,000 ($5,000 if married filing separately; $0 
for a trust) of qualifying reforestation costs paid 
or incurred after October 22, 2004, for each 
qualified timber property. The remaining costs 
can be amortized over an 84 -month period. For 
information about amortizing reforestation 
costs, see chapter 8.
Qualifying reforestation costs are the direct 
costs of planting or seeding for forestation or re-
forestation. Qualified timber property is property 
that contains trees in significant commercial 
quantities. See chapter 8  for more information 
on qualifying reforestation costs and qualified 
timber property.
If you elect to deduct qualified reforestation 
costs, create and maintain separate timber ac-
counts for each qualified timber property and in-
clude all reforestation costs and the dates each 
was applied. Do not include this qualified timber 
property in any account (for example, depletion 
block) for which depletion is allowed.
How to make the election.  You elect to de-
duct qualifying reforestation costs by claiming 
the deduction on your timely filed income tax re-
turn (including extensions) for the tax year the 
expenses were paid or incurred. If Form T (Tim-
ber) is required, complete Part IV of the form. If 
Form T (Timber) is not required, attach a state-
ment containing the following information for 
each qualified timber property for which an 
election is being made.
• The unique stand identification numbers.
• The total number of acres reforested dur-
ing the tax year.
• The nature of the reforestation treatments.
• The total amounts of qualified reforestation 
expenditures eligible to be amortized or 
deducted.
If you timely filed your return for the year 
without making the election, you can still make 
the election by filing an amended return within 6 
months of the due date of the return (excluding 
extensions). Clearly indicate the election on 
your amended return and write “Filed pursuant 
to section 301.9100-2.” File the amended return 
at the same address you filed the original re-
turn. The election applies when figuring taxable 
income for the current tax year and all subse-
quent years.
For additional information on reforestation 
costs, see chapter 8.
Recapture. This deduction may have to be re-
captured as ordinary income under section 
1245 when you sell or otherwise dispose of the 
property that would have received an addition 
to basis if you had not elected to deduct the ex-
penditure. For more information on recapturing 
the deduction, see Depreciation Recapture  in 
Pub. 544.
Retired Asset Removal 
Costs
If you retire and remove a depreciable asset in 
connection with the installation or production of 
a replacement asset, you can deduct the costs 
of removing the retired asset. However, if you 
replace a component (part) of a depreciable as-
set, capitalize the removal costs if the replace-
ment is an improvement and deduct the costs if 
the replacement is a repair.
Barrier Removal Costs
The cost of an improvement to a business asset 
is normally a capital expense. However, you 
can elect to deduct the costs of making a facility 
or public transportation vehicle more accessible 
to and usable by those who are disabled or eld-
erly. You must own or lease the facility or vehi-
cle for use in connection with your trade or busi-
ness.
A facility is all or any part of buildings, struc-
tures, equipment, roads, walks, parking lots, or 
similar real or personal property. A public trans-
portation vehicle is a vehicle, such as a bus or 
railroad car, that provides transportation service 
to the public (including service for your custom-
ers, even if you are not in the business of pro-
viding transportation services).
You cannot deduct any costs that you paid 
or incurred to completely renovate or build a fa-
cility or public transportation vehicle or to re-
place depreciable property in the normal course 
of business.
Deduction limit. The most you can deduct as 
a cost of removing barriers to the disabled and 
the elderly for any tax year is $15,000. How-
ever, you can add any costs over this limit to the 
basis of the property and depreciate these ex-
cess costs.
Partners and partnerships. The $15,000 limit 
applies to a partnership and also to each part-
ner in the partnership. A partner can allocate 
the $15,000 limit in any manner among the part-
ner's individually incurred costs and the part-
ner's distributive share of partnership costs. If 
the partner cannot deduct the entire share of 
partnership costs, the partnership can add any 
costs not deducted to the basis of the improved 
property.
A partnership must be able to show that any 
amount added to basis was not deducted by 
the partner and that it was over a partner's 
$15,000 limit (as determined by the partner). If 
the partnership cannot show this, it is presumed 
that the partner was able to deduct the distribu-
tive share of the partnership's costs in full.
Example. Emilio Azul's distributive share of 
ABC partnership's deductible expenses for the 
removal of architectural barriers was $14,000. 
Emilio had $12,000 of similar expenses in his 
sole proprietorship. He elected to deduct 
$7,000 of them. Emilio allocated the remaining 
$8,000 of the $15,000 limit to his share of 
ABC's expenses. Emilio can add the excess 
$5,000 of his own expenses to the basis of the 
property used in his business. Also, if ABC can 
show that Emilio could not deduct $6,000 
($14,000 – $8,000) of his share of the partner-
ship's expenses because of how Emilio applied 
the limit, ABC can add $6,000 to the basis of its 
property.
Qualification standards.  You can deduct 
your costs as a current expense only if the bar-
rier removal meets the guidelines and require-
ments issued by the Architectural and Trans-
portation Barriers Compliance Board under the 
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) of 1990. 
You can view the ADA at ADA.gov/pubs/
ada.htm.
The following is a list of some architectural 
barrier removal costs that can be deducted.
• Ground and floor surfaces.
• Walks.
• Parking lots.
• Ramps.
• Entrances.
• Doors and doorways.
• Stairs.
• Floors.
• Toilet rooms.
• Water fountains.
• Public telephones.
• Elevators.
• Controls.
• Signage.
• Alarms.
• Protruding objects.
• Symbols of accessibility.
You can find the ADA guidelines and require-
ments for architectural barrier removal at 
USDOJ.gov/crt/ada/reg3a.html.
The costs for removal of transportation barri-
ers from rail facilities, buses, and rapid and light 
rail vehicles are deductible. You can find the 
guidelines and requirements for transportation 
barrier removal at transit.dot.gov.
Also, you can access the ADA website at 
ADA.gov for additional information.
Other barrier removals. To be deductible, 
expenses of removing any barrier not covered 
by the above standards must meet all three of 
the following tests.
1. The removed barrier must be a substantial 
barrier to access or use of a facility or pub-
lic transportation vehicle by persons who 
have a disability or are elderly.
2. The removed barrier must have been a 
barrier for at least one major group of per-
sons who have a disability or are elderly 
(such as people who are blind, deaf, or 
wheelchair users).
3. The barrier must be removed without cre-
ating any new barrier that significantly 
Page 27 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 7 Costs You Can Deduct or Capitalize  Page 27

impairs access to or use of the facility or 
vehicle by a major group of persons who 
have a disability or are elderly.
How to make the election.  If you elect to de-
duct your costs for removing barriers to the dis-
abled or the elderly, claim the deduction on 
your income tax return (partnership return for 
partnerships) for the tax year the expenses 
were paid or incurred. Identify the deduction as 
a separate item. The election applies to all the 
qualifying costs you have during the year, up to 
the $15,000 limit. If you make this election, you 
must maintain adequate records to support your 
deduction.
For your election to be valid, you must gen-
erally file your return by its due date, including 
extensions. However, if you timely filed your re-
turn for the year without making the election, 
you can still make the election by filing an 
amended return within 6 months of the due date 
of the return (excluding extensions). Clearly in-
dicate the election on your amended return and 
write “Filed pursuant to section 301. 9100-2.” 
File the amended return at the same address 
you filed the original return. Your election is ir-
revocable after the due date, including exten-
sions, of your return.
Disabled access credit.  If you make your 
business accessible to persons with disabilities 
and your business is an eligible small business, 
you may be able to claim the disabled access 
credit. If you choose to claim the credit, you 
must reduce the amount you deduct or capital-
ize by the amount of the credit.
For more information, see Form 8826.
Film and Television 
Production Costs
Film and television production costs are gener-
ally capital expenses. However, you can elect 
to deduct certain costs of qualified film, televi-
sion, and live theatrical productions that begin 
before January 1, 2021. For more information, 
see section 181 and the related regulations.
Certain qualified film, television, or live the-
atrical productions acquired and placed in serv-
ice after September 27, 2017, may be eligible 
for the special depreciation allowance under 
section 168(k). For more information, see Pub. 
946, How To Depreciate Property.
Note. No other depreciation or amortization 
deduction is allowed for costs of qualified film or 
television production or any qualified live theat-
rical production if an election is made to deduct 
such costs.
Repair and Maintenance 
Costs
Generally, you can deduct amounts paid for re-
pairs and maintenance to tangible property if 
the amounts paid are not otherwise required to 
be capitalized. However, you may elect to capi-
talize amounts paid for repair and maintenance 
consistent with the treatment on your books and 
records. If you make this election, it applies to 
all amounts paid for repair and maintenance to 
tangible property that you treat as capital ex-
penditures on your books and records for the 
tax year.
How to make the election.  To make the elec-
tion to treat repairs and maintenance as capital 
expenditures, attach a statement titled “Section 
1.263(a)-3(n) Election” to your timely filed return 
(including extensions). For more information on 
what to include in the statement, see Regula-
tions section 1. 263(a)-3(n). If you timely filed 
your return without making the election, you can 
still make the election by filing an amended re-
turn within 6 months of the due date of the re-
turn (excluding extensions). Attach the state-
ment to the amended return and write “Filed 
pursuant to section 301. 9100-2” on the state-
ment. File the amended return at the same ad-
dress you filed the original return. 
8.
Amortization
Introduction
Amortization is a method of recovering (deduct-
ing) certain capital costs over a fixed period of 
time. It is similar to the straight line method of 
depreciation.
The various amortizable costs covered in 
this chapter are included in the list below. How-
ever, this chapter doesn't discuss amortization 
of bond premium. For information on that topic, 
see chapter 3 of Pub. 550, Investment Income 
and Expenses.
Topics
This chapter discusses:
• Deducting amortization
• Amortizing costs of starting a business
• Amortizing costs of getting a lease
• Amortizing costs of section 197 intangibles
• Amortizing reforestation costs
• Amortizing costs of geological and 
geophysical costs
• Amortizing costs of pollution control 
facilities
• Amortizing costs of research and 
experimentation
• Amortizing costs of certain tax preferences
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
544 Sales and Other Dispositions of 
Assets
550 Investment Income and Expenses
946 How To Depreciate Property
  544 
  550 
  946 
Form (and Instructions)
3115 Application for Change in 
Accounting Method
4562 Depreciation and Amortization
6251 Alternative Minimum 
Tax—Individuals
See chapter 12  for information about getting 
publications and forms.
How To Deduct 
Amortization
To deduct amortization that begins during the 
current tax year, complete Part VI of Form 4562 
and attach it to your income tax return.
To report amortization from previous years, 
in addition to amortization that begins in the cur-
rent year, list on Form 4562 each item sepa-
rately. For example, in 2018, you began to am-
ortize a lease. In 2019, you began to amortize a 
second lease. Report amortization from the new 
lease on line 42 of your 2019 Form 4562. Re-
port amortization from the 2018 lease on line 43 
of your 2019 Form 4562.
If you don't have any new amortizable ex-
penses for the current year, you aren't required 
to complete Form 4562 (unless you are claim-
ing depreciation). Report the current year's de-
duction for amortization that began in a prior 
year directly on the “Other deduction” or “Other 
expense ” line of your return.
Starting a Business
When you start a business, treat all eligible 
costs you incur before you begin operating the 
business as capital expenditures which are part 
of your basis in the business. Generally, you re-
cover costs for particular assets through depre-
ciation deductions. However, you generally 
can't recover other costs until you sell the busi-
ness or otherwise go out of business. For a dis-
cussion on how to treat these costs, see If your 
attempt to go into business is unsuccessful  un-
der Capital Expenses in chapter 1.
For costs paid or incurred after September 
8, 2008, you can deduct a limited amount of 
start-up and organizational costs. The costs 
that aren't deducted currently can be amortized 
ratably over a 180 -month period. The amortiza-
tion period starts with the month you begin op-
erating your active trade or business. You aren't 
required to attach a statement to make this 
election. You can choose to forgo this election 
by affirmatively electing to capitalize your 
start-up costs on your income tax return filed by 
the due date (including extensions) for the tax 
year in which the active trade or business be-
gins. Once made, the election to either amortize 
or capitalize start -up costs is irrevocable and 
applies to all start -up costs that are related to 
your trade or business. See Regulations sec-
tions 1.195-1, 1.248-1, and 1.709-1.
For costs paid or incurred after October 22, 
2004, and before September 9, 2008, you can 
elect to deduct a limited amount of business 
  3115 
  4562 
  6251 
Page 28 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 28  Chapter 8 Amortization

start-up and organizational costs in the year 
your active trade or business begins. Any costs 
not deducted can be amortized ratably over a 
180-month period, beginning with the month 
you begin business. If the election is made, you 
must attach any statement required by Regula-
tions sections 1. 195-1(b), 1. 248-1(c), and 
1.709-1(c), as in effect before September 9, 
2008.
Note.  You can apply the provisions of Reg-
ulations sections 1.195-1, 1.248-1, and 1.709-1 
to all business start-up and organizational costs 
paid or incurred after October 22, 2004, provi-
ded the period of limitations on assessment 
hasn't expired for the year of the election. Oth-
erwise, for business start -up and organizational 
costs paid or incurred after October 22, 2004, 
and before September 9, 2008, the provisions 
under Regulations sections 1. 195-1(b), 
1.248-1(c), and 1. 709-1(c), as in effect before 
September 9, 2008, will apply.
For costs paid or incurred before October 
23, 2004, you can elect to amortize business 
start-up and organizational costs over an amor-
tization period of 60 months or more. See How 
To Make the Election, later.
The cost must qualify as one of the follow-
ing.
• A business start-up cost.
• An organizational cost for a corporation.
• An organizational cost for a partnership.
Business Start-up Costs
Start-up costs are amounts paid or incurred for 
(a) creating an active trade or business, or (b) 
investigating the creation or acquisition of an 
active trade or business. Start -up costs include 
amounts paid or incurred in connection with an 
existing activity engaged in for profit, and for the 
production of income in anticipation of the activ-
ity becoming an active trade or business.
Qualifying costs.  A start-up cost is amortiza-
ble if it meets both of the following tests.
• It is a cost you could deduct if you paid or 
incurred it to operate an existing active 
trade or business (in the same field as the 
one you entered into).
• It is a cost you pay or incur before the day 
your active trade or business begins.
Start-up costs include amounts paid for the 
following.
• An analysis or survey of potential markets, 
products, labor supply, transportation fa-
cilities, etc.
• Advertisements for the opening of the busi-
ness.
• Salaries and wages for employees who are 
being trained and their instructors.
• Travel and other necessary costs for se-
curing prospective distributors, suppliers, 
or customers.
• Salaries and fees for executives and con-
sultants, or for similar professional serv-
ices.
Nonqualifying costs.  Start-up costs don'tt in-
clude deductible interest, taxes, or research 
and experimental costs. See Research and Ex-
perimental Costs, later.
Purchasing an active trade or business. 
Amortizable start-up costs for purchasing an ac-
tive trade or business include only investigative 
costs incurred in the course of a general search 
for or preliminary investigation of the business. 
These are costs that help you decide whether 
to purchase a business. Costs you incur in an 
attempt to purchase a specific business are 
capital expenses that you can't amortize.
Example.  On June 1, you hired an ac-
counting firm and a law firm to assist you in the 
potential purchase of XYZ, Inc. They re-
searched XYZ's industry and analyzed the fi-
nancial projections of XYZ, Inc. In September, 
the law firm prepared and submitted a letter of 
intent to XYZ, Inc. The letter stated that a bind-
ing commitment would result only after a pur-
chase agreement was signed. The law firm and 
accounting firm continued to provide services 
including a review of XYZ's books and records 
and the preparation of a purchase agreement. 
On October 22, you signed a purchase agree-
ment with XYZ, Inc.
All amounts paid or incurred to investigate 
the business before October 22 are amortizable 
investigative costs. Amounts paid on or after 
that date relate to the attempt to purchase the 
business and therefore must be capitalized.
Disposition of business.  If you completely 
dispose of your business before the end of the 
amortization period, you can deduct any re-
maining deferred start -up costs. However, you 
can deduct these deferred start-up costs only to 
the extent they qualify as a loss from a busi-
ness.
Costs of Organizing a 
Corporation
Amounts paid to organize a corporation are the 
direct costs of creating the corporation.
Qualifying costs.  To qualify as an organiza-
tional cost, it must be:
• For the creation of the corporation,
• Chargeable to a capital account (see chap-
ter 1),
• Amortized over the life of the corporation if 
the corporation had a fixed life, and
• Incurred before the end of the first tax year 
in which the corporation is in business.
A corporation using the cash method of ac-
counting can amortize organizational costs in-
curred within the first tax year, even if it doesn't 
pay them in that year.
Examples of organizational costs include 
the following.
• The cost of temporary directors.
• The cost of organizational meetings.
• State incorporation fees.
• The cost of legal services.
Nonqualifying costs.  The following items are 
capital expenses that can't be amortized.
• Costs for issuing and selling stock or se-
curities, such as commissions, professio-
nal fees, and printing costs.
• Costs associated with the transfer of as-
sets to the corporation.
Costs of Organizing a 
Partnership
The costs to organize a partnership are the di-
rect costs of creating the partnership.
Qualifying costs.  A partnership can amortize 
an organizational cost only if it meets all the fol-
lowing tests.
• It is for the creation of the partnership and 
not for starting or operating the partnership 
trade or business.
• It is chargeable to a capital account (see 
chapter 1).
• It could be amortized over the life of the 
partnership if the partnership had a fixed 
life.
• It is incurred by the due date of the partner-
ship return (excluding extensions) for the 
first tax year in which the partnership is in 
business. However, if the partnership uses 
the cash method of accounting and pays 
the cost after the end of its first tax year, 
see Cash method partnership under How 
To Amortize, later.
• It is for a type of item normally expected to 
benefit the partnership throughout its entire 
life.
Organizational costs include the following 
fees.
• Legal fees for services incident to the or-
ganization of the partnership, such as ne-
gotiation and preparation of the partner-
ship agreement.
• Accounting fees for services incident to the 
organization of the partnership.
• Filing fees.
Nonqualifying costs.  The following costs 
can't be amortized.
• The cost of acquiring assets for the part-
nership or transferring assets to the part-
nership.
• The cost of admitting or removing partners, 
other than at the time the partnership is 
first organized.
• The cost of making a contract concerning 
the operation of the partnership trade or 
business including a contract between a 
partner and the partnership.
• The costs for issuing and marketing inter-
ests in the partnership such as brokerage, 
registration, and legal fees and printing 
costs. These “syndication fees” are capital 
expenses that can't be depreciated or 
amortized.
Liquidation of partnership.  If a partnership 
is liquidated before the end of the amortization 
period, the unamortized amount of qualifying or-
ganizational costs can be deducted in the part-
nership's final tax year. However, these costs 
can be deducted only to the extent they qualify 
as a loss from a business.
How To Amortize
Deduct start -up and organizational costs in 
equal amounts over the applicable amortization 
period (discussed earlier under Business 
Start-up Costs ). You can choose an amortiza-
tion period for start -up costs that is different 
from the period you choose for organizational 
Page 29 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 8 Amortization  Page 29

costs, as long as both aren't less than the appli-
cable amortization period. Once you choose an 
amortization period, you can't change it.
To figure your deduction, divide your total 
start-up or organizational costs by the months in 
the amortization period. The result is the 
amount you can deduct for each month.
Cash method partnership.  A partnership us-
ing the cash method of accounting can deduct 
an organizational cost only if it has been paid by 
the end of the tax year. However, any cost the 
partnership could have deducted as an organi-
zational cost in an earlier tax year (if it had been 
paid that year) can be deducted in the tax year 
of payment.
How To Make the Election
To elect to amortize start -up or organizational 
costs, you must complete and attach Form 
4562 to your return for the first tax year you are 
in business. You may also be required to attach 
an organizational costs election statement  (de-
scribed later) to your return.
For start -up or organizational costs paid or 
incurred after September 8, 2008, an accompa-
nying statement isn't required. Generally, for 
start-up or organizational costs paid or incurred 
before September 9, 2008, and after October 
22, 2004, unless you choose to apply Regula-
tions sections 1. 195-1, 1. 248-1, and 1. 709-1, 
you must also attach an accompanying state-
ment to elect to amortize the costs.
If you have both start -up and organizational 
costs, attach a separate statement (if required) 
to your return for each type of cost. See Starting 
a Business, earlier, for more information.
Generally, you must file the return by the 
due date (including any extensions). However, 
if you timely filed your return for the year without 
making the election, you can still make the elec-
tion by filing an amended return within 6 months 
of the due date of the return (excluding exten-
sions). For more information, see the instruc-
tions for Part VI of Form 4562.
You can choose to forgo the election to am-
ortize by affirmatively electing to capitalize your 
start-up or organizational costs on your income 
tax return filed by the due date (including exten-
sions) for the tax year in which the active trade 
or business begins.
Note.  The election to either amortize or 
capitalize start -up or organizational costs is ir-
revocable and applies to all start-up and organi-
zational costs that are related to the trade or 
business.
If your business is organized as a corpora-
tion or partnership, only the corporation or part-
nership can elect to amortize its start -up or or-
ganizational costs. A shareholder or partner 
can't make this election. You, as a shareholder 
or partner, can't amortize any costs you incur in 
setting up your corporation or partnership. Only 
the corporation or partnership can amortize 
these costs.
However, you, as an individual, can elect to 
amortize costs you incur to investigate an inter-
est in an existing partnership. These costs qual-
ify as business start -up costs if you acquire the 
partnership interest.
Start-up costs election statement.  If you 
elect to amortize your start -up costs, attach a 
separate statement (if required) that contains 
the following information.
• A description of the business to which the 
start-up costs relate.
• A description of each start-up cost incur-
red.
• The month your active business began (or 
was acquired).
• The number of months in your amortization 
period (which is generally 180 months).
Filing the statement early.  You can elect 
to amortize your start -up costs by filing the 
statement with a return for any tax year before 
the year your active business begins. If you file 
the statement early, the election becomes ef-
fective in the month of the tax year your active 
business begins.
Revised statement.  You can file a revised 
statement to include any start -up costs not in-
cluded in your original statement. However, you 
can't include on the revised statement any cost 
you previously treated on your return as a cost 
other than a start -up cost. You can file the re-
vised statement with a return filed after the re-
turn on which you elected to amortize your 
start-up costs.
Organizational costs election statement.  If 
you elect to amortize your corporation's or part-
nership's organizational costs, attach a sepa-
rate statement (if required) that contains the fol-
lowing information.
• A description of each cost.
• The amount of each cost.
• The date each cost was incurred.
• The month your corporation or partnership 
began active business (or acquired the 
business).
• The number of months in your amortization 
period (which is generally 180 months).
Partnerships.  The statement prepared for 
a cash basis partnership must also indicate the 
amount paid before the end of the year for each 
cost.
You don't need to separately list any part-
nership organizational cost that is less than 
$10. Instead, you can list the total amount of 
these costs with the dates the first and last 
costs were incurred.
After a partnership makes the election to 
amortize organizational costs, it can later file an 
amended return to include additional organiza-
tional costs not included in the partnership's 
original return and statement.
Getting a Lease
If you get a lease for business property, you 
may recover the cost of acquiring the lease by 
amortizing it over the term of the lease. The 
term of the lease for amortization purposes gen-
erally includes all renewal options (and any 
other period for which you and the lessor 
reasonably expect the lease to be renewed). 
However, renewal periods aren't included if 
75% or more of the cost of acquiring the lease 
is for the term of the lease remaining on the ac-
quisition date (not including any period for 
which you may choose to renew, extend, or 
continue the lease).
For more information on the costs of getting 
a lease, see Cost of Getting a Lease in
chapter 3.
How to amortize.  Enter your deduction in 
Part VI of Form 4562 if you are deducting amor-
tization that begins during the current year, or 
on the appropriate line of your tax return if you 
aren't otherwise required to file Form 4562.
Section 197 Intangibles
Generally, you may amortize the capitalized 
costs of “section 197 intangibles” (see Section 
197 Intangibles Defined , later) ratably over a 
15-year period. You must amortize these costs 
if you hold the section 197 intangibles in con-
nection with your trade or business or in an ac-
tivity engaged in for the production of income.
You may not be able to amortize sec-
tion 197 intangibles acquired in a trans-
action that didn't result in a significant 
change in ownership or use. See Anti-Churning 
Rules, later.
Your amortization deduction each year is 
the applicable part of the intangible's adjusted 
basis (for purposes of determining gain), fig-
ured by amortizing it ratably over 15 years (180 
months). The 15 -year period begins with the 
later of:
• The month the intangible is acquired, or
• The month the trade or business or activity 
engaged in for the production of income 
begins.
You can't deduct amortization for the month you 
dispose of the intangible.
If you pay or incur an amount that increases 
the basis of an amortizable section 197 intangi-
ble after the 15 -year period begins, amortize it 
over the remainder of the 15 -year period begin-
ning with the month the basis increase occurs.
You aren't allowed any other depreciation or 
amortization deduction for an amortizable sec-
tion 197 intangible.
Tax-exempt use property subject to a lease. 
The amortization period for any section 197 in-
tangible leased under a lease agreement en-
tered into after March 12, 2004, to a tax -exempt 
organization, governmental unit, or foreign per-
son or entity (other than a partnership), shall not 
be less than 125% of the lease term.
Cost attributable to other property.  The 
rules for section 197 intangibles don't apply to 
any amount that is included in determining the 
cost of property that isn't a section 197 intangi-
ble. For example, if the cost of computer soft-
ware isn't separately stated from the cost of 
hardware or other tangible property and you 
consistently treat it as part of the cost of the 
hardware or other tangible property, these rules 
CAUTION
!
Page 30 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 30  Chapter 8 Amortization

don't apply. Similarly, none of the cost of acquir-
ing real property held for the production of 
rental income is considered the cost of good-
will, going concern value, or any other section 
197 intangible.
Section 197 Intangibles 
Defined
The following assets are section 197 intangibles 
and must be amortized over 180 months.
1. Goodwill.
2. Going concern value.
3. Workforce in place.
4. Business books and records, operating 
systems, or any other information base, in-
cluding lists or other information concern-
ing current or prospective customers.
5. A patent, copyright, formula, process, de-
sign, pattern, know-how, format, or similar 
item.
6. A customer-based intangible.
7. A supplier-based intangible.
8. Any item similar to items 3 through 7.
9. A license, permit, or other right granted by 
a governmental unit or agency (including 
issuances and renewals).
10. A covenant not to compete entered into in 
connection with the acquisition of an inter-
est in a trade or business.
11. Any franchise, trademark, or trade name.
12. A contract for the use of, or a term interest 
in, any item in this list.
You can't amortize any of the intangi-
bles listed in items 1 through 8 that you 
created rather than acquired unless 
you created them in acquiring assets that make 
up a trade or business or a substantial part of a 
trade or business.
Goodwill. This is the value of a trade or busi-
ness based on expected continued customer 
patronage due to its name, reputation, or any 
other factor.
Going concern value.  This is the additional 
value of a trade or business that attaches to 
property because the property is an integral 
part of an ongoing business activity. It includes 
value based on the ability of a business to con-
tinue to function and generate income even 
though there is a change in ownership (but 
doesn't include any other section 197 intangi-
ble). It also includes value based on the imme-
diate use or availability of an acquired trade or 
business, such as the use of earnings during 
any period in which the business wouldn't other-
wise be available or operational.
Workforce in place, etc.  This includes the 
composition of a workforce (for example, its ex-
perience, education, or training). It also includes 
the terms and conditions of employment, 
whether contractual or otherwise, and any other 
value placed on employees or any of their at-
tributes.
CAUTION
!
For example, you must amortize the part of 
the purchase price of a business that is for the 
existence of a highly skilled workforce. Also, 
you must amortize the cost of acquiring an ex-
isting employment contract or relationship with 
employees or consultants.
Business books and records, etc.  This in-
cludes the intangible value of technical man-
uals, training manuals or programs, data files, 
and accounting or inventory control systems. It 
also includes the cost of customer lists, sub-
scription lists, insurance expirations, patient or 
client files, and lists of newspaper, magazine, 
radio, and television advertisers.
Patents, copyrights, etc.  This includes pack-
age design, computer software, and any inter-
est in a film, sound recording, videotape, book, 
or other similar property, except as discussed 
later under Assets That Aren't Section 197 In-
tangibles .
Customer-based intangible.  This is the 
composition of market, market share, and any 
other value resulting from the future provision of 
goods or services because of relationships with 
customers in the ordinary course of business. 
For example, you must amortize the part of the 
purchase price of a business that is for the exis-
tence of the following intangibles.
• A customer base.
• A circulation base.
• An undeveloped market or market growth.
• Insurance in force.
• A mortgage servicing contract.
• An investment management contract.
• Any other relationship with customers in-
volving the future provision of goods or 
services.
Accounts receivable or other similar rights to 
income for goods or services provided to cus-
tomers before the acquisition of a trade or busi-
ness aren't section 197 intangibles.
Supplier-based intangible.  A supplier-based 
intangible is the value resulting from the future 
acquisitions (through contract or other relation-
ships with suppliers in the ordinary course of 
business) of goods or services that you will sell 
or use. The amount you pay or incur for sup-
plier-based intangibles includes, for example, 
any portion of the purchase price of an acquired 
trade or business that is attributable to the exis-
tence of a favorable relationship with persons 
providing distribution services (such as a favor-
able shelf or display space or a retail outlet), or 
the existence of favorable supply contracts. 
Don't include any amount required to be paid 
for the goods or services to honor the terms of 
the agreement or other relationship. Also, see 
Assets That Aren't Section 197 Intangibles , 
later.
Government-granted license, permit, etc.
This is any right granted by a governmental unit 
or an agency or instrumentality of a governmen-
tal unit. For example, you must amortize the 
capitalized costs of acquiring (including issuing 
or renewing) a liquor license, a taxicab medal-
lion or license, or a television or radio broad-
casting license.
Covenant not to compete. Section 197 intan-
gibles include a covenant not to compete (or 
similar arrangement) entered into in connection 
with the acquisition of an interest in a trade or 
business, or a substantial portion of a trade or 
business. An interest in a trade or business in-
cludes an interest in a partnership or a corpora-
tion engaged in a trade or business.
An arrangement that requires the former 
owner to perform services (or to provide prop-
erty or the use of property) isn't similar to a cov-
enant not to compete to the extent the amount 
paid under the arrangement represents reason-
able compensation for those services or for that 
property or its use.
Franchise, trademark, or trade name.  A 
franchise, trademark, or trade name is a section 
197 intangible. You must amortize its purchase 
or renewal costs, other than certain contingent 
payments that you can deduct currently. For in-
formation on currently deductible contingent 
payments, see chapter 11.
Professional sports franchise.  A fran-
chise engaged in professional sports and any 
intangible assets acquired in connection with 
acquiring the franchise (including player con-
tracts) is a section 197 intangible amortizable 
over a 15-year period.
Contract for the use of, or a term interest in, 
a section 197 intangible.  Section 197 intan-
gibles include any right under a license, con-
tract, or other arrangement providing for the use 
of any section 197 intangible. It also includes 
any term interest in any section 197 intangible, 
whether the interest is outright or in trust.
Assets That Aren't Section 
197 Intangibles
The following assets aren't section 197 intangi-
bles.
1. Any interest in a corporation, partnership, 
trust, or estate.
2. Any interest under an existing futures con-
tract, foreign currency contract, notional 
principal contract, interest rate swap, or 
similar financial contract.
3. Any interest in land.
4. Most computer software. (See Computer 
software, later.)
5. Any of the following assets not acquired in 
connection with the acquisition of a trade 
or business or a substantial part of a trade 
or business.
a. An interest in a film, sound recording, 
videotape, book, or similar property.
b. A right to receive tangible property or 
services under a contract or from a 
governmental agency.
c. An interest in a patent or copyright.
d. Certain rights that have a fixed dura-
tion or amount. (See Rights of fixed 
duration or amount, later.)
6. An interest under either of the following.
a. An existing lease or sublease of tangi-
ble property.
Page 31 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 8 Amortization  Page 31

b. A debt that was in existence when the 
interest was acquired.
7. A right to service residential mortgages 
unless the right is acquired in connection 
with the acquisition of a trade or business 
or a substantial part of a trade or business.
8. Certain transaction costs incurred by par-
ties to a corporate organization or reorgan-
ization in which any part of a gain or loss 
isn't recognized.
Intangible property that isn't amortizable un-
der the rules for section 197 intangibles can be 
depreciated if it meets certain requirements. 
You must generally use the straight line method 
over its useful life. For certain intangibles, the 
depreciation period is specified in the law and 
regulations. For example, the depreciation pe-
riod for computer software that isn't a section 
197 intangible is generally 36 months.
For more information on depreciating intan-
gible property, see Intangible Property  under 
What Method Can You Use To Depreciate Your 
Property? in chapter 1 of Pub. 946.
Computer software.  Section 197 intangibles 
don’t include the following types of computer 
software.
1. Software that meets all the following re-
quirements.
a. It is, or has been, readily available for 
purchase by the general public.
b. It is subject to a nonexclusive license.
c. It hasn't been substantially modified. 
This requirement is considered met if 
the cost of all modifications isn't more 
than the greater of 25% of the price of 
the publicly available unmodified soft-
ware or $2,000.
2. Software that isn't acquired in connection 
with the acquisition of a trade or business 
or a substantial part of a trade or business.
Computer software defined.  Computer 
software includes all programs designed to 
cause a computer to perform a desired function. 
It also includes any database or similar item that 
is in the public domain and is incidental to the 
operation of qualifying software.
Rights of fixed duration or amount.  Section 
197 intangibles don't include any right under a 
contract or from a governmental agency if the 
right is acquired in the ordinary course of a 
trade or business (or in an activity engaged in 
for the production of income) but not as part of a 
purchase of a trade or business and either:
• Has a fixed life of less than 15 years; or
• Is of a fixed amount that, except for the 
rules for section 197 intangibles, would be 
recovered under a method similar to the 
unit-of-production method of cost recov-
ery.
However, this doesn't apply to the following in-
tangibles.
• Goodwill.
• Going concern value.
• A covenant not to compete.
• A franchise, trademark, or trade name.
• A customer-related information base, cus-
tomer-based intangible, or similar item.
Safe Harbor for Creative 
Property Costs
If you are engaged in the trade or business of 
film production, you may be able to amortize the 
creative property costs for properties not set for 
production within 3 years of the first capitalized 
transaction. You may amortize these costs rata-
bly over a 15 -year period beginning on the first 
day of the second half of the tax year in which 
you properly write off the costs for financial ac-
counting purposes. If, during the 15 -year pe-
riod, you dispose of the creative property rights, 
you must continue to amortize the costs over 
the remainder of the 15-year period.
Creative property costs include costs paid or 
incurred to acquire and develop screenplays, 
scripts, story outlines, motion picture production 
rights to books and plays, and other similar 
properties for purposes of potential future film 
development, production, and exploitation.
Amortize these costs using the rules of Rev-
enue Procedure 2004-36. For more information, 
see Revenue Procedure 2004 -36, 2004 -24 
I.R.B. 1063, available at IRS.gov/irb/
2004-24_IRB#RP-2004-36.
A change in the treatment of creative 
property costs is a change in method of 
accounting.
Anti-Churning Rules
Anti-churning rules prevent you from amortizing 
most section 197 intangibles if the transaction 
in which you acquired them didn't result in a sig-
nificant change in ownership or use. These 
rules apply to goodwill and going concern 
value, and to any other section 197 intangible 
that isn't otherwise depreciable or amortizable.
Under the anti -churning rules, you can't use 
15-year amortization for the intangible if any of 
the following conditions apply.
1. You or a related person (defined later) 
held or used the intangible at any time 
from July 25, 1991, through August 10, 
1993.
2. You acquired the intangible from a person 
who held it at any time during the period in 
(1) and, as part of the transaction, the user 
didn't change.
3. You granted the right to use the intangible 
to a person (or a person related to that 
person) who held or used it at any time 
during the period in (1). This applies only if 
the transaction in which you granted the 
right and the transaction in which you ac-
quired the intangible are part of a series of 
related transactions. See Related person, 
later, for more information.
Exceptions.  The anti-churning rules don't ap-
ply in the following situations.
• You acquired the intangible from a dece-
dent and its basis was stepped up to its 
FMV.
• The intangible was amortizable as a sec-
tion 197 intangible by the seller or trans-
feror you acquired it from. This exception 
doesn't apply if the transaction in which 
CAUTION
!
you acquired the intangible and the trans-
action in which the seller or transferor ac-
quired it are part of a series of related 
transactions.
• The gain-recognition exception, discussed 
later, applies.
Related person.  For purposes of the 
anti-churning rules, the following are related 
persons.
• An individual and his or her brothers, sis-
ters, half-brothers, half-sisters, spouse, an-
cestors (parents, grandparents, etc.), and 
lineal descendants (children, grandchil-
dren, etc.).
• A corporation and an individual who owns, 
directly or indirectly, more than 20% of the 
value of the corporation's outstanding 
stock.
• Two corporations that are members of the 
same controlled group as defined in sec-
tion 1563(a), except that “more than 20%” 
is substituted for “at least 80%” in that defi-
nition and the determination is made with-
out regard to subsections (a)(4) and (e)(3)
(C) of section 1563. For an exception, see 
section 1.197-2(h)(6)(iv) of the regulations.
• A trust fiduciary and a corporation if more 
than 20% of the value of the corporation's 
outstanding stock is owned, directly or in-
directly, by or for the trust or grantor of the 
trust.
• The grantor and fiduciary, and the fiduciary 
and beneficiary, of any trust.
• The fiduciaries of two different trusts, and 
the fiduciaries and beneficiaries of two dif-
ferent trusts, if the same person is the 
grantor of both trusts.
• The executor and beneficiary of an estate.
• A tax-exempt educational or charitable or-
ganization and a person who directly or in-
directly controls the organization (or whose 
family members control it).
• A corporation and a partnership if the 
same persons own more than 20% of the 
value of the outstanding stock of the cor-
poration and more than 20% of the capital 
or profits interest in the partnership.
• Two S corporations, and an S corporation 
and a regular corporation, if the same per-
sons own more than 20% of the value of 
the outstanding stock of each corporation.
• Two partnerships if the same persons own, 
directly or indirectly, more than 20% of the 
capital or profits interests in both partner-
ships.
• A partnership and a person who owns, di-
rectly or indirectly, more than 20% of the 
capital or profits interests in the partner-
ship.
• Two persons who are engaged in trades or 
businesses under common control (as de-
scribed in section 41(f)(1)).
When to determine relationship.  Per-
sons are treated as related if the relationship 
existed at the following time.
• In the case of a single transaction, immedi-
ately before or immediately after the trans-
action in which the intangible was ac-
quired.
• In the case of a series of related transac-
tions (or a series of transactions that com-
prise a qualified stock purchase under 
Page 32 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 32  Chapter 8 Amortization

section 338(d)(3)), immediately before the 
earliest transaction or immediately after the 
last transaction.
Ownership of stock.  In determining 
whether an individual directly or indirectly owns 
any of the outstanding stock of a corporation, 
the following rules apply.
Rule 1.  Stock directly or indirectly owned 
by or for a corporation, partnership, estate, or 
trust is considered owned proportionately by or 
for its shareholders, partners, or beneficiaries.
Rule 2.  An individual is considered to own 
the stock directly or indirectly owned by or for 
his or her family. Family includes only brothers 
and sisters, half -brothers and half -sisters, 
spouse, ancestors, and lineal descendants.
Rule 3.  An individual owning (other than by 
applying Rule 2) any stock in a corporation is 
considered to own the stock directly or indi-
rectly owned by or for his or her partner.
Rule 4.  For purposes of applying Rule 1, 2, 
or 3, treat stock constructively owned by a per-
son under Rule 1 as actually owned by that per-
son. Don't treat stock constructively owned by 
an individual under Rule 2 or 3 as owned by the 
individual for reapplying Rule 2 or 3 to make an-
other person the constructive owner of the 
stock.
Gain-recognition exception.  This exception 
to the anti -churning rules applies if the person 
you acquired the intangible from (the transferor) 
meets both of the following requirements.
• That person wouldn't be related to you (as 
described under Related person, earlier) if 
the 20% test for ownership of stock and 
partnership interests were replaced by a 
50% test.
• That person chose to recognize gain on 
the disposition of the intangible and pay in-
come tax on the gain at the highest tax 
rate. See chapter 2 in Pub. 544 for infor-
mation on making this choice.
If this exception applies, the anti -churning 
rules apply only to the amount of your adjusted 
basis in the intangible that is more than the gain 
recognized by the transferor.
Notification.  If the person you acquired 
the intangible from chooses to recognize gain 
under the rules for this exception, that person 
must notify you in writing by the due date of the 
return on which the choice is made.
Anti-abuse rule.  You can't amortize any sec-
tion 197 intangible acquired in a transaction for 
which the principal purpose was either of the 
following.
• To avoid the requirement that the intangi-
ble be acquired after August 10, 1993.
• To avoid any of the anti-churning rules.
More information.  For more information 
about the anti -churning rules, including addi-
tional rules for partnerships, see Regulations 
section 1.197-2(h).
Incorrect Amount of 
Amortization Deducted
If you later discover that you deducted an incor-
rect amount for amortization for a section 197 
intangible in any year, you may be able to make 
a correction for that year by filing an amended 
return. See Amended Return next. If you aren't 
allowed to make the correction on an amended 
return, you can change your accounting method 
to claim the correct amortization. See Changing 
Your Accounting Method, later.
Amended Return
If you deducted an incorrect amount for amorti-
zation, you can file an amended return to cor-
rect the following.
• A mathematical error made in any year.
• A posting error made in any year.
• An amortization deduction for a section 
197 intangible for which you haven't adop-
ted a method of accounting.
When to file.  If an amended return is allowed, 
you must file it by the later of the following 
dates.
• 3 years from the date you filed your original 
return for the year in which you didn't de-
duct the correct amount. (A return filed 
early is considered filed on the due date.)
• 2 years from the time you paid your tax for 
that year.
Changing Your Accounting Method
Generally, you must get IRS approval to change 
your method of accounting. File Form 3115 to 
request a change to a permissible method of 
accounting for amortization.
The following are examples of a change in 
method of accounting for amortization.
• A change in the amortization method, pe-
riod of recovery, or convention of an amor-
tizable asset.
• A change in the accounting for amortizable 
assets from a single asset account to a 
multiple asset account (pooling), or vice 
versa.
• A change in the accounting for amortizable 
assets from one type of multiple asset ac-
count to a different type of multiple asset 
account.
Changes in amortization that aren't a 
change in method of accounting include the fol-
lowing.
• A change in figuring amortization in the tax 
year in which your use of the asset 
changes.
• An adjustment in the useful life of an amor-
tizable asset.
• Generally, the making of a late amortiza-
tion election or the revocation of a timely 
valid amortization election.
• Any change in the placed-in-service date 
of an amortizable asset.
See Regulations section 1. 446-1(e)(2)(ii)(a) 
for more information and examples.
Automatic approval.  In some instances, you 
may be able to get automatic approval from the 
IRS to change your method of accounting for 
amortization. For a list of automatic accounting 
method changes, see the Instructions for Form 
3115. Also, see the Instructions for Form 3115 
for more information on getting approval, auto-
matic approval procedures, and a list of excep-
tions to the automatic approval process.
Disposition of Section 197 
Intangibles
A section 197 intangible is treated as deprecia-
ble property used in your trade or business. If 
you held the intangible for more than 1 year, 
any gain on its disposition, up to the amount of 
allowable amortization, is ordinary income (sec-
tion 1245 gain). If multiple section 197 intangi-
bles are disposed of in a single transaction or a 
series of related transactions, treat all of the 
section 197 intangibles as if they were a single 
asset for purposes of determining the amount of 
gain that is ordinary income. Any remaining 
gain, or any loss, is a section 1231 gain or loss. 
If you held the intangible 1 year or less, any 
gain or loss on its disposition is an ordinary gain 
or loss. For more information on ordinary or 
capital gain or loss on business property, see 
chapter 3 in Pub. 544.
Nondeductible loss.  You can't deduct any 
loss on the disposition or worthlessness of a 
section 197 intangible that you acquired in the 
same transaction (or series of related transac-
tions) as other section 197 intangibles you still 
have. Instead, increase the adjusted basis of 
each remaining amortizable section 197 intangi-
ble by a proportionate part of the nondeductible 
loss. Figure the increase by multiplying the non-
deductible loss on the disposition of the intangi-
ble by the following fraction.
• The numerator is the adjusted basis of 
each remaining intangible on the date of 
the disposition.
• The denominator is the total adjusted 
bases of all remaining amortizable section 
197 intangibles on the date of the disposi-
tion.
Covenant not to compete.  A covenant not to 
compete, or similar arrangement, isn't consid-
ered disposed of or worthless before you dis-
pose of your entire interest in the trade or busi-
ness for which you entered into the covenant.
Nonrecognition transfers.  If you acquire a 
section 197 intangible in a nonrecognition trans-
fer, you are treated as the transferor with re-
spect to the part of your adjusted basis in the in-
tangible that isn't more than the transferor's 
adjusted basis. You amortize this part of the ad-
justed basis over the intangible's remaining am-
ortization period in the hands of the transferor. 
Nonrecognition transfers include transfers to a 
corporation, partnership contributions and dis-
tributions, like-kind exchanges, and involuntary 
conversions.
In a like -kind exchange or involuntary con-
version of a section 197 intangible, you must 
continue to amortize the part of your adjusted 
basis in the acquired intangible that isn't more 
than your adjusted basis in the exchanged or 
Page 33 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 8 Amortization  Page 33

converted intangible over the remaining amorti-
zation period of the exchanged or converted in-
tangible. Amortize over a new 15 -year period 
the part of your adjusted basis in the acquired 
intangible that is more than your adjusted basis 
in the exchanged or converted intangible.
Example.  You own a section 197 intangi-
ble you have amortized for 4 full years. It has a 
remaining unamortized basis of $30,000. You 
exchange the asset plus $10,000 for a like -kind 
section 197 intangible. The nonrecognition pro-
visions of like-kind exchanges apply. You amor-
tize $30,000 of the $40,000 adjusted basis of 
the acquired intangible over the 11 years re-
maining in the original 15 -year amortization pe-
riod for the transferred asset. You amortize the 
other $10,000 of adjusted basis over a new 
15-year period. For more information, see Reg-
ulations section 1.197-2(g).
Reforestation Costs
You can elect to deduct a limited amount of re-
forestation costs paid or incurred during the tax 
year. See Reforestation Costs in chapter 7. You 
can elect to amortize the qualifying costs that 
aren't deducted currently over an 84 -month pe-
riod. There is no limit on the amount of your am-
ortization deduction for reforestation costs paid 
or incurred during the tax year.
The election to amortize reforestation costs 
incurred by a partnership, S corporation, or es-
tate must be made by the partnership, corpora-
tion, or estate. A partner, shareholder, or bene-
ficiary can't make that election.
A partner's or shareholder's share of amor-
tizable costs is figured under the general rules 
for allocating items of income, loss, deduction, 
etc., of a partnership or S corporation. The am-
ortizable costs of an estate are divided between 
the estate and the income beneficiary based on 
the income of the estate allocable to each.
Qualifying costs.  Reforestation costs are the 
direct costs of planting or seeding for foresta-
tion or reforestation. Qualifying costs include 
only those costs you must capitalize and in-
clude in the adjusted basis of the property. 
They include costs for the following items.
• Site preparation.
• Seeds or seedlings.
• Labor.
• Tools.
• Depreciation on equipment used in plant-
ing and seeding.
Qualifying costs don't include costs for 
which the government reimburses you under a 
cost-sharing program, unless you include the 
reimbursement in your income.
Qualified timber property.  Qualified timber 
property is property that contains trees in signif-
icant commercial quantities. It can be a woodlot 
or other site that you own or lease. The property 
qualifies only if it meets all of the following re-
quirements.
• It is located in the United States.
• It is held for the growing and cutting of tim-
ber you will either use in, or sell for use in, 
the commercial production of timber prod-
ucts.
• It consists of at least one acre planted with 
tree seedlings in the manner normally used 
in forestation or reforestation.
Qualified timber property doesn't include 
property on which you have planted shelter 
belts or ornamental trees, such as Christmas 
trees.
Amortization period.  The 84 -month amorti-
zation period starts on the first day of the first 
month of the second half of the tax year you in-
cur the costs (July 1 for a calendar year tax-
payer), regardless of the month you actually in-
cur the costs. You can claim amortization 
deductions for no more than 6 months of the 
first and last (eighth) tax years of the period.
Life tenant and remainderman.  If one per-
son holds the property for life with the remain-
der going to another person, the life tenant is 
entitled to the full amortization for qualifying re-
forestation costs incurred by the life tenant. Any 
remainder interest in the property is ignored for 
amortization purposes.
Recapture. If you dispose of qualified timber 
property within 10 years after the tax year you 
incur qualifying reforestation expenses, report 
any gain as ordinary income up to the amortiza-
tion you took. See chapter 3 of Pub. 544 for 
more information.
How to make the election.  To elect to amor-
tize qualifying reforestation costs, complete Part 
VI of Form 4562 and attach a statement that 
contains the following information.
• A description of the costs and the dates 
you incurred them.
• A description of the type of timber being 
grown and the purpose for which it is 
grown.
Attach a separate statement for each property 
for which you amortize reforestation costs.
Generally, you must make the election on a 
timely filed return (including extensions) for the 
tax year in which you incurred the costs. How-
ever, if you timely filed your return for the year 
without making the election, you can still make 
the election by filing an amended return within 6 
months of the due date of the return (excluding 
extensions). Attach Form 4562 and the state-
ment to the amended return and write “Filed 
pursuant to section 301. 9100-2” on Form 4562. 
File the amended return at the same address 
you filed the original return.
Revoking the election.  You must get IRS ap-
proval to revoke your election to amortize quali-
fying reforestation costs. Your application to re-
voke the election must include your name, 
address, the years for which your election was 
in effect, and your reason for revoking it. Please 
provide your daytime telephone number (op-
tional), in case we need to contact you. You, or 
your duly authorized representative, must sign 
the application and file it at least 90 days before 
the due date (without extensions) for filing your 
income tax return for the first tax year for which 
your election is to end.
Send the application to:
Internal Revenue Service
Associate Chief Counsel
Passthroughs and Special Industries
CC:PSI:6
1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-5300
Washington, DC 20224
Geological and 
Geophysical Costs
You can amortize the cost of geological and ge-
ophysical expenses paid or incurred in connec-
tion with oil and gas exploration or development 
within the United States. These costs can be 
amortized ratably over a 24 -month period be-
ginning on the midpoint of the tax year in which 
the expenses were paid or incurred. For major 
integrated oil companies (as defined in section 
167(h)(5)), these costs must be amortized rata-
bly over a 5 -year period for costs paid or incur-
red after May 17, 2006 (a 7 -year period for 
costs paid or incurred after December 19, 
2007).
If you retire or abandon the property during 
the amortization period, no amortization deduc-
tion is allowed in the year of retirement or aban-
donment.
Pollution Control 
Facilities
You can elect to amortize the cost of a certified 
pollution control facility over 60 months. How-
ever, see Atmospheric pollution control facili-
ties, later, for an exception. The cost of a pollu-
tion control facility that isn't eligible for 
amortization can be depreciated under the reg-
ular rules for depreciation. Also, you can claim a 
special depreciation allowance on a certified 
pollution control facility that is qualified property 
even if you elect to amortize its cost. You must 
reduce its cost (amortizable basis) by the 
amount of any special allowance you claim. 
See chapter 3 of Pub. 946.
A certified pollution control facility is a new 
identifiable treatment facility used in connection 
with a plant or other property in operation be-
fore 1976 to reduce or control water or atmos-
pheric pollution or contamination. The facility 
must do so by removing, changing, disposing, 
storing, or preventing the creation or emission 
of pollutants, contaminants, wastes, or heat. 
The facility must be certified by state and fed-
eral certifying authorities.
The facility must not significantly increase 
the output or capacity, extend the useful life, or 
reduce the total operating costs of the plant or 
other property. Also, it must not significantly 
change the nature of the manufacturing or pro-
duction process or facility.
The federal certifying authority won't certify 
your property to the extent it appears you will 
recover (over the property's useful life) all or 
part of its cost from the profit based on its 
Page 34 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 34  Chapter 8 Amortization

operation (such as through sales of recovered 
wastes). The federal certifying authority will de-
scribe the nature of the potential cost recovery. 
You must then reduce the amortizable basis of 
the facility by this potential recovery.
New identifiable treatment facility.  A 
new identifiable treatment facility is tangible de-
preciable property that is identifiable as a treat-
ment facility. It doesn't include a building and its 
structural components unless the building is ex-
clusively a treatment facility.
Atmospheric pollution control facilities. 
Certain atmospheric pollution control facilities 
can be amortized over 84 months. To qualify, 
the following must apply.
• The facility must be acquired and placed in 
service after April 11, 2005. If acquired, the 
original use must begin with you after April 
11, 2005.
• The facility must be used in connection 
with an electric generation plant or other 
property placed in operation after Decem-
ber 31, 1975, that is primarily coal fired.
• If you construct, reconstruct, or erect the 
facility, only the basis attributable to the 
construction, reconstruction, or erection 
completed after April 11, 2005, qualifies.
Basis reduction for corporations.  A corpo-
ration must reduce the amortizable basis of a 
pollution control facility by 20% before figuring 
the amortization deduction.
More information.  For more information on 
the amortization of pollution control facilities, 
see sections 169 and 291(c) and the related 
regulations.
Research and 
Experimental Costs
You can elect to amortize your research and ex-
perimental costs, deduct them as current busi-
ness expenses, or write them off over a 10 -year 
period (see Optional write-off method below).
If you elect to amortize these costs, deduct 
them in equal amounts over 60 months or more. 
The amortization period begins the month you 
first receive an economic benefit from the costs.
For a definition of “research and experimen-
tal costs” and information on deducting them as 
current business expenses, see chapter 7.
Optional write-off method.  Rather than am-
ortize these costs or deduct them as a current 
expense, you have the option of deducting 
(writing off) research and experimental costs 
ratably over a 10-year period beginning with the 
tax year in which you incurred the costs. For 
more information, see Optional Write-off of Cer-
tain Tax Preferences , later, and section 59(e).
Costs you can amortize.  You can amortize 
costs chargeable to a capital account (see 
chapter 1) if you meet both of the following re-
quirements.
• You paid or incurred the costs in your trade 
or business.
• You aren't deducting the costs currently.
How to make the election.  To elect to amor-
tize research and experimental costs, complete 
Part VI of Form 4562 and attach it to your in-
come tax return. Generally, you must file the re-
turn by the due date (including extensions). 
However, if you timely filed your return for the 
year without making the election, you can still 
make the election by filing an amended return 
within 6 months of the due date of the return 
(excluding extensions). Attach Form 4562 to 
the amended return and write “Filed pursuant to 
section 301. 9100-2” on Form 4562. File the 
amended return at the same address you filed 
the original return.
Your election is binding for the year it is 
made and for all later years unless you obtain 
approval from the IRS to change to a different 
method.
Optional Write-off of 
Certain Tax Preferences
You can elect to amortize certain tax preference 
items over an optional period beginning in the 
tax year in which you incurred the costs. If you 
make this election, there is no AMT adjustment. 
The applicable costs and the optional recovery 
periods are as follows.
• Circulation costs—3 years.
• Intangible drilling and development 
costs—60 months.
• Mining exploration and development 
costs—10 years.
• Research and experimental costs—10 
years.
How to make the election.  To elect to amor-
tize qualifying costs over the optional recovery 
period, complete Part VI of Form 4562 and at-
tach a statement containing the following infor-
mation to your return for the tax year in which 
the election begins.
• Your name, address, and taxpayer identifi-
cation number.
• The type of cost and the specific amount of 
the cost for which you are making the elec-
tion.
Generally, the election must be made on a 
timely filed return (including extensions) for the 
tax year in which you incurred the costs. How-
ever, if you timely filed your return for the year 
without making the election, you can still make 
the election by filing an amended return within 6 
months of the due date of the return (excluding 
extensions). Attach Form 4562 to the amended 
return and write “Filed pursuant to section 
301.9100-2” on Form 4562. File the amended 
return at the same address you filed the original 
return.
Revoking the election.  You must obtain con-
sent from the IRS to revoke your election. Your 
request to revoke the election must be submit-
ted to the IRS in the form of a letter ruling before 
the end of the tax year in which the optional re-
covery period ends. The request must contain 
all of the information necessary to demonstrate 
the rare and unusual circumstances that would 
justify granting revocation. If the request for rev-
ocation is approved, any unamortized costs are 
deductible in the year the revocation is effec-
tive.
9.
Depletion
Introduction
Depletion is the using up of natural resources 
extracted from a mineral property by mining, 
drilling, quarrying stone, or cutting timber. The 
depletion deduction allows an owner or opera-
tor to account for the reduction of the mineral 
property’s value or basis as a result of the ex-
traction of the natural resource.
There are two ways of figuring depletion: 
cost depletion and percentage depletion. For oil 
and gas wells, mines, other natural deposits (in-
cluding geothermal deposits), and mineral 
property, you must generally use the method 
that gives you the larger deduction. For stand-
ing timber, you must use cost depletion.
Topics
This chapter discusses:
• Who can claim depletion
• Mineral property
• Timber
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
544 Sales and Other Dispositions of 
Assets
551 Basis of Assets
Form (and Instructions)
Schedule E (Form 1040 or 1040-SR) 
Supplemental Income and Loss
Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) Partner's 
Share of Income, Deductions, 
Credits, etc.
Schedule K-1 (Form 1120-S) 
Shareholder's Share of Income, 
Deductions, Credits, etc.
6198 At-Risk Limitations
8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitations
T (Timber) Forest Activities Schedule
See chapter 12  for information about getting 
publications and forms.
Who Can Claim 
Depletion?
If you have an economic interest in mineral 
property or standing timber, you can take a de-
duction for depletion. More than one person 
can have an economic interest in the same min-
eral deposit or timber. In the case of leased 
property, the depletion deduction is divided 
between the lessor and the lessee.
  544
  551
  Schedule E (Form 1040 or 1040-SR)
  Schedule K-1 (Form 1065)
  Schedule K-1 (Form 1120-S)
  6198
  8582
  T (Timber)
Page 35 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 9 Depletion  Page 35

You have an economic interest if both the 
following apply.
• You have acquired by investment any in-
terest in mineral deposits or standing tim-
ber.
• You have a legal right to income from the 
extraction of the mineral or cutting of the 
timber to which you must look for a return 
of your capital investment.
A contractual relationship that allows you an 
economic or monetary advantage from prod-
ucts of the mineral deposit or standing timber is 
not, in itself, an economic interest.
Individuals, estates, and trusts who 
claim depletion deductions may be lia-
ble for the AMT. For tax years begin-
ning after 2017, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, 
section 12001, repealed the corporate AMT.
Basis adjustment for depletion.  You must 
reduce the basis of your property by the deple-
tion allowed or allowable, whichever is greater, 
but not below zero.
Mineral Property
Mineral property includes oil and gas wells, 
mines, and other natural deposits (including ge-
othermal deposits). For this purpose, the term 
“property” means each separate interest you 
own in each mineral deposit in each separate 
tract or parcel of land. You can treat two or 
more separate interests as one property or as 
separate properties. See section 614 and the 
related regulations for rules on how to treat sep-
arate mineral interests.
There are two ways of figuring depletion on 
mineral property.
• Cost depletion.
• Percentage depletion.
Generally, you must use the method that gives 
you the larger deduction. However, unless you 
are an independent producer or royalty owner, 
you generally cannot use percentage depletion 
for oil and gas wells. See Oil and Gas Wells , 
later.
Cost Depletion
To figure cost depletion, you must first deter-
mine the following.
• The property's basis for depletion.
• The total recoverable units of mineral in the 
property's natural deposit.
• The number of units of mineral sold during 
the tax year.
Basis for depletion.  To figure the property's 
basis for depletion, subtract all the following 
from the property's adjusted basis.
1. Amounts recoverable through:
a. Depreciation deductions,
b. Deferred expenses (including defer-
red exploration and development 
costs), and
c. Deductions other than depletion.
2. The residual value of land and improve-
ments at the end of operations.
CAUTION
!
3. The cost or value of land acquired for pur-
poses other than mineral production.
Adjusted basis.  The adjusted basis of 
your property is your original cost or other ba-
sis, plus certain additions and improvements, 
and minus certain deductions such as depletion 
allowed or allowable and casualty losses. Your 
adjusted basis can never be less than zero. See 
Pub. 551 for more information on adjusted ba-
sis.
Total recoverable units.  The total recovera-
ble units is the sum of the following.
• The number of units of mineral remaining 
at the end of the year (including units re-
covered but not sold).
• The number of units of mineral sold during 
the tax year (determined under your 
method of accounting, as explained next).
You must estimate or determine recoverable 
units (tons, pounds, ounces, barrels, thousands 
of cubic feet, or other measure) of mineral prod-
ucts using the current industry method and the 
most accurate and reliable information you can 
obtain. You must include ores and minerals that 
are developed, in sight, blocked out, or as-
sured. You must also include probable or pro-
spective ores or minerals that are believed to 
exist based on good evidence. But see Elective 
safe harbor for owners of oil and gas property , 
later.
Number of units sold during the tax year. 
You determine the number of units sold during 
the tax year based on your method of account-
ing. Use the following table to make this deter-
mination.
IF you 
use ...
THEN the units sold during 
the tax year are ...
the cash method 
of accounting
the units sold for which you 
receive payment during the tax 
year (regardless of the year of 
sale).
an accrual 
method of 
accounting
the units sold based on your 
inventories and method of 
accounting for inventory.
The number of units sold during the tax year 
does not include any for which depletion deduc-
tions were allowed or allowable in earlier years.
Figuring the cost depletion deduction. 
Once you have figured your property's basis for 
depletion, the total recoverable units, and the 
number of units sold during the tax year, you 
can figure your cost depletion deduction by tak-
ing the following steps.
Step Action Result
 1 Divide your property's
basis for depletion by
total recoverable units.
Depletion unit.
 2 Multiply the depletion
unit by units sold
during the tax year.
Cost depletion 
deduction.
You must keep accounts for the depletion of 
each property and adjust these accounts each 
year for units sold and depletion claimed.
Elective safe harbor for owners of oil and 
gas property. Instead of using the method de-
scribed earlier to determine the total recovera-
ble units, you can use an elective safe harbor. If 
you choose the elective safe harbor, the total 
recoverable units equal 105% of a property's 
proven reserves (both developed and undevel-
oped). For details, see Revenue Procedure 
2004-19 on page 563 of I.R.B. 2004 -10, availa-
ble at IRS.gov/irb/2004-10_IRB/RP-2004-19.
To make the election, attach a statement to 
your timely filed (including extensions) original 
return for the first tax year for which the safe 
harbor is elected. The statement must indicate 
that you are electing the safe harbor provided 
by Revenue Procedure 2004-19. The election, if 
made, is effective for the tax year in which it is 
made and all later years. It cannot be revoked 
for the tax year in which it is elected, but may be 
revoked in a later year. Once revoked, it cannot 
be re-elected for the next 5 years.
Percentage Depletion
To figure percentage depletion, you multiply a 
certain percentage, specified for each mineral, 
by your gross income from the property during 
the tax year.
The rates to be used and other rules for oil 
and gas wells are discussed later under Inde-
pendent Producers and Royalty Owners  and 
under Natural Gas Wells. Rates and other rules 
for percentage depletion of other specific miner-
als are found later under Mines and Geothermal 
Deposits.
Gross income. When figuring percentage de-
pletion, subtract from your gross income from 
the property the following amounts.
• Any rents or royalties you paid or incurred 
for the property.
• The part of any bonus you paid for a lease 
on the property allocable to the product 
sold (or that otherwise gives rise to gross 
income) for the tax year.
A bonus payment includes amounts you paid as 
a lessee to satisfy a production payment re-
tained by the lessor.
Use the following fraction to figure the part 
of the bonus you must subtract.
No. of units sold in the tax year
Recoverable units from the property × Bonus 
Payments
For oil and gas wells and geothermal depos-
its, more information about the definition of 
gross income from the property is under Oil and 
Gas Wells, later. For other property, more infor-
mation about the definition of gross income 
from the property is under Mines and Geother-
mal Deposits, later.
Taxable income limit.  The percentage deple-
tion deduction generally cannot be more than 
50% (100% for oil and gas property) of your tax-
able income from the property figured without 
the depletion deduction and the domestic pro-
duction activities deduction.
Taxable income from the property means 
gross income from the property minus all allow-
able deductions (except any deduction for de-
pletion or domestic production activities) attrib-
utable to mining processes, including mining 
Page 36 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 36  Chapter 9 Depletion

transportation. These deductible items include, 
but are not limited to, the following.
• Operating expenses.
• Certain selling expenses.
• Administrative and financial overhead.
• Depreciation.
• Intangible drilling and development costs.
• Exploration and development expendi-
tures.
• Deductible taxes (see chapter 5), but not 
taxes that you capitalize or take as a credit.
• Losses sustained.
The following rules apply when figuring your 
taxable income from the property for purposes 
of the taxable income limit.
• Do not deduct any NOL deduction from the 
gross income from the property.
• Corporations do not deduct charitable con-
tributions from the gross income from the 
property.
• If, during the year, you dispose of an item 
of section 1245 property that was used in 
connection with mineral property, reduce 
any allowable deduction for mining expen-
ses by the part of any gain you must report 
as ordinary income that is allocable to the 
mineral property. See section 1.613-5(b)
(1) of the regulations for information on 
how to figure the ordinary gain allocable to 
the property.
Oil and Gas Wells
You cannot claim percentage depletion for an 
oil or gas well unless at least one of the follow-
ing applies.
• You are either an independent producer or 
a royalty owner.
• The well produces one of the following: 
regulated natural gas, natural gas sold un-
der a fixed contract, or natural gas from ge-
opressured brine.
If you are an independent producer or roy-
alty owner, see Independent Producers and 
Royalty Owners next.
For information on the depletion deduction 
for wells that produce regulated natural gas, 
natural gas sold under a fixed contract, or natu-
ral gas from geopressured brine, see Natural 
Gas Wells, later.
Independent Producers and 
Royalty Owners
If you are an independent producer or royalty 
owner, you figure percentage depletion using a 
rate of 15% of the gross income from the prop-
erty based on your average daily production of 
domestic crude oil or domestic natural gas up to 
your depletable oil or natural gas quantity. How-
ever, an independent producer or royalty owner 
that also acts as a retailer or refiner may be ex-
cluded from claiming percentage depletion. For 
information on figuring the deduction, see Figur-
ing percentage depletion, later.
Refiners who cannot claim percentage de-
pletion. You cannot claim percentage deple-
tion if you or a related person refines crude oil 
and you and the related person refined more 
than 75,000 barrels on any day during the tax 
year based on average (rather than actual) daily 
refinery runs for the tax year. The average daily 
refinery run is figured by dividing total refinery 
runs for the tax year by the total number of days 
in the tax year.
Related person.  You and another person 
are related persons if either of you holds a sig-
nificant ownership interest in the other person 
or if a third person holds a significant ownership 
interest in both of you.
For example, a corporation, partnership, es-
tate, or trust and anyone who holds a significant 
ownership interest in it are related persons. A 
partnership and a trust are related persons if 
one person holds a significant ownership inter-
est in each of them.
For purposes of the related person rules, 
significant ownership interest means direct or 
indirect ownership of 5% or more in any one of 
the following.
• The value of the outstanding stock of a 
corporation.
• The interest in the profits or capital of a 
partnership.
• The beneficial interests in an estate or 
trust.
Any interest owned by or for a corporation, 
partnership, trust, or estate is considered to be 
owned directly both by itself and proportionately 
by its shareholders, partners, or beneficiaries.
Retailers who cannot claim percentage de-
pletion. You cannot claim percentage deple-
tion if both the following apply.
1. You sell oil or natural gas or their by-prod-
ucts directly or through a related person in 
any of the following situations.
a. Through a retail outlet operated by 
you or a related person.
b. To any person who is required under 
an agreement with you or a related 
person to use a trademark, trade 
name, or service mark or name 
owned by you or a related person in 
marketing or distributing oil, natural 
gas, or their byproducts.
c. To any person given authority under 
an agreement with you or a related 
person to occupy any retail outlet 
owned, leased, or controlled by you or 
a related person.
2. The combined gross receipts from sales 
(not counting resales) of oil, natural gas, or 
their by-products by all retail outlets taken 
into account in (1) are more than $5 million 
for the tax year.
For the purpose of determining if this rule 
applies, do not count the following.
• Bulk sales (sales in very large quantities) 
of oil or natural gas to commercial or indus-
trial users.
• Bulk sales of aviation fuels to the Depart-
ment of Defense.
• Sales of oil or natural gas or their by-prod-
ucts outside the United States if none of 
your domestic production or that of a rela-
ted person is exported during the tax year 
or the prior tax year.
Related person.  To determine if you and 
another person are related persons, see Rela-
ted person  under Refiners who cannot claim 
percentage depletion, earlier.
Sales through a related person.  You are 
considered to be selling oil or natural gas (or a 
product derived therefrom) through a related 
person if any sale by the related person produ-
ces gross income from which you may benefit 
because of your direct or indirect ownership in-
terest in the related person.
You are not considered to be selling oil or 
natural gas (or a product derived therefrom) 
through a related person who is a retailer if all 
the following apply.
• You do not own a significant ownership in-
terest in the retailer.
• You sell your production to persons who 
are not related to either you or the retailer.
• The retailer does not buy oil or natural gas 
from your customers or persons related to 
your customers.
• There are no arrangements for the retailer 
to acquire oil or natural gas you produced 
for resale or made available for purchase 
by the retailer.
• Neither you nor the retailer knows of or 
controls the final disposition of the oil or 
natural gas you sold or the original source 
of the petroleum products the retailer ac-
quired for resale.
Transferees who cannot claim percentage 
depletion. You cannot claim percentage de-
pletion if you received your interest in a proven 
oil or gas property by transfer after 1974 and 
before October 12, 1990. For a definition of the 
term “transfer,” see section 1. 613A-7(n) of the 
regulations. For a definition of the term “interest 
in proven oil or gas property,” see section 
1.613A-7(p) of the regulations.
Figuring percentage depletion.  Generally, 
as an independent producer or royalty owner, 
you figure your percentage depletion by figuring 
your average daily production of domestic oil or 
gas and comparing it to your depletable oil or 
gas quantity. If your average daily production 
does not exceed your depletable oil or gas 
quantity, you figure your percentage depletion 
by multiplying the gross income from the oil or 
gas property (as defined under Gross income 
from the property , later) by 15% (0.15). If your 
average daily production of domestic oil or gas 
exceeds your depletable oil or gas quantity, you 
must make an allocation as explained later un-
der Average daily production.
In addition, there is a limit on the percentage 
depletion deduction. See Taxable income limit , 
later.
Average daily production.  Figure your aver-
age daily production by dividing your total do-
mestic production of oil or gas for the tax year 
by the number of days in your tax year.
Partial interest. If you have a partial inter-
est in the production from a property, figure 
your share of the production by multiplying total 
production from the property by your percent-
age participation in the revenues from the prop-
erty.
You have a partial interest in the production 
from a property if you have a net profits interest 
Page 37 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 9 Depletion  Page 37

in the property. To figure the share of produc-
tion for your net profits interest, you must first 
determine your percentage participation (as 
measured by the net profits) in the gross reve-
nue from the property. To figure this percent-
age, you divide the income you receive for your 
net profits interest by the gross revenue from 
the property. Then multiply the total production 
from the property by your percentage participa-
tion to figure your share of the production.
Example. Javier Robles owns oil property 
in which Pablo Olmos owns a 20% net profits 
interest. During the year, the property produced 
10,000 barrels of oil, which Javier sold for 
$200,000. Javier had expenses of $90,000 at-
tributable to the property. The property gener-
ated a net profit of $110,000 ($200,000 − 
$90,000). Pablo received income of $22,000 
($110,000 × 20% (0.20)) for his net profits inter-
est.
Pablo determined his percentage participa-
tion to be 11% by dividing $22,000 (the income 
he received) by $200,000 (the gross revenue 
from the property). Pablo determined his share 
of the oil production to be 1,100 barrels (10,000 
barrels × 11% (0.11)).
Depletable oil or natural gas quantity.  Gen-
erally, your depletable oil quantity is 1,000 bar-
rels. Your depletable natural gas quantity is 
6,000 cubic feet multiplied by the number of 
barrels of your depletable oil quantity that you 
choose to apply. If you claim depletion on both 
oil and natural gas, you must reduce your de-
pletable oil quantity (1,000 barrels) by the num-
ber of barrels you use to figure your depletable 
natural gas quantity.
Example. You have both oil and natural 
gas production. To figure your depletable natu-
ral gas quantity, you choose to apply 360 bar-
rels of your 1,000 -barrel depletable oil quantity. 
Your depletable natural gas quantity is 2. 16 mil-
lion cubic feet of gas (360 × 6,000). You must 
reduce your depletable oil quantity to 640 bar-
rels (1,000 – 360).
If you have production from marginal wells, 
see section 613A(c)(6) to figure your depletable 
oil or natural gas quantity. Also, see Notice 
2019-38, available at IRS.gov/irb/
2019-23_IRB#NOT-2019-38.
Business entities and family members. 
You must allocate the depletable oil or gas 
quantity among the following related persons in 
proportion to each business entity's or family 
member's production of domestic oil or gas for 
the year.
• Corporations, trusts, and estates if 50% or 
more of the beneficial interest is owned by 
the same or related persons (considering 
only persons that own at least 5% of the 
beneficial interest).
• You and your spouse and minor children.
A related person is anyone mentioned in the re-
lated persons discussion under Nondeductible 
loss in chapter 2 of Pub. 544, except that for 
purposes of this allocation, item (1) in that dis-
cussion includes only an individual, his or her 
spouse, and minor children.
Controlled group of corporations.  Mem-
bers of the same controlled group of 
corporations are treated as one taxpayer when 
figuring the depletable oil or natural gas quan-
tity. They share the depletable quantity. A con-
trolled group of corporations is defined in sec-
tion 1563(a), except that, for this purpose, the 
stock ownership requirement in that definition is 
“more than 50%” rather than “at least 80%.”
Gross income from the property.  For purpo-
ses of percentage depletion, gross income from 
the property (in the case of oil and gas wells) is 
the amount you receive from the sale of the oil 
or gas in the immediate vicinity of the well. If 
you do not sell the oil or gas on the property but 
manufacture or convert it into a refined product 
before sale, or transport it before sale, the gross 
income from the property is the representative 
market or field price (RMFP) of the oil or gas 
before conversion or transportation.
If you sold gas after you removed it from the 
premises for a price that is lower than the 
RMFP, determine gross income from the prop-
erty for percentage depletion purposes without 
regard to the RMFP.
Gross income from the property does not in-
clude lease bonuses, advance royalties, or 
other amounts payable without regard to pro-
duction from the property.
Average daily production exceeds depleta-
ble quantities.  If your average daily produc-
tion for the year is more than your depletable oil 
or natural gas quantity, figure your allowance for 
depletion for each domestic oil or natural gas 
property as follows.
1. Figure your average daily production of oil 
or natural gas for the year.
2. Figure your depletable oil or natural gas 
quantity for the year.
3. Figure depletion for all oil or natural gas 
produced from the property using a per-
centage depletion rate of 15% (0.15).
4. Multiply the result figured in (3) by a frac-
tion, the numerator of which is the result 
figured in (2) and the denominator of 
which is the result figured in (1). This is 
your depletion allowance for that property 
for the year.
Taxable income limit. If you are an independ-
ent producer or royalty owner of oil and gas, 
your deduction for percentage depletion is limi-
ted to the smaller of the following.
• 100% of your taxable income from the 
property figured without the deduction for 
depletion and the deduction for qualified 
business income under section 199A. For 
a definition of taxable income from the 
property, see Taxable income limit, earlier, 
under Mineral Property.
• 65% of your taxable income for the year 
figured without the deduction for depletion, 
the deduction for qualified business in-
come, any net operating loss carryback to 
the tax year under section 172, any capital 
loss carryback to the tax year under sec-
tion 1212, and in the case of a trust, any 
distribution to its beneficiary (with certain 
exceptions).
You can carry over to the following year any 
amount you cannot deduct because of the 
65%-of-taxable-income limit. Add it to your de-
pletion allowance (before applying any limits) 
for the following year.
Partnerships and S Corporations
Generally, each partner or S corporation share-
holder, and not the partnership or S corpora-
tion, figures the depletion allowance separately. 
Each partner or shareholder must decide 
whether to use cost or percentage depletion. If 
a partner or shareholder uses percentage de-
pletion, he or she must apply the 65% -of-taxa-
ble-income limit using his or her taxable income 
from all sources.
Partner's or shareholder's adjusted basis. 
The partnership or S corporation must allocate 
to each partner or shareholder his or her share 
of the adjusted basis of each oil or gas property 
held by the partnership or S corporation. The 
partnership or S corporation makes the alloca-
tion as of the date it acquires the oil or gas 
property.
Each partner's share of the adjusted basis of 
the oil or gas property is generally figured ac-
cording to that partner's interest in partnership 
capital. However, in some cases, it is figured 
according to the partner's interest in partnership 
income.
The partnership or S corporation adjusts the 
partner's or shareholder's share of the adjusted 
basis of the oil and gas property for any capital 
expenditures made for the property and for any 
change in partnership or S corporation inter-
ests.
Recordkeeping. Each partner or 
shareholder must separately keep re-
cords of his or her share of the adjus-
ted basis in each oil and gas property of the 
partnership or S corporation. The partner or 
shareholder must reduce his or her adjusted 
basis by the depletion allowed or allowable on 
the property each year. The partner or share-
holder must use that reduced adjusted basis to 
figure cost depletion, or his or her gain or loss, if 
the partnership or S corporation disposes of the 
property.
Reporting the deduction.  Information that 
you, as a partner or shareholder, use to figure 
your depletion deduction on oil and gas proper-
ties is reported by the partnership or S corpora-
tion on Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) or on Sched-
ule K -1 (Form 1120 -S). Deduct oil and gas 
depletion for your partnership or S corporation 
interest on Schedule E (Form 1040 or 
1040-SR). The depletion deducted on Sched-
ule E is included in figuring income or loss from 
rental real estate or royalty properties. The In-
structions for Schedule E (Form 1040 or 
1040-SR) explain where to report this income or 
loss and whether you need to file either of the 
following forms.
• Form 6198.
• Form 8582.
Natural Gas Wells
You can use percentage depletion for a well 
that produces natural gas that is either:
• Regulated natural gas,
• Sold under a fixed contract, or
RECORDS
Page 38 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 38  Chapter 9 Depletion

• Produced from geopressured brine.
Regulated natural gas. Regulated natural gas 
qualifies for a percentage depletion rate of 22%. 
Regulated natural gas is domestic natural gas 
produced and sold by the producer before July 
1, 1976, and is regulated by the Federal Power 
Commission. The price for regulated gas can-
not be adjusted to reflect any increase in the 
seller’s tax liability because of the repeal of per-
centage depletion for gas. Price increases after 
February 1, 1975, are presumed to take the in-
crease in tax liability into account unless dem-
onstrated otherwise by clear and convincing 
evidence.
Natural gas sold under a fixed contract. 
Natural gas sold under a fixed contract qualifies 
for a percentage depletion rate of 22%. Natural 
gas sold under a fixed contract is domestic nat-
ural gas sold by the producer under a contract 
that does not provide for a price increase to re-
flect any increase in the seller's tax liability be-
cause of the repeal of percentage depletion for 
gas. The contract must have been in effect from 
February 1, 1975, until the date of sale of the 
gas. Price increases after February 1, 1975, are 
presumed to take the increase in tax liability into 
account unless demonstrated otherwise by 
clear and convincing evidence.
Natural gas from geopressured brine. 
Qualified natural gas from geopressured brine 
is eligible for a percentage depletion rate of 
10%. This is natural gas that is both the follow-
ing.
• Produced from a well you began to drill af-
ter September 1978 and before 1984.
• Determined in accordance with section 
503 of the Natural Gas Policy Act of 1978 
to be produced from geopressured brine.
Mines and Geothermal 
Deposits
Certain mines, oil and gas wells, and other nat-
ural deposits, including geothermal deposits, 
qualify for percentage depletion.
Mines, oil and gas wells, and other natural 
deposits. The percentage of your gross in-
come from the property that you can deduct as 
depletion depends on the type of deposit.
See section 613(b) and Regulations section 
1.613-2 for the percentage depletion rates.
Corporate deduction for iron ore and 
coal. The percentage depletion deduction of a 
corporation for iron ore and coal (including lig-
nite) is reduced by 20% (0.20) of:
• The percentage depletion deduction for 
the tax year (figured without this reduc-
tion), minus
• The adjusted basis of the property at the 
close of the tax year (figured without the 
depletion deduction for the tax year).
Gross income from the property.  For prop-
erty other than a geothermal deposit or an oil or 
gas well, gross income from the property 
means the gross income from mining. Mining 
includes all the following.
• Extracting ores or minerals from the 
ground.
• Applying certain treatment processes de-
scribed later.
• Transporting ores or minerals (generally, 
not more than 50 miles) from the point of 
extraction to the plants or mills in which the 
treatment processes are applied.
Excise tax.  Gross income from mining in-
cludes the separately stated excise tax re-
ceived by a mine operator from the sale of coal 
to compensate the operator for the excise tax 
the mine operator must pay to finance black 
lung benefits.
Extraction. Extracting ores or minerals 
from the ground includes extraction by mine 
owners or operators of ores or minerals from 
the waste or residue of prior mining. This does 
not apply to extraction from waste or residue of 
prior mining by the purchaser of the waste or 
residue or the purchaser of the rights to extract 
ores or minerals from the waste or residue.
Treatment processes.  The processes in-
cluded as mining depend on the ore or mineral 
mined. To qualify as mining, the treatment pro-
cesses must be applied by the mine owner or 
operator. For a listing of treatment processes 
considered as mining, see section 613(c)(4) 
and the related regulations.
Transportation of more than 50 miles.  If 
ore or mineral must be transported more than 
50 miles to plants or mills to be treated because 
of physical and other requirements, the addi-
tional authorized transportation may be consid-
ered mining and included in the calculation of 
gross income from mining if authorized by the 
IRS.
If you wish to include transportation of 
more than 50 miles in the calculation of 
gross income from mining, request an 
advance ruling from the IRS. Include in the re-
quest the facts about the physical and other re-
quirements that prevented the construction and 
operation of the plant (in which mining pro-
cesses are applied) within 50 miles of the point 
of extraction. For more information about re-
questing an advance ruling, see Revenue Pro-
cedure 2019 -1, available at IRS.gov/irb/
2019-01_IRB#RP-2019-01.
Disposal of coal or iron ore. You cannot take 
a depletion deduction for coal (including lignite) 
or iron ore mined in the United States if both the 
following apply.
• You disposed of it after holding it for more 
than 1 year.
• You disposed of it under a contract under 
which you retain an economic interest in 
the coal or iron ore.
Treat any gain on the disposition as a capital 
gain.
Disposal to related person.  This rule 
does not apply if you dispose of the coal or iron 
ore to one of the following persons.
• A related person (as listed in chapter 2 of 
Pub. 544).
• A person owned or controlled by the same 
interests that own or control you.
Geothermal deposits.  Geothermal deposits 
located in the United States or its possessions 
qualify for a percentage depletion rate of 15%. 
A geothermal deposit is a geothermal reservoir 
of natural heat stored in rocks or in a watery liq-
uid or vapor (whether or not under pressure). 
For percentage depletion purposes, a geother-
mal deposit is not considered a gas well.
Figure gross income from the property for a 
geothermal steam well in the same way as for 
oil and gas wells. See Gross income from the 
property, earlier, under Oil and Gas Wells . Per-
centage depletion on a geothermal deposit can-
not be more than 50% of your taxable income 
from the property.
Lessor's Gross Income
In the case of leased property, the depletion de-
duction is divided between the lessor and the 
lessee.
A lessor's gross income from the property 
that qualifies for percentage depletion usually is 
the total of the royalties received from the lease.
Bonuses and advanced royalties.  Bonuses 
and advanced royalties are payments a lessee 
makes before production to a lessor for the 
grant of rights in a lease or for minerals, gas, or 
oil to be extracted from leased property. If you 
are the lessor, your income from bonuses and 
advanced royalties received is subject to an al-
lowance for depletion, as explained in the next 
two paragraphs.
Figuring cost depletion.  To figure cost 
depletion on a bonus, multiply your adjusted ba-
sis in the property by a fraction, the numerator 
of which is the bonus and the denominator of 
which is the total bonus and royalties expected 
to be received. To figure cost depletion on ad-
vanced royalties, use the calculation explained 
earlier under Cost Depletion, treating the num-
ber of units for which the advanced royalty is re-
ceived as the number of units sold.
Figuring percentage depletion.  In the 
case of mines, wells, and other natural deposits 
other than gas, oil, or geothermal property, you 
may use the percentage rates discussed earlier 
under Mines and Geothermal Deposits. Any bo-
nus or advanced royalty payments are gener-
ally part of the gross income from the property 
to which the rates are applied in making the cal-
culation. However, for oil, gas, or geothermal 
property, gross income does not include lease 
bonuses, advanced royalties, or other amounts 
payable without regard to production from the 
property.
Ending the lease.  If you receive a bonus 
on a lease that ends or is abandoned before 
you derive any income from mineral extraction 
or the cutting of timber, include in income the 
depletion deduction you took on the bonus. Do 
this for the year the lease ends or is aban-
doned. Also, increase your adjusted basis in the 
property to restore the depletion deduction you 
previously subtracted.
For advanced royalties, include in income 
the depletion claimed on minerals for which the 
advanced royalties were paid if the minerals 
were not produced or any timber cut before the 
lease ended. Include this amount in income for 
the year the lease ends. Increase your adjusted 
basis in the property by the amount you include 
in income.
Page 39 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 9 Depletion  Page 39

Delay rentals. These are payments for defer-
ring development of the property. Since delay 
rentals are ordinary rent, they are ordinary in-
come to the payee that is not subject to deple-
tion. These rentals can be avoided by either 
abandoning the lease, beginning development 
operations, or obtaining production.
Timber
You can figure timber depletion only by the cost 
method. Percentage depletion does not apply 
to timber. Base your depletion on your cost or 
other basis in the timber. Your cost does not in-
clude the cost of land or any amounts recovera-
ble through depreciation.
Depletion takes place when you cut stand-
ing timber. You can figure your depletion de-
duction when the quantity of cut timber is first 
accurately measured in the process of exploita-
tion.
Figuring cost depletion.  To figure your cost 
depletion allowance, you multiply the number of 
timber units cut by your depletion unit.
Timber units.  When you acquire timber 
property, you must make an estimate of the 
quantity of marketable timber reasonably 
known, or on good evidence believed to exist 
on the property. You measure the timber using 
board feet, log scale, cords, or other units. If 
you later determine that you have more or less 
units of timber, you must adjust the original esti-
mate.
The term “timber property” means your eco-
nomic interest in standing timber in each tract or 
block representing a separate timber account.
Depletion unit.  You figure your depletion 
unit each year by taking the following steps.
1. Determine your cost or adjusted basis of 
the timber on hand at the beginning of the 
year. Adjusted basis is defined under Cost 
Depletion in the discussion on Mineral 
Property, earlier.
2. Add to the amount determined in (1) the 
cost of any timber units acquired during 
the year and any additions to capital.
3. Figure the number of timber units to take 
into account by adding the number of tim-
ber units acquired during the year to the 
number of timber units on hand in the ac-
count at the beginning of the year and 
then adding (or subtracting) any correction 
to the estimate of the number of timber 
units remaining in the account.
4. Divide the result of (2) by the result of (3). 
This is your depletion unit.
Example. You bought a timber tract for 
$160,000 and the land was worth as much as 
the timber. Your basis for the timber is $80,000. 
Based on an estimated 1 million board feet 
(1,000 MBF) of standing timber, you figure your 
depletion unit to be $80 per MBF ($80,000 ÷ 
1,000). If you cut 500 MBF of timber, your de-
pletion allowance would be $40,000 (500 MBF 
× $80).
When to claim depletion.  Claim your deple-
tion allowance as a deduction in the year of sale 
or other disposition of the products cut from the 
timber, unless you choose to treat the cutting of 
timber as a sale or exchange (explained below). 
Include allowable depletion for timber products 
not sold during the tax year the timber is cut as 
a cost item in the closing inventory of timber 
products for the year. The inventory is your ba-
sis for determining gain or loss in the tax year 
you sell the timber products.
Example. The facts are the same as in the 
previous example, except that you sold only 
half of the timber products in the cutting year. 
You would deduct $20,000 of the $40,000 de-
pletion that year. You would add the remaining 
$20,000 depletion to your closing inventory of 
timber products.
Electing to treat the cutting of timber as a 
sale or exchange.  You can elect, under cer-
tain circumstances, to treat the cutting of timber 
held for more than 1 year as a sale or ex-
change. You must make the election on your in-
come tax return for the tax year to which it ap-
plies. If you make this election, subtract the 
adjusted basis for depletion from the FMV of 
the timber on the first day of the tax year in 
which you cut it to figure the gain or loss on the 
cutting. You generally report the gain as 
long-term capital gain. The FMV then becomes 
your basis for figuring your ordinary gain or loss 
on the sale or other disposition of the products 
cut from the timber. For more information, see 
Timber in chapter 2 of Pub. 544.
You may revoke an election to treat the cut-
ting of timber as a sale or exchange without the 
IRS's consent. The prior election (and revoca-
tion) is disregarded for purposes of making a 
subsequent election. See Form T (Timber) for 
more information.
Form T (Timber).  Complete and attach Form 
T (Timber) to your income tax return if you claim 
a deduction for timber depletion, choose to treat 
the cutting of timber as a sale or exchange, or 
make an outright sale of timber.
10.
Business Bad 
Debts
Introduction
You have a bad debt if you cannot collect 
money owed to you. A bad debt is either a busi-
ness bad debt or a nonbusiness bad debt. This 
chapter discusses only business bad debts.
Generally, a business bad debt is one that 
comes from operating your trade or business. 
You can deduct business bad debts on Sched-
ule C (Form 1040 or 1040 -SR) or your applica-
ble business income tax return.
All other bad debts are nonbusiness bad 
debts and are deductible only as short -term 
capital losses. For more information on nonbus-
iness bad debts, see Pub. 550.
Topics
This chapter discusses:
• Definition of business bad debt
• When a debt becomes worthless
• How to claim a business bad debt
• Recovery of a bad debt
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income
536 Net Operating Losses (NOLs) for 
Individuals, Estates, and Trusts
544 Sales and Other Dispositions of 
Assets
550 Investment Income and Expenses
556 Examination of Returns, Appeal 
Rights, and Claims for Refund
Form (and Instructions)
Schedule C (Form 1040 or 1040-SR) 
Profit or Loss From Business
1040-X Amended U.S. Individual Income 
Tax Return
1045 Application for Tentative Refund
1065 U.S. Return of Partnership Income
1065-X Amended Return or 
Administrative Adjustment Request 
(AAR)
1120-S U.S. Income Tax Return for an S 
Corporation
1120-X Amended U.S. Corporation 
Income Tax Return
1139 Corporation Application for 
Tentative Refund
3115 Application for Change in 
Accounting Method
See chapter 12  for information about getting 
publications and forms.
Definition of Business 
Bad Debt
A business bad debt is a loss from the worth-
lessness of a debt that was either:
• Created or acquired in your trade or busi-
ness, or
• Closely related to your trade or business 
when it became partly or totally worthless.
A debt is closely related to your trade or 
business if your primary motive for incurring the 
debt is business related. Bad debts of a 
  525 
  536 
  544 
  550 
  556 
  Schedule C (Form 1040 or 1040-SR)
  1040-X 
  1045 
  1065 
  1065-X 
  1120-S 
  1120-X 
  1139 
  3115 
Page 40 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 40  Chapter 10 Business Bad Debts

corporation (other than an S corporation) are al-
ways business bad debts.
Credit sales.  Business bad debts are mainly 
the result of credit sales to customers. Goods 
that have been sold, but not yet paid for, and 
services that have been performed, but not yet 
paid for, are recorded in your books as either 
accounts receivable or notes receivable. After a 
reasonable period of time, if you have tried to 
collect the amount due, but are unable to do so, 
the uncollectible part becomes a business bad 
debt.
Accounts or notes receivable valued at fair 
market value (FMV) when received are deducti-
ble only at that value, even though the FMV 
may be less than the face value. If you pur-
chased an account receivable for less than its 
face value, and the receivable subsequently be-
comes worthless, the most you’re allowed to 
deduct is the amount you paid to acquire it.
You can claim a business bad debt de-
duction only if the amount owed to you 
was previously included in gross in-
come. This applies to amounts owed to you 
from all sources of taxable income, including 
sales, services, rents, and interest.
Accrual method.  If you use an accrual 
method of accounting, you generally report in-
come as you earn it. You can only claim a bad 
debt deduction for an uncollectible receivable if 
you have previously included the uncollectible 
amount in income.
If you qualify, you can use the nonac-
crual-experience method of accounting dis-
cussed later. Under this method, you don’t have 
to accrue income that, based on your experi-
ence, you don’t expect to collect.
Cash method.  If you use the cash method 
of accounting, you generally report income 
when you receive payment. You can’t claim a 
bad debt deduction for amounts owed to you 
because you never included those amounts in 
income. For example, a cash basis architect 
can’t claim a bad debt deduction if a client fails 
to pay the bill because the architect's fee was 
never included in income.
Debts from a former business.  If you sell 
your business but retain its receivables, these 
debts are business debts because they arose 
out of your trade or business. If any of these re-
ceivables subsequently become worthless, the 
loss is still a business bad debt.
Debt acquired from a decedent.  The 
character of a loss from debts of a business ac-
quired from a decedent is determined in the 
same way as debts acquired on the purchase of 
a business. The executor of the decedent's es-
tate treats any loss from the debts as a busi-
ness bad debt if the debts were closely related 
to the decedent's trade or business when they 
became worthless. Otherwise, a loss from 
these debts becomes a nonbusiness bad debt 
for the decedent's estate.
Liquidation.  If you liquidate your business 
and some of the accounts receivable that you 
retain become worthless, they’re treated as 
business bad debts.
CAUTION
!
Types of Business Bad 
Debts
Business bad debts may result from the follow-
ing.
Loans to clients and suppliers.  If you loan 
money to a client, supplier, employee, or distrib-
utor for a business reason and you’re unable to 
collect the loan after attempting to do so, you 
have a business bad debt.
Debts owed by political parties.  If a political 
party (or other organization that accepts contri-
butions or spends money to influence elections) 
owes you money and the debt becomes worth-
less, you can claim a bad debt deduction only if 
all of the following requirements are met.
1. You use an accrual method of accounting.
2. The debt arose from the sale of goods or 
services in the ordinary course of your 
trade or business.
3. More than 30% of your receivables ac-
crued in the year of the sale were from 
sales to political parties.
4. You made substantial and continuing ef-
forts to collect on the debt.
Loan or capital contribution.  You cannot 
claim a bad debt deduction for a loan you made 
to a corporation if, based on the facts and cir-
cumstances, the loan is actually a contribution 
to capital.
Debts of an insolvent partner.  If your busi-
ness partnership breaks up and one of your for-
mer partners becomes insolvent, you may have 
to pay more than your pro rata share of the part-
nership's debts. If you pay any part of the insol-
vent partner's share of the debts, you can claim 
a bad debt deduction for the amount you paid 
that is attributable to the insolvent partner's 
share.
Business loan guarantee.  If you guarantee a 
debt that subsequently becomes worthless, the 
debt can qualify as a business bad debt if all the 
following requirements are met.
• You made the guarantee in the course of 
your trade or business.
• You have a legal duty to pay the debt.
• You made the guarantee before the debt 
became worthless. You meet this require-
ment if you reasonably expected you 
wouldn’t have to pay the debt without full 
reimbursement from the borrower.
• You received reasonable consideration for 
making the guarantee. You meet this re-
quirement if you made the guarantee ac-
cording to normal business practice or for 
a good faith business purpose.
Example.  Jane Zayne owns the Zayne 
Dress Company. She guaranteed payment of a 
$20,000 note for Elegant Fashions, a dress out-
let. Elegant Fashions is one of Zayne's largest 
clients. Elegant Fashions later defaulted on the 
loan. As a result, Ms. Zayne paid the remaining 
balance of the loan in full to the bank.
She can claim a business bad debt deduc-
tion only for the amount she paid because her 
guarantee was made in the course of her trade 
or business for a good faith business purpose. 
She was motivated by the desire to retain one 
of her better clients and keep a sales outlet.
Deductible in the year paid.  If you make 
a payment on a loan you guaranteed, you can 
deduct it in the year paid, unless you have 
rights against the borrower.
Rights against a borrower.  When you 
make payment on a loan you guaranteed, you 
may have the right to take the place of the 
lender. The debt is then owed to you. If you 
have this right, or some other right to demand 
payment from the borrower, you can’t claim a 
bad debt deduction until these rights become 
partly or totally worthless.
Joint debtor.  If two or more debtors jointly 
owe you money, your inability to collect from 
one doesn’t enable you to deduct a proportion-
ate amount as a bad debt.
Sale of mortgaged property.  If mortgaged or 
pledged property is sold for less than the debt, 
the unpaid, uncollectible balance of the debt is 
a bad debt.
When a Debt Becomes 
Worthless
A debt becomes worthless when there is no 
longer any chance the amount owed will be 
paid. This may occur on the date the debt is 
due or prior to that date.
To demonstrate worthlessness, you must 
only show that you have taken reasonable 
steps to collect the debt but were unable to do 
so. It isn’t necessary to go to court if you can 
show that a judgment from the court would be 
uncollectible. Bankruptcy of your debtor is gen-
erally good evidence of the worthlessness of at 
least a part of an unsecured and unpreferred 
debt.
Property received for debt.  If you receive 
property in partial settlement of a debt, reduce 
the debt by the property's FMV, which becomes 
the property's basis. You can deduct the re-
maining debt as a bad debt if and when it be-
comes worthless.
If you later sell the property for more than its 
basis, any gain on the sale is due to the appre-
ciation of the property. It isn’t a recovery of a 
bad debt. For information on the sale of an as-
set, see Pub. 544.
How To Claim a 
Business Bad Debt
There are two methods to claim a business bad 
debt.
• The specific charge-off method.
• The nonaccrual-experience method.
Generally, you must use the specific charge -off 
method. However, you may use the nonac-
crual-experience method if you meet the re-
quirements discussed later under Nonac-
crual-Experience Method.
Page 41 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 10 Business Bad Debts  Page 41

Specific Charge-off Method
If you use the specific charge -off method, you 
can deduct specific business bad debts that be-
come either partly or totally worthless during the 
tax year. However, with respect to partly worth-
less bad debts, your deduction is limited to the 
amount you charged off on your books during 
the year.
Partly worthless debts.  You can deduct spe-
cific bad debts that become partly uncollectible 
during the tax year. Your tax deduction is limi-
ted to the amount you charge off on your books 
during the year. You don’t have to charge off 
and deduct your partly worthless debts annu-
ally. You can delay the charge -off until a later 
year. However, you can’t deduct any part of a 
debt after the year it becomes totally worthless.
Significantly modified debt.  An excep-
tion to the charge -off rule exists for debt that 
has been significantly modified and on which 
the holder recognized gain. For more informa-
tion, see Regulations section 1.166-3(a)(3).
Deduction disallowed.  Generally, you 
can claim a partial bad debt deduction only in 
the year you make the charge -off on your 
books. If, under audit, the IRS doesn’t allow 
your deduction and the debt becomes partly 
worthless in a later tax year, you can deduct the 
amount you charged off in that year plus the 
disallowed amount charged off in the earlier 
year. The charge -off in the earlier year, unless 
reversed on your books, fulfills the charge -off 
requirement for the later year.
Totally worthless debts.  If a debt becomes 
totally worthless in the current tax year, you can 
deduct the entire amount minus any amount de-
ducted in an earlier tax year when the debt was 
only partly worthless.
You don’t have to make an actual charge -off 
on your books to claim a bad debt deduction for 
a totally worthless debt. However, you may 
want to do so. If you don’t and the IRS later 
rules the debt is only partly worthless, you’ll not 
be allowed a deduction for the debt in that tax 
year because a deduction of a partly worthless 
bad debt is limited to the amount actually 
charged off. See Partly worthless debts, earlier.
Filing a claim for refund.  If you didn’t deduct 
a bad debt on your original return for the year it 
became worthless, you can file a claim for a 
credit or refund. If the bad debt was totally 
worthless, you must file the claim by the later of 
the following dates.
• 7 years from the date your original return 
was due (not including extensions).
• 2 years from the date you paid the tax.
If the claim is for a partly worthless bad debt, 
you must file the claim by the later of the follow-
ing dates.
• 3 years from the date you filed your original 
return.
• 2 years from the date you paid the tax.
You may have longer to file the claim if you 
were unable to manage your financial affairs 
due to a physical or mental impairment. Such 
an impairment requires proof of existence.
For details and more information about filing 
a claim, see Pub. 556. Use one of the following 
forms to file a claim. For more information, see 
the instructions for the applicable form.
Table 10-1. Forms Used To File a
Claim
IF you filed as 
a...
THEN file...
sole proprietor 
or farmer Form 1040-X.
corporation Form 1120-X.
S corporation Form 1120-S and check 
box H(4).
partnership Form 1065-X if filing on 
paper or 
Form 1065 and check box 
G(5) if filing electronically.
Nonaccrual-Experience 
Method
Generally, a person using accrual accounting 
isn’t required to accrue a service -provided re-
ceivable that experience shows won't be collec-
ted if:
• The service provided is health, law, engi-
neering, architecture, accounting, actuarial 
science, performing arts, or consulting; or
• The person's average annual gross re-
ceipts for all previous 3-tax-year periods 
doesn’t exceed $26 million.
See section 448 for details and exceptions.
Recovery of a Bad Debt
If you claim a deduction for a bad debt on your 
income tax return and later recover (collect) all 
or part of it, you may have to include all or part 
of the recovery in gross income. The amount 
you include is limited to the amount you actually 
deducted. However, you can exclude the 
amount deducted that did not reduce your tax. 
Report the recovery as “Other income” on the 
appropriate business form or schedule.
See Recoveries in Pub. 525 for more infor-
mation.
NOL carryover.  If a bad debt deduction in-
creases an NOL carryover that has not expired 
before the beginning of the tax year in which the 
recovery takes place, you treat the deduction as 
having reduced your tax. A bad debt deduction 
that contributes to an NOL helps lower taxes in 
the year to which you carry the NOL. For more 
information about NOLs for individuals, see 
Pub. 536. Also, see the Instructions for Form 
1045, and the Instructions for Form 1139.
11.
Other Expenses
What's New
Standard mileage rate.  Beginning in 2019, 
the standard mileage rate for the cost of operat-
ing your car, van, pickup, or panel truck for 
business use is 58 cents per mile. For more in-
formation, see Car and truck expenses  under 
Miscellaneous Expenses, later.
Reminders
No miscellaneous itemized deductions al-
lowed. You can no longer claim any miscella-
neous itemized deductions, including the de-
duction for repayments (claim of right). 
Miscellaneous itemized deductions are those 
deductions that would have been subject to the 
2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limitation.
Qualified business income deduction.  For 
tax years beginning after 2017, individual tax-
payers and some trusts and estates may be en-
titled to a deduction of up to 20% of their Quali-
fied Business Income (QBI) from a trade or 
business, including income from a pass-through 
entity, but not from a C corporation, plus 20% of 
qualified real estate investment trust (REIT) div-
idends and qualified publicly traded partnership 
(PTP) income. The deduction is subject to mul-
tiple limitations, such as the type of trade or 
business, the taxpayer’s taxable income, the 
amount of W-2 wages paid in the trade or busi-
ness, and the unadjusted basis immediately af-
ter acquisition (UBIA) of qualified property held 
by the trade or business. The deduction can be 
taken in addition to the standard or itemized de-
ductions. See the Instructions for Form 8995 
and the Instructions for Form 8995 -A for more 
information.
Travel, meals, and entertainment.  In gen-
eral, entertainment expenses are no longer de-
ductible. For more information on travel and 
non-entertainment related meals including de-
ductibility, see Pub. 463.
Certain payments made in sexual harass-
ment or sexual abuse cases.  For amounts 
paid or incurred after December 22, 2017, new 
section 162(q) provides that no deduction is al-
lowed under section 162 for any settlement or 
payment related to sexual harassment or sexual 
abuse if it is subject to a nondisclosure agree-
ment. In addition, attorney’s fees related to such 
a settlement or payment are not allowed as a 
deduction.
Introduction
This chapter covers business expenses that 
may not have been explained to you, as a busi-
ness owner, in previous chapters of this publi-
cation.
Page 42 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 42  Chapter 11 Other Expenses

Topics
This chapter discusses:
• Travel and non-entertainment related 
meals
• Bribes and kickbacks
• Charitable contributions
• Education expenses
• Lobbying expenses
• Penalties and fines
• Repayments (claim of right)
• Other miscellaneous expenses
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
15-B Employer's Tax Guide to Fringe 
Benefits
463 Travel, Gift, and Car Expenses
526 Charitable Contributions
529 Miscellaneous Deductions
544 Sales and Other Dispositions of 
Assets
946 How To Depreciate Property
970 Tax Benefits for Education
Form (and Instructions)
Schedule A (Form 1040 or 1040-SR) 
Itemized Deductions
Schedule C (Form 1040 or 1040-SR) 
Profit or Loss From Business
Schedule F (Form 1040 or 1040-SR) 
Profit or Loss From Farming
1099-MISC Miscellaneous Income
1120 U.S. Corporation Income Tax 
Return
4562 Depreciation and Amortization
8949 Sales and Other Dispositions of 
Capital Assets
8995 Qualified Business Income 
Deduction Simplified Computation
8995-A Qualified Business Income 
Deduction
W-2 Wage and Tax Statement
See chapter 12  for information about getting 
publications and forms.
Reimbursement of 
Travel and 
Non-Entertainment 
Related Meals
The following discussion explains how to han-
dle any reimbursements or allowances you may 
provide to your employees under a reimburse-
ment or allowance arrangement for travel and 
non-entertainment related meals expenses. If 
you are self -employed and report your income 
and expenses on Schedule C (Form 1040 or 
1040-SR), see Pub. 463.
  15-B 
  463 
  526 
  529 
  544 
  946 
  970 
  Schedule A (Form 1040 or 1040-SR)
  Schedule C (Form 1040 or 1040-SR)
  Schedule F (Form 1040 or 1040-SR)
  1099-MISC 
  1120 
  4562 
  8949 
  8995 
  8995-A 
  W-2 
To be deductible for tax purposes, expen-
ses incurred for travel and non -entertainment 
related meals must be ordinary and necessary 
expenses incurred while carrying on your trade 
or business. Generally, you also must show that 
non-entertainment related meals expenses are 
directly related to, or associated with, the con-
duct of your trade or business. For more infor-
mation on travel and non -entertainment related 
meals, including deductibility, see Pub. 463.
Reimbursements
A “reimbursement or allowance arrangement” 
provides for payment of advances, reimburse-
ments, and allowances for travel and non-enter-
tainment related meals expenses incurred by 
your employees during the ordinary course of 
business. If the expenses are substantiated, 
you can deduct the allowable amount on your 
tax return. Because of differences between ac-
counting methods and tax law, the amount you 
can deduct for tax purposes may not be the 
same as the amount you deduct on your busi-
ness books and records. For example, you can 
deduct 100% of the cost of meals on your busi-
ness books and records. However, only 50% of 
these costs are allowed by law as a tax deduc-
tion.
How you deduct a business expense under 
a reimbursement or allowance arrangement de-
pends on whether you have:
• An accountable plan, or
• A nonaccountable plan.
If you reimburse these expenses under an ac-
countable plan, deduct them as travel and 
non-entertainment related meals expenses.
If you reimburse these expenses under a 
nonaccountable plan, report the reimburse-
ments as wages on Form W -2, and deduct 
them as wages on the appropriate line of your 
tax return. If you make a single payment to your 
employees and it includes both wages and an 
expense reimbursement, you must specify the 
amount of the reimbursement and report it ac-
cordingly. See Table 11-1.
Accountable Plans
An accountable plan requires your employees 
to meet all of the following requirements. Each 
employee must:
1. Have paid or incurred deductible expen-
ses while performing services as your em-
ployee,
2. Adequately account to you for these ex-
penses within a reasonable period of time, 
and
3. Return any excess reimbursement or al-
lowance within a reasonable period of 
time.
An arrangement under which you advance 
money to employees is treated as meeting (3) 
above only if the following requirements are 
also met.
• The advance is reasonably calculated not 
to exceed the amount of anticipated ex-
penses.
• You make the advance within a reasonable 
period of time of your employee paying or 
incurring the expense.
If any expenses reimbursed under this ar-
rangement aren’t substantiated, or an excess 
reimbursement isn’t returned within a reasona-
ble period of time by an employee, you cannot 
treat these expenses as reimbursed under an 
accountable plan. Instead, treat the reimbursed 
expenses as paid under a nonaccountable 
plan, discussed later.
Adequate accounting.  Your employees must 
adequately account to you for their travel and 
non-entertainment related meals expenses. 
They must give you documentary evidence of 
their travel, mileage, and other employee busi-
ness expenses. This evidence should include 
items such as receipts, along with either a 
statement of expenses, an account book, a 
day-planner, or similar record in which the em-
ployee entered each expense at or near the 
time the expense was incurred.
Excess reimbursement or allowance.  An 
excess reimbursement or allowance is any 
amount you pay to an employee that is more 
than the business -related expenses for which 
the employee adequately accounted. The em-
ployee must return any excess reimbursement 
or other expense allowance to you within a rea-
sonable period of time.
Reasonable period of time.  A reasonable 
period of time depends on the facts and circum-
stances. Generally, actions that take place 
within the times specified in the following list will 
be treated as taking place within a reasonable 
period of time.
1. You give an advance within 30 days of the 
time the employee pays or incurs the ex-
pense.
2. Your employees adequately account for 
their expenses within 60 days after the ex-
penses were paid or incurred.
3. Your employees return any excess reim-
bursement within 120 days after the ex-
penses were paid or incurred.
4. You give a periodic statement (at least 
quarterly) to your employees that asks 
them to either return or adequately ac-
count for outstanding advances and they 
comply within 120 days of the date of the 
statement.
How to deduct.  You can claim a deduction for 
travel and non -entertainment related meals ex-
penses if you reimburse your employees for 
these expenses under an accountable plan. 
Generally, the amount you can deduct for 
non-entertainment related meals is subject to a 
50% limit, discussed later. If you are a sole pro-
prietor, or are filing as a single member limited 
liability company, deduct the travel reimburse-
ment on line 24a and the deductible part of the 
non-entertainment related meals reimburse-
ment on line 24b of Schedule C (Form 1040 or 
1040-SR).
If you are filing an income tax return for a 
corporation, include the reimbursement on the 
Other deductions line of Form 1120. If you are 
Page 43 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 11 Other Expenses  Page 43

filing any other business income tax return, 
such as a partnership or S corporation return, 
deduct the reimbursement on the appropriate 
line of the return as provided in the instructions 
for that return.
Per Diem and Car Allowances
You can reimburse your employees under an 
accountable plan based on travel days, miles, 
or some other fixed allowance. In these cases, 
your employee is considered to have accounted 
to you for the amount of the expense that 
doesn’t exceed the rates established by the 
federal government. Your employee must ac-
tually substantiate to you the other elements of 
the expense, such as time, place, and business 
purpose.
Federal rate.  The federal rate can be figured 
using any one of the following methods.
1. For car expenses:
a. The standard mileage rate.
b. A fixed and variable rate (FAVR).
2. For per diem amounts:
a. The regular federal per diem rate.
b. The standard meal allowance.
c. The high-low rate.
Car allowance.  Your employee is considered 
to have accounted to you for car expenses that 
do not exceed the standard mileage rate. Be-
ginning in 2019, the standard business mileage 
rate is 58 cents per mile.
You can choose to reimburse your employ-
ees using an FAVR allowance. This is an allow-
ance that includes a combination of payments 
covering fixed and variable costs, such as a 
cents-per-mile rate to cover your employees' 
variable operating costs (such as gas, oil, etc.) 
plus a flat amount to cover your employees' 
fixed costs (such as depreciation, insurance, 
etc.). For information on using an FAVR allow-
ance, see Revenue Procedure 2010 -51, availa-
ble at IRS.gov/irb/2010-51_IRB#RP-2010-51, 
and Notice 2019 -02, available at IRS.gov/irb/
2019-02_IRB#NOT-2019-02.
Per diem allowance.  If your employee ac-
tually substantiates to you the other elements 
(discussed earlier) of the expenses reimbursed 
using the per diem allowance, how you report 
and deduct the allowance depends on whether 
the allowance is for lodging and meal expenses 
or for meal expenses only and whether the al-
lowance is more than the federal rate.
Regular federal per diem rate.  The regu-
lar federal per diem rate is the highest amount 
the federal government will pay to its employ-
ees while away from home on travel. It has the 
following two components.
1. Lodging expense.
2. Meal and incidental expense (M&IE).
The rates are different for different locations. 
See GSA.gov/perdiem for the per diem rates in 
the continental United States.
Standard meal allowance.  The federal 
rate for M&IE is the standard meal allowance. 
You can pay only an M&IE allowance to em-
ployees who travel away from home if:
• You pay the employee for actual expenses 
for lodging based on receipts submitted to 
you,
• You provide for the lodging,
• You pay for the actual expense of the lodg-
ing directly to the provider,
• You don’t have a reasonable belief that 
lodging expenses were incurred by the 
employee, or
• The allowance is figured on a basis similar 
to that used in figuring the employee's wa-
ges (that is, number of hours worked or 
miles traveled).
Per diem rates online.  You can access 
per diem rates at GSA.gov/perdiem.
High-low method.  This is a simplified 
method of figuring the federal per diem rate for 
travel within the continental United States. It 
eliminates the need to keep a current list of the 
per diem rate for each city.
Under the high -low method, the per diem 
amount for travel during January through Sep-
tember of 2019 is $287 ($71 for M&IE) for cer-
tain high-cost locations. All other areas have a 
per diem amount of $195 ($60 for M&IE). The 
high-cost localities eligible for the higher per 
diem amount under the high-low method are lis-
ted in Notice 2018 -77, available at IRS.gov/irb/
2018-42_IRB#NOT-2018-77.
Effective October 1, 2019, the per diem rate 
for high -cost locations increased to $297 ($71 
for M&IE). The rate for all other locations in-
creased to $200 ($60 for M&IE). For October, 
November, and December 2019, you can either 
continue to use the rates described in the pre-
ceding paragraph or change to the new rates. 
However, you must use the same rate for all 
employees reimbursed under the high -low 
method.
For more information about the high -low 
method, see Notice 2018 -77, available at 
IRS.gov/irb/2018-42_IRB#NOT-2018-77. See 
GSA.gov/perdiem for the current per diem rates 
for all locations.
Reporting per diem and car allowances. 
The following discussion explains how to report 
per diem and car allowances. The manner in 
which you report them depends on how the al-
lowance compares to the federal rate. See Ta-
ble 11-1.
Allowance less than or equal to the fed-
eral rate.  If your allowance for the employee is 
less than or equal to the appropriate federal 
rate, that allowance isn’t included as part of the 
employee's pay in box 1 of the employee's 
Form W -2. Deduct the allowance as travel ex-
penses (including meals that may be subject to 
the 50% limit, discussed later). See How to de-
duct under Accountable Plans, earlier.
Allowance more than the federal rate.  If 
your employee's allowance is more than the ap-
propriate federal rate, you must report the al-
lowance as two separate items.
Include the allowance amount up to the fed-
eral rate in box 12 (code L) of the employee's 
Form W-2. Deduct it as travel expenses (as ex-
plained above). This part of the allowance is 
treated as reimbursed under an accountable 
plan.
Include the amount that is more than the 
federal rate in box 1 (and in boxes 3 and 5 if 
they apply) of the employee's Form W -2. De-
duct it as wages subject to income tax withhold-
ing, social security, Medicare, and federal un-
employment taxes. This part of the allowance is 
treated as reimbursed under a nonaccountable 
plan as explained later under Nonaccountable 
Plans.
Meals and Entertainment
Under an accountable plan, you can generally 
deduct only 50% of any otherwise deductible 
business-related meal and entertainment ex-
penses you reimburse your employees. The de-
duction limit applies even if you reimburse them 
for 100% of the expenses.
Application of the 50% limit.  The 50% de-
duction limit applies to reimbursements you 
make to your employees for expenses they in-
cur for meals while traveling away from home 
Table 11-1. Reporting Reimbursements
IF the type of reimbursement (or other expense 
allowance) arrangement is under THEN the employer reports on Form W-2
An accountable plan with:
Actual expense reimbursement:
Adequate accounting made and excess returned
No amount.
Actual expense reimbursement:
Adequate accounting and return of excess both required 
but excess not returned
The excess amount as wages in box 1.
Per diem or mileage allowance up to the federal rate:
Adequate accounting made and excess returned
No amount.
Per diem or mileage allowance up to the federal rate:
Adequate accounting and return of excess both required 
but excess not returned
The excess amount as wages in box 1. The amount up to 
the federal rate is reported only in box 12—it is not 
reported in box 1.
Per diem or mileage allowance exceeds the federal rate:
Adequate accounting made up to the federal rate only and 
excess not returned
The excess amount as wages in box 1. The amount up to 
the federal rate is reported only in box 12—it is not 
reported in box 1.
A nonaccountable plan with:
Either adequate accounting or return of excess, or both, not 
required by plan
The entire amount as wages in box 1.
No reimbursement plan The entire amount as wages in box 1.
Page 44 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 44  Chapter 11 Other Expenses

on business and for entertaining business cus-
tomers at your place of business, a restaurant, 
or another location. It applies to expenses in-
curred at a business convention or reception, 
business meeting, or business luncheon at a 
club. The deduction limit may also apply to 
meals you furnish on your premises to your em-
ployees.
Related expenses.  Taxes and tips relat-
ing to a meal or entertainment activity you reim-
burse to your employee under an accountable 
plan are included in the amount subject to the 
50% limit. Reimbursements you make for ex-
penses, such as cover charges for admission to 
a nightclub, rent paid for a room to hold a dinner 
or cocktail party, or the amount you pay for 
parking at a sports arena, are all subject to the 
50% limit. However, the cost of transportation to 
and from an otherwise allowable business meal 
or a business-related entertainment activity isn’t 
subject to the 50% limit.
Amount subject to 50% limit.  If you provide 
your employees with a per diem allowance only 
for meal and incidental expenses, the amount 
treated as an expense for food and beverages 
is the lesser of the following.
• The per diem allowance.
• The federal rate for M&IE.
If you provide your employees with a per 
diem allowance that covers lodging, meals, and 
incidental expenses, you must treat an amount 
equal to the federal M&IE rate for the area of 
travel as an expense for food and beverages. If 
the per diem allowance you provide is less than 
the federal per diem rate for the area of travel, 
you can treat 40% of the per diem allowance as 
the amount for food and beverages.
Meal expenses when subject to “hours of 
service” limits.  You can deduct 80% of the 
cost of reimbursed meals your employees con-
sume while away from their tax home on busi-
ness during, or incident to, any period subject to 
the Department of Transportation's “hours of 
service” limits.
See Pub. 463 for a detailed discussion of in-
dividuals subject to the Department of Trans-
portation's “hours of service” limits.
De minimis (minimal) fringe benefit.  P.L. 
115-97, Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, changed the 
rules for the deduction of food or beverage ex-
penses that are excludable from employee in-
come as a de minimis fringe benefit. For 
amounts incurred or paid after 2017, the 50% 
limit on deductions for food or beverage expen-
ses also applies to food or beverage expenses 
excludable from employee income as a de mini-
mis fringe benefit. While your business deduc-
tion may be limited, the rules that allow you to 
exclude certain de minimis meals and meals on 
your business premises from your employee's 
wages still apply. See Meals in section 2 of 
Pub. 15-B.
Company cafeteria or executive dining 
room.  The cost of food and beverages you 
provide primarily to your employees on your 
business premises is deductible. This includes 
the cost of maintaining the facilities for provid-
ing the food and beverages. These expenses 
are subject to the 50% limit unless they are 
compensation to your employees (explained 
later).
Employee activities.  The expense of provid-
ing recreational, social, or similar activities (in-
cluding the use of a facility) for your employees 
is deductible and isn’t subject to the 50% limit. 
The benefit must be primarily for your employ-
ees who aren’t highly compensated.
For this purpose, a highly compensated em-
ployee is an employee who meets either of the 
following requirements.
1. Owned a 5% or more interest in the busi-
ness during the year or the preceding 
year. An employee is treated as owning 
any interest owned by his or her brother, 
sister, spouse, ancestors, and lineal de-
scendants.
2. Received more than $120,000 in pay for 
the preceding year. You can choose to in-
clude only employees who were also in 
the top 20% of employees when ranked by 
pay for the preceding year.
For example, the expenses for food, bever-
ages, and entertainment for a company -wide 
picnic aren’t subject to the 50% limit.
Meals or entertainment treated as compen-
sation.  The 50% limit doesn’t apply to either of 
the following.
1. Expenses for meals or entertainment that 
you treat as:
a. Compensation to an employee who 
was the recipient of the meals or en-
tertainment, and
b. Wages subject to withholding of fed-
eral income tax.
2. Expenses for meals or entertainment if:
a. A recipient of the meals or entertain-
ment who isn’t your employee has to 
include the expenses in gross income 
as compensation for services or as a 
prize or award; and
b. You include that amount on a Form 
1099-MISC issued to the recipient, if a 
Form 1099-MISC is required.
Sales of meals or entertainment.  You can 
deduct the cost of meals or entertainment (in-
cluding the use of facilities) you sell to the pub-
lic. For example, if you run a nightclub, your ex-
pense for the entertainment you furnish to your 
customers, such as a floor show, is a business 
expense that is fully deductible. The 50% limit 
doesn’t apply to this expense.
Providing meals or entertainment to gen-
eral public to promote goodwill.  You can 
deduct the cost of providing meals, entertain-
ment, or recreational facilities to the general 
public as a means of advertising or promoting 
goodwill in the community. The 50% limit 
doesn’t apply to this expense.
Director, stockholder, or employee meet-
ings.  You can deduct entertainment expenses 
directly related to business meetings of your 
employees, partners, stockholders, agents, or 
directors. You can provide some minor social 
activities, but the main purpose of the meeting 
must be your company's business. These ex-
penses are subject to the 50% limit.
Trade association meetings.  You can de-
duct expenses directly related to and necessary 
for attending business meetings or conventions 
of certain tax -exempt organizations. These or-
ganizations include business leagues, cham-
bers of commerce, real estate boards, and 
trade and professional associations.
Nonaccountable Plans
A nonaccountable plan is an arrangement that 
doesn’t meet the requirements for an accounta-
ble plan. All amounts paid, or treated as paid, 
under a nonaccountable plan are reported as 
wages on Form W-2. The payments are subject 
to income tax withholding, social security, Medi-
care, and federal unemployment taxes. You can 
deduct the reimbursement as compensation or 
wages only to the extent it meets the deductibil-
ity tests for employees' pay in chapter 2. Deduct 
the allowable amount as compensation or wa-
ges on the appropriate line of your income tax 
return, as provided in its instructions.
Miscellaneous Expenses
In addition to travel, meal, and entertainment 
expenses, there are other expenses you can 
deduct.
Advertising expenses. You generally can de-
duct reasonable advertising expenses that are 
directly related to your business activities. Gen-
erally, you can’t deduct amounts paid to influ-
ence legislation (for example, lobbying). For 
more information, see Lobbying expenses , 
later.
You can usually deduct as a business ex-
pense the cost of institutional or goodwill adver-
tising to keep your name before the public if it 
relates to business you reasonably expect to 
gain in the future. For example, the cost of ad-
vertising that encourages people to contribute 
to the Red Cross, to buy U.S. Savings Bonds, 
or to participate in similar causes is usually de-
ductible.
Anticipated liabilities. Anticipated liabilities or 
reserves for anticipated liabilities aren’t deducti-
ble. For example, assume you sold 1 -year TV 
service contracts this year totaling $50,000. 
From experience, you know you will have ex-
penses of about $15,000 in the coming year for 
these contracts. You can’t deduct any of the 
$15,000 this year by charging expenses to a re-
serve or liability account. You can deduct your 
expenses only when you actually pay or accrue 
them, depending on your accounting method.
Bribes and kickbacks.  Engaging in the pay-
ment of bribes or kickbacks is a serious criminal 
matter. Such activity could result in criminal 
prosecution. Any payments that appear to have 
been made, either directly or indirectly, to an of-
ficial or employee of any government or an 
agency or instrumentality of any government 
aren’t deductible for tax purposes and are in vi-
olation of the law.
Page 45 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 11 Other Expenses  Page 45

Payments paid directly or indirectly to a per-
son in violation of any federal or state law (but 
only if that state law is generally enforced, de-
fined below) that provides for a criminal penalty 
or for the loss of a license or privilege to engage 
in a trade or business aren’t allowed as a de-
duction for tax purposes.
Meaning of “generally enforced.” A state 
law is considered generally enforced unless it is 
never enforced or enforced only for infamous 
persons or persons whose violations are extra-
ordinarily flagrant. For example, a state law is 
generally enforced unless proper reporting of a 
violation of the law results in enforcement only 
under unusual circumstances.
Kickbacks.  A kickback is a payment for re-
ferring a client, patient, or customer. The com-
mon kickback situation occurs when money or 
property is given to someone as payment for in-
fluencing a third party to purchase from, use the 
services of, or otherwise deal with the person 
who pays the kickback. In many cases, the per-
son whose business is being sought or enjoyed 
by the person who pays the kickback isn’t 
aware of the payment.
For example, the Yard Corporation is in the 
business of repairing ships. It returns 10% of 
the repair bills as kickbacks to the captains and 
chief officers of the vessels it repairs. Although 
this practice is considered an ordinary and nec-
essary expense of getting business, it is clearly 
a violation of a state law that is generally en-
forced. These expenditures aren’t deductible 
for tax purposes, whether or not the owners of 
the shipyard are subsequently prosecuted.
Form 1099 -MISC.  It doesn’t matter 
whether any kickbacks paid during the tax year 
are deductible on your income tax return in re-
gards to information reporting. See Form 
1099-MISC for more information.
Car and truck expenses. The costs of operat-
ing a car, truck, or other vehicle in your busi-
ness may be deductible. For more information 
on how to figure your deduction, see Pub. 463.
Charitable contributions.  Cash payments to 
an organization, charitable or otherwise, may 
be deductible as business expenses if the pay-
ments aren’t charitable contributions or gifts 
and are directly related to your business. If the 
payments are charitable contributions or gifts, 
you can’t deduct them as business expenses. 
However, corporations (other than S corpora-
tions) can deduct charitable contributions on 
their income tax returns, subject to limitations. 
See the Instructions for Form 1120 for more in-
formation. Sole proprietors, partners in a part-
nership, or shareholders in an S corporation 
may be able to deduct charitable contributions 
made by their business on Schedule A (Form 
1040 or 1040-SR).
Example.  You paid $15 to a local church 
for a half-page ad in a program for a concert it is 
sponsoring. The purpose of the ad was to en-
courage readers to buy your products. Your 
payment isn’t a charitable contribution. You can 
deduct it as an advertising expense.
Example.  You made a $100,000 donation 
to a committee organized by the local Chamber 
of Commerce to bring a convention to your city, 
intended to increase business activity, including 
yours. Your payment isn’t a charitable contribu-
tion. You can deduct it as a business expense.
See Pub. 526 for a discussion of donated in-
ventory, including capital gain property.
Club dues and membership fees.  Generally, 
you can’t deduct amounts paid or incurred for 
membership in any club organized for business, 
pleasure, recreation, or any other social pur-
pose. This includes country clubs, golf and ath-
letic clubs, hotel clubs, sporting clubs, airline 
clubs, and clubs operated to provide meals un-
der circumstances generally considered to be 
conducive to business discussions.
Exception.  The following organizations 
aren’t treated as clubs organized for business, 
pleasure, recreation, or other social purpose 
unless one of the main purposes is to conduct 
entertainment activities for members or their 
guests or to provide members or their guests 
with access to entertainment facilities.
• Boards of trade.
• Business leagues.
• Chambers of commerce.
• Civic or public service organizations.
• Professional organizations such as bar as-
sociations and medical associations.
• Real estate boards.
• Trade associations.
Credit card convenience fees.  Credit card 
companies charge a fee to businesses who ac-
cept their cards. This fee when paid or incurred 
by the business can be deducted as a business 
expense.
Damages recovered.  Special rules apply to 
compensation you receive for damages sus-
tained as a result of patent infringement, breach 
of contract or fiduciary duty, or antitrust viola-
tions. You must include this compensation in 
your income. However, you may be able to take 
a special deduction. The deduction applies only 
to amounts recovered for actual economic in-
jury, not any additional amount. The deduction 
is the smaller of the following.
• The amount you received or accrued for 
damages in the tax year reduced by the 
amount you paid or incurred in the year to 
recover that amount.
• Your losses from the injury you haven’t de-
ducted.
Demolition expenses or losses.  Amounts 
paid or incurred to demolish a structure aren’t 
deductible. These amounts are added to the 
basis of the land where the demolished struc-
ture was located. Any loss for the remaining un-
depreciated basis of a demolished structure 
wouldn’t be recognized until the property is dis-
posed of.
Education expenses.  Ordinary and neces-
sary expenses paid for the cost of the education 
and training of your employees are deductible. 
See Education Expenses in chapter 2.
You can also deduct the cost of your own 
education (including certain related travel) rela-
ted to your trade or business. You must be able 
to show the education maintains or improves 
skills required in your trade or business, or that 
it is required by law or regulations, for keeping 
your license to practice, status, or job. For ex-
ample, an attorney can deduct the cost of at-
tending Continuing Legal Education (CLE) 
classes that are required by the state bar asso-
ciation to maintain his or her license to practice 
law.
Education expenses you incur to meet the 
minimum requirements of your present trade or 
business, or those that qualify you for a new 
trade or business, aren’t deductible. This is true 
even if the education maintains or improves 
skills presently required in your business. For 
more information on education expenses, see 
Pub. 970.
Franchise, trademark, trade name.  If you 
buy a franchise, trademark, or trade name, you 
can deduct the amount you pay or incur as a 
business expense only if your payments are 
part of a series of payments that are:
1. Contingent on productivity, use, or dispo-
sition of the item;
2. Payable at least annually for the entire 
term of the transfer agreement; and
3. Substantially equal in amount (or payable 
under a fixed formula).
When determining the term of the transfer 
agreement, include all renewal options and any 
other period for which you and the transferor 
reasonably expect the agreement to be re-
newed.
A franchise includes an agreement that 
gives one of the parties to the agreement the 
right to distribute, sell, or provide goods, serv-
ices, or facilities within a specified area.
Impairment-related expenses. If you are dis-
abled, you can deduct expenses necessary for 
you to be able to work (impairment -related ex-
penses) as a business expense, rather than as 
a medical expense.
You are disabled if you have either of the fol-
lowing.
• A physical or mental disability (for exam-
ple, blindness or deafness) that function-
ally limits your being employed.
• A physical or mental impairment that sub-
stantially limits one or more of your major 
life activities.
The expense qualifies as a business ex-
pense if all the following apply.
• Your work clearly requires the expense for 
you to satisfactorily perform that work.
• The goods or services purchased are 
clearly not needed or used, other than inci-
dentally, in your personal activities.
• Their treatment isn’t specifically provided 
for under other tax law provisions.
Example.  You are blind. You must use a 
reader to do your work, both at and away from 
your place of work. The reader's services are 
only for your work. You can deduct your expen-
ses for the reader as a business expense.
Internet-related expenses.  Generally, you 
can deduct Internet -related expenses including 
domain registration fees and webmaster con-
sulting costs. If you are starting a business, you 
may have to amortize these expenses as 
Page 46 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 46  Chapter 11 Other Expenses

start-up costs. For more information about am-
ortizing start -up and organizational costs, see 
chapter 8.
Interview expense allowances.  Reimburse-
ments you make to job candidates for transpor-
tation or other expenses related to interviews 
for possible employment aren’t wages. You can 
deduct the reimbursements as a business ex-
pense. However, expenses for food, bever-
ages, and entertainment are subject to the 50% 
limit discussed earlier under Meals and Enter-
tainment.
Legal and professional fees.  Fees charged 
by accountants and attorneys that are ordinary 
and necessary expenses directly related to op-
erating your business are deductible as busi-
ness expenses. However, usually legal fees 
you pay to acquire business assets aren’t de-
ductible. These costs are added to the basis of 
the property.
Fees that include payments for work of a 
personal nature (such as drafting a will, or dam-
ages arising from a personal injury) aren’t al-
lowed as a business deduction on Schedule C 
(Form 1040 or 1040 -SR). If the invoice includes 
both business and personal charges, figure the 
business portion as follows: multiply the total 
amount of the bill by a fraction, the numerator of 
which is the amount attributable to business 
matters, the denominator of which is the total 
amount paid. The result is the portion of the in-
voice attributable to business expenses. The 
portion attributable to personal matters is the 
difference between the total amount and the 
business portion (figured above).
Legal fees relating to doing or keeping your 
job, such as those you paid to defend yourself 
against criminal charges arising out of your 
trade or business, may be deductible on Sched-
ule A (Form 1040 or 1040 -SR), if you itemize 
deductions. For more information, see Pub. 
529.
Certain payments made in sexual har-
assment or sexual abuse cases.  For 
amounts paid or incurred after December 22, 
2017, new section 162(q) provides that no de-
duction is allowed under section 162 for any 
settlement or payment related to sexual harass-
ment or sexual abuse if it is subject to a nondi-
sclosure agreement. In addition, attorney’s fees 
related to such a settlement or payment are not 
allowed as a deduction.
Tax preparation fees.  The cost of hiring a 
tax professional, such as a Certified Public Ac-
countant (CPA), to prepare that part of your tax 
return relating to your business as a sole pro-
prietor is deductible on Schedule C (Form 1040 
or 1040-SR). Deduct expenses of preparing tax 
schedules relating to rentals or royalties 
(Schedule E), or farm income and expenses 
(Schedule F) on the appropriate schedule. Ex-
penses for completing the remainder of the re-
turn are miscellaneous deductions and are no 
longer deductible.
You can also claim a business deduction for 
amounts paid or incurred in resolving asserted 
tax deficiencies for your business operated as a 
sole proprietor.
Licenses and regulatory fees.  Licenses and 
regulatory fees for your trade or business paid 
annually to state or local governments generally 
are deductible. Some licenses and fees may 
have to be amortized. See chapter 8  for more 
information.
Lobbying expenses.  Generally, lobbying ex-
penses aren’t deductible. Lobbying expenses 
include amounts paid or incurred for any of the 
following activities.
• Influencing legislation.
• Participating in or intervening in any politi-
cal campaign for, or against, any candidate 
for public office.
• Attempting to influence the general public, 
or segments of the public, about elections, 
legislative matters, or referendums.
• Communicating directly with covered ex-
ecutive branch officials (defined later) in 
any attempt to influence the official actions 
or positions of those officials.
• Researching, preparing, planning, or coor-
dinating any of the preceding activities.
Your expenses for influencing legislation 
and communicating directly with a covered ex-
ecutive branch official include a portion of your 
labor costs and general and administrative 
costs of your business. For information on mak-
ing this allocation, see section 1. 162-28 of the 
regulations.
You can’t claim a charitable or business ex-
pense deduction for amounts paid to an organi-
zation if both of the following apply.
• The organization conducts lobbying activi-
ties on matters of direct financial interest to 
your business.
• A principal purpose of your contribution is 
to avoid the rules discussed earlier that 
prohibit a business deduction for lobbying 
expenses.
If a tax -exempt organization, other than a 
section 501(c)(3) organization, provides you 
with a notice on the part of dues that is allocable 
to nondeductible lobbying and political expen-
ses, you can’t deduct that part of the dues.
Covered executive branch official.  For 
purposes of this discussion, a covered execu-
tive branch official is any of the following.
1. The President.
2. The Vice President.
3. Any officer or employee of the White 
House Office of the Executive Office of the 
President and the two most senior level of-
ficers of each of the other agencies in the 
Executive Office.
4. Any individual who:
a. Is serving in a position in Level I of the 
Executive Schedule under section 
5312 of title 5, United States Code;
b. Has been designated by the Presi-
dent as having Cabinet level status; or
c. Is an immediate deputy of an individ-
ual listed in item (a) or (b).
Exceptions to denial of deduction.  The 
general denial of the deduction doesn’t apply to 
the following.
• Any in-house expenses for influencing leg-
islation and communicating directly with a 
covered executive branch official if those 
expenses for the tax year don’t exceed 
$2,000 (excluding overhead expenses).
• Expenses incurred by taxpayers engaged 
in the trade or business of lobbying (pro-
fessional lobbyists) on behalf of another 
person (but does apply to payments by the 
other person to the lobbyist for lobbying 
activities).
Moving machinery.  Generally, the cost of 
moving machinery from one city to another is a 
deductible expense. So is the cost of moving 
machinery from one plant to another, or from 
one part of your plant to another. You can de-
duct the cost of installing the machinery in the 
new location. However, you must capitalize the 
costs of installing or moving newly purchased 
machinery.
Outplacement services.  The costs of out-
placement services you provide to your employ-
ees to help them find new employment, such as 
career counseling, résumé assistance, skills as-
sessment, etc., are deductible.
The costs of outplacement services may 
cover more than one deduction category. For 
example, deduct as a utilities expense the cost 
of telephone calls made under this service and 
deduct as a rental expense the cost of renting 
machinery and equipment for this service.
For information on whether the value of out-
placement services is includible in your employ-
ees' income, see Pub. 15-B.
Penalties and fines.  Penalties paid for late 
performance or nonperformance of a contract 
are generally deductible. For instance, you own 
and operate a construction company. Under a 
contract, you are to finish construction of a 
building by a certain date. Due to construction 
delays, the building isn’t completed and ready 
for occupancy on the date stipulated in the con-
tract. You are now required to pay an additional 
amount for each day that completion is delayed 
beyond the completion date stipulated in the 
contract. These additional costs are deductible 
business expenses.
On the other hand, generally, no deduction 
is allowed for penalties and fines paid to a gov-
ernment or specified nongovernmental entity for 
the violation of any law except the following.
• Amounts that constitute restitution.
• Amounts paid to come into compliance 
with the law.
• Amounts paid or incurred as the result of 
certain court orders in which no govern-
ment or specified nongovernmental 
agency is a party.
• Amounts paid or incurred for taxes due.
On or after December 22, 2017, no deduc-
tion is allowed for the restitution amount or 
amount paid to come into compliance with the 
law unless the amounts are specifically identi-
fied in the settlement agreement or court order. 
Also, any amount paid or incurred as reim-
bursement to a government for the costs of any 
investigation or litigation are not eligible for the 
exceptions and are nondeductible.
See section 162(f), as amended by P.L. 
115-97, section 13306.
Page 47 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 11 Other Expenses  Page 47

Examples of nondeductible penalties and 
fines include the following.
• Amounts paid because of a conviction for 
a crime or after a plea of guilty or no con-
test in a criminal proceeding.
• Amounts paid as a penalty imposed by 
federal, state, or local law in a civil action, 
including certain additions to tax and addi-
tional amounts and assessable penalties 
imposed by the Internal Revenue Code.
• Amounts paid in settlement of actual or 
possible liability for a fine or penalty, 
whether civil or criminal.
• Amounts forfeited as collateral posted for a 
proceeding that could result in a fine or 
penalty.
• Fines paid for violating city housing codes.
• Fines paid by truckers for violating state 
maximum highway weight laws.
• Fines paid for violating air quality laws.
• Civil penalties paid for violating federal 
laws regarding mining safety standards 
and discharges into navigable waters.
A fine or penalty doesn’t include any of the 
following.
• Legal fees and related expenses to defend 
yourself in a prosecution or civil action for a 
violation of the law imposing the fine or civil 
penalty.
• Court costs or stenographic and printing 
charges.
• Compensatory damages paid to a govern-
ment.
Political contributions.  Contributions or gifts 
paid to political parties or candidates aren’t de-
ductible. In addition, expenses paid or incurred 
to take part in any political campaign of a candi-
date for public office aren’t deductible.
Indirect political contributions.  You 
can’t deduct indirect political contributions and 
costs of taking part in political activities as busi-
ness expenses. Examples of nondeductible ex-
penses include the following.
• Advertising in a convention program of a 
political party, or in any other publication if 
any of the proceeds from the publication 
are for, or intended for, the use of a politi-
cal party or candidate.
• Admission to a dinner or program (includ-
ing, but not limited to, galas, dances, film 
presentations, parties, and sporting 
events) if any of the proceeds from the 
function are for, or intended for, the use of 
a political party or candidate.
• Admission to an inaugural ball, gala, pa-
rade, concert, or similar event if identified 
with a political party or candidate.
Repairs. The cost of repairing or improving 
property used in your trade or business is either 
a deductible or capital expense. Routine main-
tenance that keeps your property in a normal ef-
ficient operating condition, but that doesn’t ma-
terially increase the value or substantially 
prolong the useful life of the property, is deduc-
tible in the year that it is incurred. Otherwise, 
the cost must be capitalized and depreciated. 
See Form 4562 and its instructions for how to 
figure and claim the depreciation deduction.
The cost of repairs includes the costs of la-
bor, supplies, and certain other items. The 
value of your own labor isn’t deductible. Exam-
ples of repairs include:
• Reconditioning floors (but not replace-
ment),
• Repainting the interior and exterior walls of 
a building,
• Cleaning and repairing roofs and gutters, 
and
• Fixing plumbing leaks (but not replacement 
of fixtures).
Repayments. If you had to repay an amount 
you included in your income in an earlier year, 
you may be able to deduct the amount repaid 
for the year in which you repaid it. Or, if the 
amount you repaid is more than $3,000, you 
may be able to take a credit against your tax for 
the year in which you repaid it. In most cases, 
you can claim a deduction or credit only if the 
repayment qualifies as an expense or loss in-
curred in your trade or business or in a for -profit 
transaction.
Type of deduction.  The type of deduction 
you are allowed in the year of repayment de-
pends on the type of income you included in the 
earlier year. For instance, if you repay an 
amount you previously reported as a capital 
gain, deduct the repayment as a capital loss as 
explained in the Instructions for Schedule D 
(Form 1040 or 1040 -SR). If you reported it as 
self-employment income, deduct it as a busi-
ness expense on Schedule C (Form 1040 or 
1040-SR) or Schedule F (Form 1040 or 
1040-SR).
If you reported the amount as wages, unem-
ployment compensation, or other nonbusiness 
ordinary income, you may be able to deduct it 
as an other itemized deduction if the amount re-
paid is over $3,000.
Beginning in 2018, due to the suspen-
sion of miscellaneous itemized deduc-
tions subject to the 2% floor under sec-
tion 67(a), your are not able to deduct the 
repayment as an itemized deduction if it is 
$3,000 or less.
Repayment—$3,000 or less.  If the 
amount you repaid was $3,000 or less, deduct it 
from your income in the year you repaid it.
Repayment—Over $3,000.  If the amount 
you repaid was more than $3,000, you can de-
duct the repayment as an other itemized deduc-
tion on Schedule A (Form 1040 or 1040 -SR), 
line 16, if you included the income under a 
“claim of right.” This means that at the time you 
included the income, it appeared that you had 
an unrestricted right to it. However, you can 
choose to take a credit for the year of repay-
ment. Figure your tax under both methods and 
use the method that results in less tax.
Method 1.  Figure your tax for 2019 claim-
ing a deduction for the repaid amount.
Method 2.  Figure your tax for 2019 claim-
ing a credit for the repaid amount. Follow these 
steps.
1. Figure your tax for 2019 without deducting 
the repaid amount.
2. Refigure your tax from the earlier year 
without including in income the amount 
you repaid in 2019.
CAUTION
!
3. Subtract the tax in (2) from the tax shown 
on your return for the earlier year. This is 
the amount of your credit.
4. Subtract the answer in (3) from the tax for 
2019 figured without the deduction (step 
1).
If Method 1 results in less tax, deduct the 
amount repaid as discussed earlier under Type 
of deduction.
If Method 2 results in less tax, claim the 
credit on Schedule 3 (Form 1040 or 1040 -SR), 
line 13, and write “I.R.C. 1341” next to line 13.
Example.  For 2018, you filed a return and 
reported your income on the cash method. In 
2019, you repaid $5,000 included in your 2018 
gross income under a claim of right. Your filing 
status in 2019 and 2018 is single. Your income 
and tax for both years are as follows:
2018 
With Income
2018 
Without 
Income
Taxable
 Income $15,000 $10,000
Tax $ 1,613 $ 1,013
2019 
Without 
Deduction
2019 
With Deduction
Taxable
 Income $49,950 $44,950
Tax $6,853 $5,753
Your tax under Method 1 is $5,753. Your tax un-
der Method 2 is $6,253, figured as follows:
Tax previously determined for 
2018 ...........................
$ 1,613
Less: Tax as refigured ........... − 1,013
Decrease in 2018 tax $600
Regular tax liability for 2019 ....... $6,853
Less: Decrease in 2018 tax ....... − 600
Refigured tax for 2019 $6,253
Because you pay less tax under Method 1, you 
should take a deduction for the repayment in 
2019.
Repayment does not apply.  This discus-
sion doesn’t apply to the following.
• Deductions for bad debts.
• Deductions from sales to customers, such 
as returns and allowances, and similar 
items.
• Deductions for legal and other expenses of 
contesting the repayment.
Year of deduction (or credit).  If you use 
the cash method of accounting, you can take 
the deduction (or credit, if applicable) for the tax 
year in which you actually make the repayment. 
If you use any other accounting method, you 
can deduct the repayment or claim a credit for it 
only for the tax year in which it is a proper de-
duction under your accounting method. For ex-
ample, if you use the accrual method, you are 
entitled to the deduction or credit in the tax year 
in which the obligation for the repayment ac-
crues.
Page 48 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 48  Chapter 11 Other Expenses

Supplies and materials. Unless you have de-
ducted the cost in any earlier year, you gener-
ally can deduct the cost of materials and sup-
plies actually consumed and used during the 
tax year.
If you keep incidental materials and supplies 
on hand, you can deduct the cost of the inci-
dental materials and supplies you bought during 
the tax year if all the following requirements are 
met.
• You don’t keep a record of when they are 
used.
• You don’t take an inventory of the amount 
on hand at the beginning and end of the 
tax year.
• This method doesn’t distort your income.
You can also deduct the cost of books, pro-
fessional instruments, equipment, etc., if you 
normally use them within a year. However, if the 
usefulness of these items extends substantially 
beyond the year they are placed in service, you 
generally must recover their costs through de-
preciation. For more information regarding de-
preciation, see Pub. 946.
Utilities. Business expenses for heat, lights, 
power, telephone service, and water and sew-
erage are deductible. However, any part due to 
personal use isn’t deductible.
Telephone. You can’t deduct the cost of 
basic local telephone service (including any 
taxes) for the first telephone line you have in 
your home, even if you have an office in your 
home. However, charges for business long -dis-
tance phone calls on that line, as well as the 
cost of a second line into your home used ex-
clusively for business, are deductible business 
expenses.
12.
How To Get Tax 
Help
If you have questions about a tax issue, need 
help preparing your tax return, or want to down-
load free publications, forms, or instructions, go 
to IRS.gov and find resources that can help you 
right away.
People who are deaf, hard of hearing, or have a 
speech disability and who have access to 
TTY/TDD equipment can call toll free 
800-829-4059 to ask tax questions or to order 
forms and publications. Deaf or hard -of-hearing 
individuals can contact the IRS through relay 
services such as the Federal Relay Service, 
available at GSA.gov/FedRelay.
Preparing and filing your tax return.  After 
receiving your wage and earning statements 
(Form W -2, W -2G, 1099 -R, 1099 -MISC) from 
all employers and interest and dividend state-
ments from banks (Forms 1099), you can find 
free options to prepare and file your return on 
IRS.gov or in your local community if you qual-
ify.
The Volunteer Income Tax Assistance 
(VITA) program offers free tax help to people 
with low -to-moderate incomes, persons with 
disabilities, and limited -English-speaking tax-
payers who need help preparing their own tax 
returns. The Tax Counseling for the Elderly 
(TCE) program offers free tax help for all tax-
payers, particularly those who are 60 years of 
age and older. TCE volunteers specialize in an-
swering questions about pensions and retire-
ment-related issues unique to seniors.
You can go to IRS.gov to see your options 
for preparing and filing your return, which in-
clude the following.
• Free File. Go to IRS.gov/FreeFile to see if 
you qualify to use brand-name software to 
prepare and e-file your federal tax return 
for free.
• VITA. Go to IRS.gov/VITA, download the 
free IRS2Go app, or call 800-906-9887 to 
find the nearest VITA location for free tax 
return preparation.
• TCE. Go to IRS.gov/TCE, download the 
free IRS2Go app, or call 888-227-7669 to 
find the nearest TCE location for free tax 
return preparation.
Employers can register to use Business 
Services Online. The SSA offers online serv-
ice for fast, free, and secure online W -2 filing 
options to CPAs, accountants, enrolled agents, 
and individuals who process Forms W -2, Wage 
and Tax Statement, and Forms W -2c, Correc-
ted Wage and Tax Statement. Employers can 
go to SSA.gov/employer for more information.
Tax reform. Tax reform legislation affects indi-
viduals, businesses, and tax -exempt and gov-
ernment entities. Go to IRS.gov/TaxReform for 
information and updates on how this legislation 
affects your taxes.
Tax reform provisions that affect busi-
nesses. Business owners can refer to IRS.gov/
Newsroom/Businesses for updates and resour-
ces on business-related changes resulting from 
tax law changes.
Small Business and Self -Employed (SB/SE) 
tax center.  SB/SE serves taxpayers who file 
Form 1040 or 1040 -SR; Schedules C, E, or F; 
or Form 2106, as well as small businesses with 
assets under $10 million.
A–Z index for business.  Find it fast!  Know 
what you're looking for and want to find it fast? 
Select business topics using our A–Z listing, or 
by business type such as sole proprietor, cor-
poration, etc. We also provide links to major 
business subjects, such as Business Expenses, 
which provide a gateway to all related informa-
tion on those subjects.
• Small Business Forms and Publications. 
You can download forms and publications 
for small businesses and self-employed in-
dividuals.
• Employer ID Numbers (EINs). Find out 
about EINs or apply for one online.
• e-File Form 940, 941, 944, or 945 for Small 
Businesses. Learn your options for e-filing 
Form 940, 941, 944, or 945 for small busi-
nesses.
• Starting, Operating, or Closing a Business. 
Important tax information related to the 
various stages of owning a business.
• Employment Taxes. Federal income tax, 
social security and Medicare taxes, FUTA, 
self-employment tax, and more.
• Independent Contractor (Self-Employed) 
or Employee. It is critical that you, the em-
ployer, correctly determine whether the in-
dividuals providing services are employees 
or independent contractors.
• Self-Employed Individuals Tax Center. The 
basics on self-employment, filing require-
ments, and reporting responsibilities for in-
dependent contractors.
• Information Return Filing Requirements. If 
you made or received a payment as a 
small business or self-employed individual, 
you are most likely required to file an infor-
mation return with the IRS.
• IRS Video Portal. Video, webinars, and au-
dio presentations for small businesses, in-
dividuals, and tax pros.
• Small Business Events. Workshops and 
webinars on a variety of topics for small 
businesses.
• Online Tools & Educational Products. 
Choose from a variety of products, includ-
ing the Tax Calendar desktop tool, to help 
you learn about business taxes on your 
own time, and at your own pace.
• Subscribe to e-News. A free electronic 
mail service keeping you up to date on tax 
topics.
Requirements for filing.  If you made or re-
ceived a payment during the calendar year as a 
small business or self -employed individual, you 
are most likely required to file an information re-
turn with the IRS. For more information, see Am 
I Required To File a Form 1099 or Other 
Information Return? on IRS.gov.
Getting answers to your tax ques-
tions. On IRS.gov, get answers to your 
tax questions anytime, anywhere.
• Go to IRS.gov/Help for a variety of tools 
that will help you get answers to some of 
the most common tax questions.
• Go to IRS.gov/ITA for the Interactive Tax 
Assistant, a tool that will ask you questions 
on a number of tax law topics and provide 
answers. You can print the entire interview 
and the final response for your records.
• Go to IRS.gov/Forms to search for our 
forms, instructions, and publications. You 
will find details on 2019 tax changes and 
hundreds of interactive links to help you 
find answers to your questions.
• You may also be able to access tax law in-
formation in your electronic filing software.
IRS social media.  Go to IRS.gov/SocialMedia 
to see the various social media tools the IRS 
uses to share the latest information on tax 
changes, scam alerts, initiatives, products, and 
services. At the IRS, privacy and security are 
paramount. We use these tools to share public 
information with you. Don’t post your social se-
curity number or other confidential information 
on social media sites. Always protect your iden-
tity when using any social networking site.
Page 49 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 12 How To Get Tax Help  Page 49

The following IRS YouTube channels provide 
short, informative videos on various tax -related 
topics in English, Spanish, and ASL.
• Youtube.com/irsvideos.
• Youtube.com/irsvideosmultilingua.
• Youtube.com/irsvideosASL.
Watching IRS videos.  The IRS Video portal 
(IRSVideos.gov) contains video and audio pre-
sentations for individuals, small businesses, 
and tax professionals.
Getting tax information in other languages.
For taxpayers whose native language isn’t Eng-
lish, we have the following resources available. 
Taxpayers can find information on IRS.gov in 
the following languages.
• Spanish (IRS.gov/Spanish).
• Chinese (IRS.gov/Chinese).
• Korean (IRS.gov/Korean).
• Russian (IRS.gov/Russian).
• Vietnamese (IRS.gov/Vietnamese).
The IRS Taxpayer Assistance Centers 
(TACs) provide over-the-phone interpreter serv-
ice in over 170 languages, and the service is 
available free to taxpayers.
Getting tax forms and publications.  Go to 
IRS.gov/Forms to view, download, or print all of 
the forms, instructions, and publications you 
may need. You can also download and view 
popular tax publications and instructions (in-
cluding the 1040 and 1040 -SR instructions) on 
mobile devices as an eBook at no charge at 
IRS.gov/eBooks. Or you can go to IRS.gov/
OrderForms to place an order and have them 
mailed to you within 10 business days.
Access your online account (individual tax-
payers only).  Go to IRS.gov/Account to se-
curely access information about your federal tax 
account.
• View the amount you owe, pay online, or 
set up an online payment agreement.
• Access your tax records online.
• Review the past 24 months of your pay-
ment history.
• Go to IRS.gov/SecureAccess to review the 
required identity authentication process.
Using direct deposit.  The fastest way to re-
ceive a tax refund is to combine direct deposit 
and IRS e-file. Direct deposit securely and elec-
tronically transfers your refund directly into your 
financial account. Eight in 10 taxpayers use di-
rect deposit to receive their refund. The IRS is-
sues more than 90% of refunds in less than 21 
days.
Getting a transcript or copy of a return. 
The quickest way to get a copy of your tax tran-
script is to go to IRS.gov/Transcripts. Click on 
either “Get Transcript Online” or “Get Transcript 
by Mail” to order a copy of your transcript. If you 
prefer, you can order your transcript by calling 
800-908-9946.
How to choose a tax return preparer.  If you 
choose to have someone prepare your tax re-
turn, choose that preparer wisely. A paid tax re-
turn preparer is primarily responsible for the 
overall substantive accuracy of your tax return 
and, by law, is required to sign the return and 
include their preparer tax identification number 
(PTIN) on it. Although the tax return preparer 
signs the return, you are ultimately responsible 
for the accuracy of every item reported on your 
return. Anyone paid to prepare tax returns for 
others should have a thorough understanding of 
tax matters and is required to have a PTIN. You 
may want to ask friends, co -workers, or your 
employer for help in selecting a competent tax 
return preparer.
For your convenience, the IRS provides an 
online database for all Authorized IRS e-file 
Providers that choose to be included in the da-
tabase. You can locate the closest Authorized 
IRS e-file Providers in your area where you can 
electronically file your tax return. For more infor-
mation on finding a tax return preparer who pro-
vides IRS e-file, see Authorized IRS e-file 
Providers for Individuals  on IRS.gov, or go to 
IRS.gov/uac/Authorized-IRS-e-file-Providers-
for-Individuals. The inclusion in this database 
does not constitute any endorsement by the 
IRS of the e-file Providers listed in this database 
or any of the products or services that they pro-
vide. You should always be sure to conduct 
your own due diligence when selecting an e-file 
Provider. In addition to the Authorized IRS e-file 
Provider locator tool above, you can also find 
professional help through the IRS Tax 
Professional Partner  page at IRS.gov/Tax-
Professionals/IRSTaxProAssociationPartners.
Choose a tax return preparer you will be 
able to contact in case the IRS examines your 
return and has questions regarding how your 
return was prepared. You can designate your 
paid tax return preparer or another third party to 
speak to the IRS concerning the preparation of 
your return, payment/refund issues, and mathe-
matical errors. The third party authorization 
checkbox on Form 1040 or 1040 -SR gives the 
designated party the authority to receive and in-
spect returns and return information for 1 year 
from the original due date of your return (without 
regard to extensions). You can extend the au-
thority to receive and inspect returns and return 
information to a third party using Form 8821, 
Tax Information Authorization.
The following points will assist you when se-
lecting a tax return preparer.
• Check the preparer’s qualifications. All 
paid tax return preparers are required to 
have a PTIN.
• Check the preparer’s history. You can 
check with the Better Business Bureau to 
find out if a preparer has a questionable 
history. Check for disciplinary actions and 
the license status for credentialed prepar-
ers. For Certified Public Accountants 
(CPAs), check with the State Board of Ac-
countancy. For attorneys, check with the 
State Bar Association. For Enrolled Agents 
(EAs), go to IRS.gov/Tax-Professionals/
Verify-the-Status-of-an-Enrolled-Agent and 
follow the instructions for requesting EA 
status verification.
• Ask about service fees. Avoid preparers 
who base their fee on a percentage of your 
refund or those who say they can get 
larger refunds than others can. Always 
make sure any refund due is sent directly 
to you or deposited into your bank ac-
count. You should not have your refund 
deposited into a preparer’s bank account.
• Ask to e-file your return. Make sure your 
preparer offers IRS e-file. Any paid pre-
parer who prepares and files more than 10 
returns must generally e-file their clients’ 
returns. The IRS has safely processed 
more than 1.3 billion e-filed tax returns.
• Make sure the preparer is available. 
You need to ensure that you can contact 
the tax preparer after you file your return. 
That’s true even after the April 15, 2020, 
due date for individual returns. The due 
date for partnerships and S corporations 
using a calendar year is March 16, 2020. 
You may need to contact the preparer if 
questions come up about your tax return at 
a later time.
• Provide tax records. A good preparer will 
ask to see your records and receipts. They 
ask you questions to report your total in-
come and the tax benefits you’re entitled to 
claim. These may include tax deductions, 
tax credits, and other items. Do not use a 
preparer who is willing to e-file your return 
using your last pay stub instead of your 
Form W-2. This is against IRS e-file rules.
• Never sign a blank tax return. Do not 
use a tax preparer who asks you to sign a 
blank tax form.
• Review your return before signing. Be-
fore you sign your tax return, review it thor-
oughly. Ask questions if something is not 
clear to you. Make sure you’re comfortable 
with the information on the return before 
you sign it.
• Preparer must sign returns and include 
their PTIN. A paid preparer must sign re-
turns and include his or her PTIN as re-
quired by law. The preparer must also give 
you a copy of the return.
• Report abusive tax preparers to the 
IRS. You can report abusive tax preparers 
and suspected tax fraud to the IRS. Use 
Form 14157, Complaint: Tax Return 
Preparer. If you suspect a return preparer 
filed or changed the return without your 
consent, you should also file Form 14157-
A, Return Preparer Fraud or Misconduct 
Affidavit. You can download and print 
these forms from IRS.gov. If you need a 
paper form mailed to you, go to IRS.gov/
OrderForms to order online. For more in-
formation, go to How Do You Report 
Suspected Tax Fraud Activity? on IRS.gov.
Using online tools to help prepare your re-
turn.  Go to IRS.gov/Tools for the following.
• The Earned Income Tax Credit Assistant 
(IRS.gov/EITCAssistant) determines if 
you’re eligible for the EIC.
• The Online EIN Application (IRS.gov/EIN) 
helps you get an employer identification 
number.
• The Tax Withholding Estimator (IRS.gov/
W4app) makes it easier for everyone to 
pay the correct amount of tax during the 
year. The Estimator replaces the Withhold-
ing Calculator. The redesigned tool is a 
convenient, online way to check and tailor 
your withholding. It’s more user-friendly for 
taxpayers, including retirees and self-em-
ployed individuals. The new and improved 
features include the following.
– Easy to understand language;
Page 50 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 50  Chapter 12 How To Get Tax Help

– The ability to switch between screens, 
correct previous entries, and skip 
screens that don’t apply;
– Tips and links to help you determine if 
you qualify for tax credits and deduc-
tions;
– A progress tracker;
– A self-employment tax feature; and
– Automatic calculation of taxable social 
security benefits.
• The First Time Homebuyer Credit Account 
Look-up (IRS.gov/HomeBuyer) tool pro-
vides information on your repayments and 
account balance.
• The Sales Tax Deduction Calculator 
(IRS.gov/SalesTax) figures the amount you 
can claim if you itemize deductions on 
Schedule A (Form 1040 or 1040-SR), 
choose not to claim state and local income 
taxes, and you didn’t save your receipts 
showing the sales tax you paid.
• Go to IRS.gov/Pub17 to get Pub. 17, Your 
Federal Income Tax for Individuals, which 
features details on tax-saving opportuni-
ties, 2019 tax changes, and thousands of 
interactive links to help you find answers to 
your questions. View it online in HTML or 
as a PDF or, better yet, download it to your 
mobile device to enjoy eBook features.
• You may also be able to access tax law in-
formation in your electronic filing software.
• Go to IRS.gov and click on the Help & Re-
sources tab for more information.
Getting a transcript or copy of a return. Tax 
transcripts are summaries of tax returns. IRS 
transcripts are best and most often used to vali-
date past income and tax filing status for mort-
gage, student, and small business loan applica-
tions, and to help with tax preparation. 
Taxpayers can also use transcripts to obtain 
their prior -year adjusted gross income (AGI), 
which they need in order to e-file their tax re-
turns. You can get a transcript by mail to view 
your tax account transactions or line -by-line tax 
return information for a specific tax year. The 
method you used to file your return and whether 
you have a refund or balance due affects your 
current tax year transcript availability. Gener-
ally, these transcript types are available for the 
current tax year and 3 prior years. The quickest 
way to get a copy of your tax transcript is to go 
to IRS.gov/Transcripts. Click on either "Get 
Transcript Online" or "Get Transcript by Mail" to 
order a copy of your transcript. If you need an 
account transcript for an older tax year, a wage 
and income transcript, or a verification of nonfil-
ing letter, you’ll need to complete Form 4506 -T, 
Request for Transcript of Tax Return, available 
at IRS.gov/Forms-Pubs/About-Form-4506-T-
Request-for-Transcript-of-Tax-Return,
and send it to us as instructed on the form. If 
you made estimated tax payments and/or ap-
plied your overpayment from a prior-year tax re-
turn to your current -year tax return, you can re-
quest a tax account transcript to confirm these 
payments or credits a few weeks after the be-
ginning of the calendar year prior to filing your 
current-year return. For the list of the various 
types of transcripts available for you to order, 
see Transcript Types and Ways to Order Them 
at IRS.gov/Individuals/Tax-Return-Transcript-
Types-and-Ways-to-Order-Them. To order your 
transcript, you can choose from one of the fol-
lowing convenient options.
• Request a return or account transcript us-
ing Get Transcript at IRS.gov/Individuals/
Get-Transcript.
• Download the free IRS2Go app to your 
mobile device and use it to order tran-
scripts of your tax returns or tax account.
• Call the automated transcript toll-free line 
at 800-908-9946 to receive your transcript 
by mail.
• Go to Get Transcript at IRS.gov/
Individuals/Get-Transcript, and click on 
“Get Transcript by Mail.” You will need 
your social security number (SSN) or your 
individual taxpayer identification number 
(ITIN), date of birth, and address from your 
latest tax return. Transcripts arrive in 5 to 
10 calendar days at the address we have 
on file for you.
• Mail Form 4506-T, Request for Transcript 
of Tax Return, or Form 4506T-EZ, Short 
Form Request for Individual Tax Return 
Transcript (both available on IRS.gov).
The IRS never sends email requesting that 
you obtain or access your transcripts. Report all 
unsolicited email claiming to be from the IRS or 
an IRS-related function to phishing@irs.gov.
A transcript isn’t a photocopy of your return. 
If you need a photocopy of your original return, 
complete and mail Form 4506, Request for 
Copy of Tax Return , available at IRS.gov/Pub/
irs-pdf/F4506.pdf, along with the applicable fee.
Resolving tax-related identity theft issues.
• The IRS doesn’t initiate contact with tax-
payers by email or telephone to request 
personal or financial information. This in-
cludes any type of electronic communica-
tion, such as text messages and social me-
dia channels.
• Go to IRS.gov/IDProtection for information.
• If your SSN or ITIN has been lost or stolen 
or you suspect you’re a victim of tax-rela-
ted identity theft, visit IRS.gov/IdentityTheft 
to learn what steps you should take.
• The IRS stops and flags suspicious or du-
plicate federal tax returns that falsely rep-
resent your identity, such as your name or 
SSN. If the IRS suspects tax ID theft, the 
agency will send a 5071C letter to your 
home address. If you receive this letter, 
verify your identity at IDVerify.IRS.gov or 
call the toll-free number listed in the letter. 
If you did not receive an IRS notice but be-
lieve you’ve been the victim of ID theft, 
contact the IRS Identity Protection Special-
ized Unit at 800-908-4490 right away so 
we can take steps to secure your tax ac-
count and match your SSN or ITIN.
• Also, fill out and submit the IRS Form 
14039, Identity Theft Affidavit. Please write 
legibly and follow the directions on the 
back of the form that relate to your specific 
circumstances.
• If you are a victim of state tax ID theft, con-
tact your state's taxation department or 
comptroller's office about the next steps 
you need to take.
• You should protect the information that you 
keep, and properly dispose of what you no 
longer need. And, of course, you should 
create a plan to respond to security inci-
dents. As part of its long-standing efforts to 
promote good data security practices, the 
Federal Trade Commission (FTC) has un-
dertaken extensive efforts to educate busi-
nesses and has brought more than 50 law 
enforcement actions related to data secur-
ity issues. For more information, see Pro-
tecting Personal Information: A Guide for 
Business, available at FTC.gov/Tips-
advice/business-center/guidance/
protecting-personal-information-guide-
business, for practical tips on creating and 
implementing a plan for safeguarding per-
sonal information used in your business. 
Most recently, the FTC released Start with 
Security: A Guide for Business, available 
at FTC.gov/Tips-advice/business-center/
guidance/start-security-guide-business?
utm_source=govdelivery, which draws on 
the lessons learned from the FTC's en-
forcement actions.
The IRS, the states, and the tax industry 
joined together to enact new safeguards and 
take additional actions to combat tax -related 
identity theft. Many of these safeguards will be 
invisible to you, but invaluable to our fight 
against these criminal syndicates. If you pre-
pare your own return with tax software, you will 
see new log -on standards. Some states also 
have taken additional steps. See your state 
revenue agency’s web site  for additional de-
tails.
The FTC works for consumers to prevent 
fraudulent, deceptive, and unfair business prac-
tices and to provide information to help spot, 
stop, and avoid them. To file a complaint, for 
example, to report someone falsely claiming to 
be from the government, a business, or a family 
member, visit the FTC’s online Complaint 
Assistant or call 877 -FTC-HELP 
(877-382-4357). The FTC enters complaints 
into Consumer Sentinel, a secure, online data-
base available to more than 2,000 civil and 
criminal law enforcement agencies in the United 
States and abroad. Complaints from consumers 
help the FTC detect patterns of fraud and 
abuse. The FTC’s website provides free infor-
mation on a variety of consumer topics, in Eng-
lish and in Spanish.
Consumer complaints regarding interna-
tional scams can be reported online through 
Econsumer.gov. These are also entered into 
Consumer Sentinel, the complaint database 
maintained by the FTC, and are made available 
to enforcers and regulators in countries with 
participating agencies. Those agencies may 
use the complaints to investigate cross -border 
issues, uncover new scams, pursue regulatory 
or enforcement actions, and spot consumer 
trends.
Checking on the status of your refund. 
• Go to IRS.gov/Refunds.
• The IRS can’t issue refunds before 
mid-February 2020 for returns that claimed 
the EIC or the ACTC. This applies to the 
entire refund, not just the portion associ-
ated with these credits.
• Download the official IRS2Go app to your 
mobile device to check your refund status.
• Call the automated refund hotline at 
800-829-1954.
Page 51 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 12 How To Get Tax Help  Page 51

Making a tax payment.  The IRS uses the lat-
est encryption technology to ensure your elec-
tronic payments are safe and secure. You can 
make electronic payments online, by phone, 
and from a mobile device using the IRS2Go 
app. Paying electronically is quick, easy, and 
faster than mailing in a check or money order. 
Go to IRS.gov/Payments to make a payment 
using any of the following options.
• IRS Direct Pay: Pay your individual tax bill 
or estimated tax payment directly from 
your checking or savings account at no 
cost to you.
• Debit or Credit Card: Choose an approved 
payment processor to pay online, by 
phone, and by mobile device.
• Electronic Funds Withdrawal: Offered only 
when filing your federal taxes using tax re-
turn preparation software or through a tax 
professional.
• Electronic Federal Tax Payment System 
(EFTPS®). EFTPS® is a system for pay-
ing federal taxes electronically online, or 
by phone using the EFTPS® Voice Re-
sponse System. EFTPS® is offered free 
by the U.S. Department of the Treasury. 
You can use EFTPS® to make all your fed-
eral tax payments, including income, em-
ployment, estimated, and excise taxes. It is 
the best option for businesses. Enrollment 
is required. You can initiate your tax pay-
ment from your home or office, 24/7. Busi-
nesses and individuals can schedule pay-
ments up to 365 days in advance. 
Scheduled payments can be changed or 
canceled up to 2 business days in advance 
of the scheduled payment date.
• Check or Money Order: Mail your payment 
to the address listed on the notice or in-
structions.
• Cash: You may be able to pay your taxes 
with cash at a participating retail store.
• Same-Day Wire: You may be able to do 
same-day wire from your financial institu-
tion. Contact your financial institution for 
availability, cost, and cut-off times.
What if I can’t pay now?  Go to IRS.gov/
Payments for more information about your op-
tions.
• Apply for an online payment agreement 
(OPA) (IRS.gov/OPA) to meet your tax ob-
ligation in monthly installments if you can’t 
pay your taxes in full today. Once you com-
plete the online process, you will receive 
immediate notification of whether your 
agreement has been approved.
• Use the Offer in Compromise Pre-Qualifier 
to see if you can settle your tax debt for 
less than the full amount you owe. For 
more information on the Offer in Compro-
mise (OIC) program, go to IRS.gov/OIC. If 
you are a sole proprietor or independent 
contractor, apply for a payment agreement 
as an individual.
Checking the status of an amended return.
Go to IRS.gov/WMAR to track the status of 
Form 1040 -X amended returns. Please note 
that it can take up to 3 weeks from the date you 
mailed your amended return for it to show up in 
our system, and processing it can take up to 16 
weeks.
Filing past due tax returns.  File all tax re-
turns that are due, regardless of whether or not 
you can pay in full. File your past due return the 
same way and to the same location where you 
would file an on -time return. If you have re-
ceived a notice, make sure to send your past 
due return to the location indicated on the no-
tice you received. If you have a past due return, 
filing your past due return now can help you do 
the following.
• Avoid interest and penalties. File your 
past due return and pay now to limit inter-
est charges and late payment penalties.
• Claim a refund. You risk losing your re-
fund if you don't file your return. If you are 
due a refund for withholding or estimated 
taxes, you must file your return to claim it 
within 3 years of the return due date. The 
same rule applies to a right to claim tax 
credits such as the EIC. We hold income 
tax refunds in cases where our records 
show that one or more income tax returns 
are past due. We hold them until we get 
the past due return or receive an accepta-
ble reason for not filing a past due return.
• Protect social security benefits. If you 
are self-employed and do not file your fed-
eral income tax return, any self-employ-
ment income you earned will not be repor-
ted to the Social Security Administration 
and you will not receive credits toward so-
cial security retirement or disability bene-
fits.
• Avoid issues obtaining loans. Loan ap-
provals may be delayed if you don't file 
your return. Copies of filed tax returns must 
be submitted to financial institutions, mort-
gage lenders/brokers, etc., whenever you 
want to buy or refinance a home, get a loan 
for a business, or apply for federal aid for 
higher education.
For more information, go to Filing Past Due 
Tax Returns on IRS.gov.
Substitute return. If you fail to file voluntarily, 
we may file a substitute return for you, based on 
income reported to the IRS. This return might 
not give you credit for deductions and exemp-
tions you may be entitled to receive. We will 
send you a Notice of Deficiency CP3219N
(90-day letter) proposing a tax assessment. 
You will have 90 days to file your past due tax 
return or file a petition in Tax Court. If you do 
neither, we will proceed with our proposed as-
sessment. If you have received a Notice of Defi-
ciency CP3219N, you can't request an exten-
sion to file. Call us if you think you don't have to 
file.
If any of the income listed is incorrect, you 
may do the following.
• Contact us toll free at 866-681-4271 to let 
us know.
• Contact the payer (source) of the income 
to request a corrected Form W-2 or 1099.
• Attach the corrected forms when you send 
us your completed tax returns.
If the IRS files a substitute return, it is still in 
your best interest to file your own tax return to 
take advantage of any exemptions, credits, and 
deductions you are entitled to receive. The IRS 
will generally adjust your account to reflect the 
correct figures. If you filed a past due return and 
have received a notice, you should send us a 
copy of the past due return to the address con-
tained in the notice. It takes approximately 6 
weeks for us to process an accurately comple-
ted past due tax return.
Understanding an IRS notice or letter. Go to 
IRS.gov/Notices to find additional information 
about responding to an IRS notice or letter . We 
will send you a notice or letter if any of the fol-
lowing apply.
• You have a balance due.
• You are due a larger or smaller refund.
• We have a question about your tax return.
• We need to verify your identity.
• We need additional information.
• We changed your return.
• We are notifying you of delays in process-
ing your return.
When you receive correspondence from us, 
read the entire notice or letter carefully. Typi-
cally, we only need a response if you don’t 
agree with the information, we need additional 
information, or you have a balance due. If we 
changed your tax return, compare the informa-
tion we provided in the notice or letter with the 
information in your original return. If we receive 
a return that we suspect is ID theft, we will ask 
you to verify your identity using the web ad-
dress provided in the letter.
If we ask for a response within a specific 
timeframe, you must respond on time to mini-
mize additional interest and penalty charges or 
to preserve your appeal rights if you don’t 
agree. Pay as much as you can, even if you 
can’t pay the full amount you owe. You can pay 
online or apply for an OPA or OIC. See What if I 
can’t pay now? , earlier, or visit our payments 
page, IRS.gov/Payments, for more information.
We provide our contact phone number on 
the top right -hand corner of our correspond-
ence. Be sure you have your tax return and any 
related documentation available when you call. 
You can also write to us at the address in the 
correspondence to explain why you disagree. If 
you write, allow at least 30 days for our re-
sponse. Keep a copy of all correspondence 
with your tax records.
Collection and enforcement actions.  The 
return we prepare for you (our proposed as-
sessment) will lead to a tax bill, which, if unpaid, 
will trigger the collection process. This can in-
clude such actions as a levy on your wages or 
bank account or the filing of a notice of federal 
tax lien. If you repeatedly do not file, you could 
be subject to additional enforcement measures, 
such as additional penalties and/or criminal 
prosecution.
Contacting your local IRS office.  Keep in 
mind, many questions can be answered on 
IRS.gov without visiting an IRS Taxpayer Assis-
tance Center (TAC). Go to IRS.gov/LetUsHelp 
for the topics people ask about most. If you still 
need help, IRS TACs provide tax help when a 
tax issue can’t be handled online or by phone. 
All TACs now provide service by appointment 
so you’ll know in advance that you can get the 
service you need without long wait times. Be-
fore you visit, go to IRS.gov/TACLocator to find 
the nearest TAC, check hours, available serv-
ices, and appointment options. Or, on the 
IRS2Go app, under the Stay Connected tab, 
Page 52 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 52  Chapter 12 How To Get Tax Help

choose the Contact Us option and click on “Lo-
cal Offices.”
Recognizing and reporting tax scams.  The 
Dirty Dozen  is compiled annually by the IRS 
and lists a variety of common scams taxpayers 
may encounter any time during the year. Many 
of these con games peak during filing season 
as people prepare their tax returns or hire 
someone to do so. Aggressive and threatening 
phone calls by criminals impersonating IRS 
agents remain near the top of the annual Dirty 
Dozen list of tax scams for the 2019 filing sea-
son.
Scammers are able to alter caller identifica-
tion (caller ID) numbers to make it look like the 
IRS is calling. They use fake names and bogus 
IRS identification or badge numbers. They often 
leave “urgent” callback requests. They prey on 
the most vulnerable people, such as the elderly, 
newly arrived immigrants, and those whose first 
language is not English. Scammers have been 
known to impersonate agents of IRS Criminal 
Investigation as well.
Be cautious when receiving suspicious calls 
at home or at work from sources claiming to be 
from the IRS, other agencies, or outside sour-
ces asking for money or credit card information, 
or threatening to have you arrested for not pay-
ing. These callers may demand money or may 
say you have a refund due and try to trick you 
into sharing private information. These con ar-
tists can sound convincing when they call. They 
may know a lot about you.
Here are five things the scammers often do 
but the IRS will not do. Any one of these five 
things is a tell-tale sign of a scam.
The IRS will never do any of the follow-
ing.
• Call to demand immediate payment, nor 
will the agency call about taxes owed with-
out first having mailed you a bill.
• Demand that you pay taxes without giving 
you the opportunity to question or appeal 
the amount they say you owe.
• Require you to use a specific payment 
method for your taxes, such as a prepaid 
debit card.
• Ask for credit or debit card numbers over 
the phone.
• Threaten to bring in local police or other 
law-enforcement groups to have you arres-
ted for not paying.
If you get a phone call from someone claim-
ing to be from the IRS and asking for money, do 
not disclose your personal information. You 
should make notes of all information regarding 
the call and/or the caller, for example, any caller 
ID information, then hang up immediately and 
do the following.
• If you know you owe taxes or think you 
might owe, call the IRS toll free at 
800-829-1040. The IRS assistors can help 
you with a payment issue.
• If you know you don’t owe taxes or have no 
reason to believe that you do, report the in-
cident to the Treasury Inspector General 
for Tax Administration (TIGTA) toll free at 
800-366-4484 or at TIGTA.gov.
• If you’ve been targeted by this scam, also 
contact the FTC and use their FTC 
Complaint Assistant at FTC.gov. Please 
add “IRS Telephone Scam” to the com-
ments of your complaint.
Remember, too, the IRS does not use 
email, text messages, or any social media to 
discuss your personal tax issue involving bills or 
refunds. If you get a phone call from someone 
claiming to be from the IRS regarding a refund 
owed to you and asking you for your SSN and 
bank account information, do not give them this 
information. You should make notes of all infor-
mation regarding the call and/or the caller, for 
example, any caller ID information, and report 
this scam. For more information on reporting tax 
scams, go to IRS.gov and type “scam” in the 
search box. You can verify any potential re-
funds owed to you by contacting the IRS di-
rectly.
For additional information about tax scams, 
go to IRS.gov/newsroom/use-irs-social-media-
tools, where you can search “scam” to find all 
the scam-related posts.
The Taxpayer Advocate 
Service (TAS) Is Here To 
Help You
What Is TAS?
TAS is an independent organization within the 
IRS that helps taxpayers and protects taxpayer 
rights. Their job is to ensure that every taxpayer 
is treated fairly and that you know and under-
stand your rights under the Taxpayer Bill of 
Rights.
How Can You Learn About Your 
Taxpayer Rights?
The Taxpayer Bill of Rights describes 10 basic 
rights that all taxpayers have when dealing with 
the IRS. Go to TaxpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov to 
help you understand what these rights mean to 
you and how they apply. These are your rights. 
Know them. Use them.
You can find a list of your rights and the 
IRS’s obligations to protect them in Pub. 1, Your 
Rights as a Taxpayer. It includes the following.
1. The Right To Be Informed. Taxpayers 
have the right to know what they need to 
do to comply with the tax laws. They are 
entitled to clear explanations of the laws 
and IRS procedures in all tax forms, in-
structions, publications, notices, and cor-
respondence. They have the right to be in-
formed of IRS decisions about their tax 
accounts and to receive clear explana-
tions of the outcomes.
2. The Right to Quality Service. Taxpayers 
have the right to receive prompt, courte-
ous, and professional assistance in their 
dealings with the IRS, to be spoken to in a 
way they can easily understand, to receive 
clear and easily understandable communi-
cations from the IRS, and to speak to a su-
pervisor about inadequate service.
3. The Right To Pay No More Than the 
Correct Amount of Tax. Taxpayers have 
the right to pay only the amount of tax le-
gally due, including interest and penalties, 
and to have the IRS apply all tax payments 
properly.
4. The Right To Challenge the IRS’s Posi-
tion and Be Heard. Taxpayers have the 
right to raise objections and provide addi-
tional documentation in response to formal 
IRS actions or proposed actions, to expect 
that the IRS will consider their timely ob-
jections and documentation promptly and 
fairly, and to receive a response if the IRS 
does not agree with their position.
5. The Right To Appeal an IRS Decision 
in an Independent Forum. Taxpayers 
are entitled to a fair and impartial adminis-
trative appeal of most IRS decisions, in-
cluding many penalties, and have the right 
to receive a written response regarding 
the Office of Appeals’ decision. Taxpayers 
generally have the right to take their cases 
to court.
6. The Right to Finality. Taxpayers have 
the right to know the maximum amount of 
time they have to challenge the IRS’s posi-
tion as well as the maximum amount of 
time the IRS has to audit a particular tax 
year or collect a tax debt. Taxpayers have 
the right to know when the IRS has fin-
ished an audit.
7. The Right to Privacy. Taxpayers have 
the right to expect that any IRS inquiry, ex-
amination, or enforcement action will com-
ply with the law and be no more intrusive 
than necessary, and will respect all due 
process rights, including search and seiz-
ure protections, and will provide, where 
applicable, a collection due process hear-
ing.
8. The Right to Confidentiality. Taxpayers 
have the right to expect that any informa-
tion they provide to the IRS will not be dis-
closed unless authorized by the taxpayer 
or by law. Taxpayers have the right to ex-
pect appropriate action will be taken 
against employees, return preparers, and 
others who wrongfully use or disclose tax-
payer return information.
9. The Right To Retain Representation. 
Taxpayers have the right to retain an au-
thorized representative of their choice to 
represent them in their dealings with the 
IRS. Taxpayers have the right to seek as-
sistance from a Low Income Taxpayer 
Clinic if they cannot afford representation.
10. The Right to a Fair and Just Tax Sys-
tem. Taxpayers have the right to expect 
the tax system to consider facts and cir-
cumstances that might affect their underly-
ing liabilities, ability to pay, or ability to pro-
vide information timely. Taxpayers have 
the right to receive assistance from the 
TAS if they are experiencing financial diffi-
culty or if the IRS has not resolved their tax 
issues properly and timely through its nor-
mal channels.
The IRS is working to increase the number 
of Americans who know and understand their 
rights under the tax law. To expand awareness, 
Page 53 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Chapter 12 How To Get Tax Help  Page 53

the IRS makes Pub. 1 available in multiple lan-
guages on IRS.gov. This important publication 
is available in the following languages.
• English, Your Rights as a Taxpayer, at 
IRS.gov/Pub/irs-pdf/P1.pdf.
• Chinese, Chinese- Your Rights as a 
Taxpayer (Pub 1), at IRS.gov/Chinese.
• Korean, Korean- Your Rights as a 
Taxpayer (Pub 1), at IRS.gov/Korean.
• Russian, Ваши права в качестве 
налогоплательщика (Публикацию № 1), 
at IRS.gov/Russian.
• Spanish, Publicación 1SP, Derechos del 
Contribuyente, at IRS.gov/Spanish.
• Vietnamese, Quyền Hạn của Người Đóng 
Thuế, Your Rights as a Taxpayer (Pub 1), 
at IRS.gov/Vietnamese.
The IRS will include Pub. 1 when sending noti-
ces to taxpayers on a range of issues, such as 
an audit or collection matter. All IRS facilities 
will publicly display the rights for taxpayers and 
employees to see.
What Can TAS Do For You?
TAS can help you resolve problems that you 
can’t resolve with the IRS. And their service is 
free. If you qualify for their assistance, you will 
be assigned to one advocate who will work with 
you throughout the process and will do every-
thing possible to resolve your issue. TAS can 
help you if:
• Your problem is causing financial difficulty 
for you, your family, or your business;
• You face (or your business is facing) an 
immediate threat of adverse action; or
• You’ve tried repeatedly to contact the IRS 
but no one has responded, or the IRS 
hasn’t responded by the date promised.
How Can You Reach TAS?
TAS has offices in every state, the District of 
Columbia, and Puerto Rico . Your local advo-
cate’s number is in your local directory and at 
TaxpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov/Contact-Us. You 
can also call them at 877-777-4778.
How Else Does TAS Help 
Taxpayers?
TAS works to resolve large -scale problems that 
affect many taxpayers. If you know of one of 
these broad issues, please report it to them at 
IRS.gov/SAMS.
TAS also has a website, Tax Reform 
Changes, which shows you how the new tax 
law may change your future tax filings and helps 
you plan for these changes. The information is 
categorized by tax topic in the order of the IRS 
Form 1040 or 1040 -SR. Go to TaxChanges.us 
for more information.
TAS for Tax Professionals
TAS can provide a variety of information for tax 
professionals, including tax law updates and 
guidance, TAS programs, and ways to let TAS 
know about systemic problems you’ve seen in 
your practice.
Low Income Taxpayer 
Clinics (LITCs)
LITCs are independent from the IRS. LITCs 
represent individuals whose income is below a 
certain level and need to resolve tax problems 
with the IRS, such as audits, appeals, and tax 
collection disputes. In addition, clinics can pro-
vide information about taxpayer rights and re-
sponsibilities in different languages for individu-
als who speak English as a second language. 
Services are offered for free or a small fee. To 
find a clinic near you, visit IRS.gov/LITC or see 
IRS Pub. 4134, Low Income Taxpayer Clinic 
List.
Page 54 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 54  Chapter 12 How To Get Tax Help

To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.
See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Index
 
A
Advertising 45
Amortization:
Anti-abuse rule 33
Anti-churning rules 32
Atmospheric pollution control 
facilities 34
Corporate organization costs 29
Dispositions of section 197 
intangibles 33
Experimental costs 35
Geological and geophysical 
costs 34
How to deduct 28
Incorrect amount deducted 33
Partnership organization 
costs 29
Pollution control facilities 34
Reforestation costs 34
Reforestation expenses 27
Related person 32
Research costs 35
Section 197 intangibles 
defined 31
Starting a businesscosts 28
Start-up costs 29
Anticipated liabilities 45
Assistance (See Tax help)
At-risk limits 6
Attorney fees 47
Authorized IRS e-file 
providers 50
Awards 8
A-Z Index for Business 49
B
Bad debts:
Defined 40
How to treat 41
Recovery 42
Types of 41
When worthless 41
Bonuses:
Employee 9
Royalties 39
Bribes 45
Business:
Assets 4
Books and records 31
Meal expenses 44
Use of car 5, 46
Use of car 5, 46
Use of home 5
Business Services Online 49
C
Campaign contribution 48
Capital expenses 3, 5
Capitalization of interest 16
Car allowance 44
Car and truck expenses 46
Carrying charges 24
Charitable contributions 46
Checking amended return 
status 52
Choosing a tax return 
preparer 50
Circulation costs, newspapers 
and periodicals 26
Claim a refund 52
Club dues 46
Collection and enforcement 
actions 52
Commitment fees 15
Compensation in excess of $1 
million 8
Computer software 32
Constant-yield method, OID 15
Contested liability 6
Contributions:
Charitable 46
Political 48
Copyrights 31
Cost depletion 36
Cost of getting lease 12, 30
Cost of goods sold 3
Cost recovery 3
Covenant not to compete 31
Credit card convenience fees 46
D
Debt-financed distributions 14
Definitions:
Business bad debt 40
Necessary expense 3
Ordinary expense 3
Section 197 intangibles 31
De minimis OID 15
Demolition expenses 46
Depletion:
Mineral property 36
Oil and gas wells 37
Timber 40
Who can claim 35
Depreciation (See Cost recovery)
Development costs, miners 26
Direct Pay 52
Dirty Dozen 53
Disabled, improvements for 27
Drilling and development 
costs 25
Dues, membership 46
E
Economic interest 35
Economic performance 6
Education expenses 9, 46
Education expenses 9, 46
e-File Form 940, 941, or 944 for 
Small Businesses 49
Elderly, improvements for 27
Electronic Federal Tax Payment 
System (EFTPS®) 52
Employee benefit programs 9
Employer ID Numbers (EINs) 49
Employment taxes 19
Employment Taxes 49
Additional Medicare Tax 19
Self-employment tax:
Additional Medicare Tax 19
Unemployment fund 19
e-News 49
Entertainment 43
Entertainment expenses 9
Experimentation costs 24, 35
Exploration costs 25
F
Federal Relay Service 49
Fees:
Commitment 15
Legal and professional 47
Regulatory 47
Tax return preparation 47
Filing past due tax returns 52
Fines 47
Forgone 16
Forgone interest 16
Form:
3115 33
4562 28
5213 7
8826 28
T 40
Franchise 31, 46
Fringe benefits 9
G
Gas wells 38
Geological and geophysical 
costs:
Development, oil and gas 34
Exploration, oil and gas 34
Geothermal wells 25, 39
Gifts, nominal value 9
Going into business 3, 28
Goodwill 31
Gross income, not-for-profit 
activity 7
H
Health coverage tax credit 
(HCTC) 23
Health plan 23
Heating equipment 5
Home, business use of 5
I
Identity theft 51
Identity theft issues 51
Impairment-related expenses 46
Improvements 4
By lessee 12
For disabled and elderly 27
Income Taxes 19
Accrual of contested income 
taxes 19
Federal income taxes 19
Foreign income taxes 19
State and local income taxes 19
Incorrect amount of amortization 
deducted 33
Independent Contractor 
(Self-Employed) or 
Employee? 49
Information Return Filing 
Requirements 49
Insurance 24
Capitalized premiums 23
Deductible premiums 20
Nondeductible premiums 23
Intangible drilling costs 25
Intangibles, amortization 30
Interest 16
Allocation of 13
Below-market 16
Business expense for 12
Capitalized 15, 16
Carrying charge 24
Deductible 14
Life insurance policies 15
Limitation 14
Not deductible 15
Refunds of 16
When to deduct 16
Internet-related expenses 46
Interview expenses 47
IRS social media 49
IRS Tax Professional 
Partners 50
IRS Video Portal 49
K
Key person 15
Kickbacks 45
L
Leases:
Canceling 11
Cost of getting 12, 30
Improvements by lessee 12
Leveraged 11
Mineral 39
Oil and gas 39
Sales distinguished 11
Taxes on 11
Legal and professional fees 47
Letter 5071C 51
Licenses 31, 47
Life insurance coverage 9
Limit on deductions 6
Line of credit 14
Loans:
Below-market 16
Discounted 16
Loans or advances 10
Lobbying expenses 47
Long-term care insurance 21
Losses 6
At-risk limits 6
Net operating 6
Passive activities 6
Low Income Taxpayer Clinics 
(LITCs) 54
M
Machinery parts 5
Making a tax payment 52
Meals 43
Meals and entertainment 44
Page 55 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 535 (2019)   Page 55

Meals and lodging 9
Methods of accounting 6
Mining:
Depletion 39
Development costs 26
Exploration costs 25
More than one health plan and 
business 23
Mortgage 14
Moving expenses, machinery 47
N
Natural gas 38
Nonqualifying intangibles 31
Not-for-profit activities 6
Not-for-profit activity, gross 
income 7
Notice of Deficiency 
CP3219N 52
O
Office in home 5
Oil and gas wells:
Depletion 37
Drilling costs 25
Partnerships 38
S corporations 38
Online payment agreement 52
Online Tools & Educational 
Products 49
Optional safe harbor method 5
Optional write-off method:
Circulation costs 35
Experimental costs 35
Intangible drilling and 
development costs 35
Mining exploration and 
development costs 35
Research costs 35
Organizational costs 26
Organization costs:
Corporate 29
Partnership 29
Original issue discount 14
Other coverage 23
Other Taxes 19
Excise taxes 19
Franchise taxes 19
Fuel taxes 19
Occupational taxes 19
Personal property taxes 19
Sales taxes 19
Outplacement services 47
P
Passive activities 6
Payments in kind 6
Penalties 14
Deductible 47
Nondeductible 47
Prepayment 14
Percentage depletion 36
Per diem and car allowances 44
Political contributions 48
Pollution control facilities 34
Prepaid expense 6
Extends useful life 24
Interest 16
Rent 10
Prepayment penalty 14
Presumption of profit 6
Publication 1, Your Rights as a 
Taxpayer 53
Publications (See Tax help)
Q
Qualified long-term care 
insurance:
Benefits received 22
Chronically ill individual 22
Qualified long-term care 
insurance contract 21
Qualified long-term care 
services 21
R
Real Estate Taxes 18
Assessments Local 18
Charges for services 18
Electing to ratably accrue to a 
definite period 18
Form 3115 19
Making the election to ratably 
accrue the taxes 18
Purchase or sale of real 
estate 18
Separate elections to ratably 
accrue for each separate 
trade or business and for 
nonbusiness activities 18
Recapture:
Exploration expenses 26
Timber property 34
Recordkeeping 38
Recovery of amount deducted 6
Refiners who cannot claim 
percentage depletion 37
Reforestation costs 27, 34
Regulatory fees 47
Reimbursements 43
Business expenses 10
Mileage 44
Nonaccountable plan 45
Per diem 44
Related persons:
Anti-churning rules 32
Coal or iron ore 39
Payments to 6, 16
Payments to 6, 16
Refiners 37
Unreasonable rent 10
Reminder:
Premium tax credit 20
Removal 27
Rent expense, capitalizing 12
Repairs 48
Repayments (claim of right) 48
Reporting abusive tax 
preparers 50
Research costs 24, 35
S
Scammers 53
Section 179 expense 
deduction (See Cost recovery )
Self-employed health insurance 
deduction 20
Self-Employed Health Insurance 
Deduction Worksheet 22
Self-Employed Individuals Tax 
Center 49
Self-insurance, reserve for 23
Sick pay 10
Small Business and 
Self-Employed (SB/SE) Tax 
Center 49
Small Business Events 49
Small Business Forms and 
Publications 49
Standard meal allowance 44
Standard mileage 
rate (See Business use of your 
car)
Standby charges 15
Starting, Operating, or Closing a 
Business 49
Start-up costs 26, 29
Substitute return 52
Supplies and materials 49
T
Taxes 11, 17
Carrying charge 24
Leased property 11
When To Deduct Taxes 18
Tax help 49
Tax information in other 
languages 50
Taxpayer Advocate Service 
(TAS) 53
Taxpayer Assistance Center 
(TAC) locator 52
Tax preparation 49
Tax preparation fees 47
Tax questions 49
Tax scams 53
Telephone 49
Timber 34, 40
Tools 5
Trademark, trade name 31, 46
Trademark, trade name 31, 46
transcript or copy of a return 50
, 51
transcript or copy of a 
return 50, 51
Transportation (commuting) 
benefits 9
Travel 43
U
Understanding an IRS notice or 
letter 52
Unpaid expenses, related 
person 16
Utilities 49
V
Vacation pay 10
W
Wages:
Property 10
Tests for deducting pay 8
Welfare benefit funds 9
When To Deduct Premiums 24
When To Deduct Taxes:
Carrying charges 18
Limit on accrual of taxes 18
Refunds of taxes 18
Uniform capitalization rules 18
Page 56 of 56  Fileid: … tions/P535/2019/A/XML/Cycle02/source 11:40 - 4-Mar-2020
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 56 Publication 535 (2019)