Userid: ________ DTD TIP04 Leadpct: 0% Pt. size: 8 ❏ Draft ❏ Ok to Print
PAGER/SGML Fileid: D:\Users\00yhb\Documents\Epic Files\Pub 550\P550-1.sgm (Init. & date)
Page 1 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 550 ContentsCat. No. 15093R
What’s New for 2007............... 2
Department
What’s New for 2008............... 2of the
InvestmentTreasury Reminders ...................... 2
Internal Introduction ..................... 2Revenue Income and
Service Chapter 1. Investment Income ........ 3
General Information ............. 3
Interest Income ................ 5Expenses
Discount on Debt Instruments ...... 13
When To Report Interest Income .... 16
How To Report Interest Income ..... 17
Dividends and Other Corporate(Including Capital
Distributions ............... 19
Gains and Losses) How To Report Dividend
Income ................... 23
Stripped Preferred Stock .......... 25
REMICs, FASITs, and OtherFor use in preparing
CDOs .................... 25
S Corporations ................ 26
2007 Returns Investment Clubs ............... 26
Chapter 2. Tax Shelters and Other
Reportable Transactions ......... 28
Chapter 3. Investment Expenses ...... 31
Limits on Deductions ............ 31
Interest Expenses .............. 31
Bond Premium Amortization ........ 33
Expenses of Producing Income ..... 35
Nondeductible Expenses .......... 36
How To Report Investment
Expenses ................. 37
When To Report Investment
Expenses ................. 37
Chapter 4. Sales and Trades of
Investment Property ............ 38
What Is a Sale or Trade? .......... 38
Basis of Investment Property ....... 41
How To Figure Gain or Loss ....... 45
Nontaxable Trades .............. 45
Transfers Between Spouses ....... 47
Related Party Transactions ........ 47
Capital Gains and Losses ......... 48
Capital or Ordinary Gain or
Loss ..................... 48
Holding Period ............... 52
Nonbusiness Bad Debts ......... 53
Short Sales ................. 54
Wash Sales ................. 55
Options .................... 56
Straddles ................... 57
Sales of Stock to ESOPs or
Certain Cooperatives ......... 61
Rollover of Gain From
Publicly Traded Securities ...... 62
Gains on Qualified Small
Business Stock ............. 62
Rollover of Gain From Sale of 
Empowerment Zone Assets ..... 63
Reporting Capital Gains and
Losses ................... 64
Special Rules for Traders in
Securities ................. 72
Chapter 5. How To Get Tax Help ...... 73Get forms and other information
Glossary ....................... 75faster and easier by:
Index .......................... 77
Internet • www.irs.gov

Page 2 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you fail to withhold, you may be held liable for and what investment expenses are deductible. ItWhat’s New for 2007 explains when and how to show these items onthe tax, penalties that apply, and interest. For
your tax return. It also explains how to determinemore information, see Publication 515, With-
Capital asset treatment for self-created mu- and report gains and losses on the disposition ofholding of Tax on Nonresident Aliens and For-sical works. Musical compositions and copy- investment property and provides informationeign Entities.rights in musical works are generally not capital on property trades and tax shelters.
assets. However, you can elect to treat these Foreign source income. If you are a U.S. The glossary at the end of this publica-types of property as capital assets. See Capital citizen with investment income from sources tion defines many of the terms used.Assets and Noncapital Assets in chapter 4. outside the United States (foreign income), you TIP
must report that income on your tax return un-Tax shelters and other reportable transac- less it is exempt by U.S. law. This is true whethertions. Investors are no longer required to file
you reside inside or outside the United StatesForm 8271, Investor Reporting of Tax Shelter Investment income. This generally includesand whether or not you receive a Form 1099Registration Number, otherwise due after Au-
interest, dividends, capital gains, and otherfrom the foreign payer.gust 2, 2007. “Transactions with a brief asset
types of distributions.holding period” is no longer a reportable trans- Alien’s individual taxpayer identificationaction category for transactions entered into af- number (ITIN). If you are a nonresident or Investment expenses. These include interestter August 2, 2007. “Transactions of interest” is a resident alien and do not have and are not eligi- paid or incurred to acquire investment propertynew reportable transaction category. For more
ble to get a social security number (SSN), you and expenses to manage or collect income frominformation, see chapter 2.
must apply for an ITIN. For details on how to do investment property.
Identified straddles. Recent legislation clari- so, see Form W-7, Application for IRS Individual
fied the treatment of a loss on a position in an Taxpayer Identification Number, and its instruc- Comments and suggestions. We welcome
identified straddle when (1) there are no offset- tions. If you already have an ITIN, enter it wher- your comments about this publication and your
ting positions in the identified straddle with un- ever an SSN is requested on your tax return. suggestions for future editions.
recognized straddle period gain and (2) an An ITIN is for tax use only. It does not entitle You can write to us at the following address:offsetting position in the identified straddle is or you to social security benefits or change yourhas been a liability to you. Also, for identified employment or immigration status under U.S. Internal Revenue Servicestraddles acquired after December 29, 2007, law.you must identify the positions in the straddle Individual Forms and Publications Branch
that are offsetting with respect to one another. SE:W:CAR:MP:T:ISale of DC Zone assets. Investments in Dis-
For more information, see Indentified straddle 1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6526trict of Columbia Enterprise Zone (DC Zone)
under Straddles in chapter 4. Washington, DC 20224assets held more than 5 years will qualify for a
special tax benefit. If you sell or trade a DC Zone
asset at a gain, you may be able to exclude the We respond to many letters by telephone.
qualified capital gain from your gross income. Therefore, it would be helpful if you would in-What’s New for 2008 This exclusion applies to an interest in, or prop- clude your daytime phone number, including the
erty of, certain businesses operating in the Dis- area code, in your correspondence.Maximum tax rate on qualified dividends and trict of Columbia. For more information about the You can email us at *taxforms@irs.gov. (Thenet capital gain reduced. In tax years begin- exclusion, see the Schedule D instructions. For asterisk must be included in the address.)ning after 2007, the 5% maximum tax rate on more information about DC Zone assets, see Please put “Publications Comment” on the sub-qualified dividends and net capital gain is re- Publication 954, Tax Incentives for Distressed ject line. Although we cannot respond individu-duced to 0 (zero)%. Thus, qualified dividends Communities. ally to each email, we do appreciate yourand net capital gain are not taxed if the regular feedback and will consider your comments astax rate that would apply to them is lower than Photographs of missing children. The Inter- we revise our tax products.25%. nal Revenue Service is a proud partner with the
Ordering forms and publications. VisitNational Center for Missing and Exploited Chil-
www.irs.gov/formspubs to download forms anddren. Photographs of missing children selected
publications, call 1-800-829-3676, or write to theby the Center may appear in this publication on
Reminders address below and receive a response within 10pages that would otherwise be blank. You can
days after your request is received.help bring these children home by looking at the
U.S. property acquired from a foreign per- photographs and calling 1-800-THE-LOST
son. If you acquire a U.S. real property inter- (1-800-843-5678) if you recognize a child. National Distribution Centerest from a foreign person or firm, you may have P.O. Box 8903to withhold income tax on the amount you pay Bloomington, IL 61702–8903for the property (including cash, the fair market
value of other property, and any assumed liabil- Introduction Tax questions. If you have a tax question,ity). Domestic or foreign corporations, partner-
This publication provides information on the tax check the information available on www.irs.govships, trusts, and estates may also have to
treatment of investment income and expenses. or call 1-800-829-1040. We cannot answer taxwithhold on certain distributions and other trans-
It explains what investment income is taxableactions involving U.S. real property interests. If questions sent to either of the above addresses.
Page 2 Publication 550 (2007)

Page 3 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
See chapter 5 for information about getting savings account with your child using funds be-
these publications and forms. longing to the child, list the child’s name first on
the account and give the child’s SSN.
1.
Custodian account for your child. If your
child is the actual owner of an account that is
General Information recorded in your name as custodian for the child,
give the child’s SSN to the payer. For example,Investment A few items of general interest are covered here. you must give your child’s SSN to the payer of
dividends on stock owned by your child, evenRecordkeeping.You should keep a listIncome though the dividends are paid to you as custo-showing sources and amounts of in-
dian.vestment income that you receive dur-RECORDS
ing the year. Also, keep the forms you receive Penalty for failure to supply SSN. You will
that show your investment income (FormsTopics be subject to a penalty if, when required, you fail
1099-INT, Interest Income, and 1099-DIV, Divi-This chapter discusses: to:
dends and Distributions, for example) as an im-
• Include your SSN on any return, state-portant part of your records.• Interest income, ment, or other document,
• Dividends and other corporate distribu- • Give your SSN to another person who hasTax on investment income of a child undertions,
to include it on any return, statement, orage 18. Part of a child’s 2007 investment in-
• Real estate mortgage investment conduits other document, orcome may be taxed at the parent’s tax rate. This
(REMICs), financial asset securitization in- may happen if all of the following are true. • Include the SSN of another person on anyvestment trusts (FASITs), and other collat-
return, statement, or other document.• The child was under age 18 at the end oferalized debt obligations (CDOs),
2007. A child born on January 1, 1990, is The penalty is $50 for each failure up to a maxi-• S corporations, and considered to be age 18 at the end of mum penalty of $100,000 for any calendar year.2007.• Investment clubs.
You will not be subject to this penalty if you• The child had more than $1,700 of invest- can show that your failure to provide the SSNment income (such as taxable interest andUseful Items was due to a reasonable cause and not to willfuldividends) and has to file a tax return.You may want to see: neglect.
• Either parent was alive at the end of 2007. If you fail to supply an SSN, you may also be
Publication subject to backup withholding.
If all of these statements are true, Form 8615❏ 525 Taxable and Nontaxable Income Backup withholding. Your investment in-must be completed and attached to the child’s❏ 537 Installment Sales come is generally not subject to regular with-tax return. If any of these statements is not true, holding. However, it may be subject to backup❏ 564 Mutual Fund Distributions Form 8615 is not required and the child’s income withholding to ensure that income tax is col-is taxed at his or her own tax rate.❏ 590 Individual Retirement Arrangements lected on the income. Under backup withhold-
(IRAs) However, the parent can choose to include ing, the bank, broker, or other payer of interest,
the child’s interest and dividends on the parent’s original issue discount (OID), dividends, cash❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules return if certain requirements are met. Use Form patronage dividends, or royalties must withhold,
❏ 1212 Guide to Original Issue Discount 8814 for this purpose. as income tax, 28% of the amount you are paid.
(OID) Instruments For more information about the tax on invest- Backup withholding applies if:
ment income of children and the parents’ elec-
Form (and Instructions) 1. You do not give the payer your identifica-tion, see Publication 929, Tax Rules for Children
tion number (either a social security num-and Dependents.❏ Schedule B (Form 1040) Interest and ber or an employer identification number)Ordinary Dividends in the required manner,Beneficiary of an estate or trust. Interest,
❏ Schedule 1 (Form 1040A) Interest and dividends, and other investment income you re- 2. The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) noti-Ordinary Dividends for Form 1040A ceive as a beneficiary of an estate or trust is fies the payer that you gave an incorrectFilers generally taxable income. You should receive a identification number,
Schedule K-1 (Form 1041), Beneficiary’s Share❏ 1099 General Instructions for Forms 3. The IRS notifies the payer that you areof Income, Deductions, Credits, etc., from the1099, 1098, 5498, and W-2G subject to backup withholding on interestfiduciary. Your copy of Schedule K-1 and its
or dividends because you have underre-❏ 3115 Application for Change in instructions will tell you where to report the in-
ported interest or dividends on your in-Accounting Method come on your Form 1040.
come tax return, or❏ 6251 Alternative Minimum Tax —
Social security number (SSN). You must 4. You are required, but fail, to certify thatIndividuals
give your name and SSN to any person required you are not subject to backup withholding❏ 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitations by federal tax law to make a return, statement, for the reason described in (3).
or other document that relates to you. This in-❏ 8615 Tax for Children Under Age 18 Who
cludes payers of interest and dividends. Certification. For new accounts paying in-Have Investment Income of More
terest or dividends, you must certify under pen-Than $1,700 SSN for joint account. If the funds in a joint
alties of perjury that your social security numberaccount belong to one person, list that person’s❏ 8814 Parents’ Election To Report Child’s is correct and that you are not subject to backupname first on the account and give that person’sInterest and Dividends withholding. Your payer will give you a FormSSN to the payer. (For information on who owns
❏ 8815 Exclusion of Interest From Series W-9, Request for Taxpayer Identification Num-the funds in a joint account, see Joint accounts,
EE and I U.S. Savings Bonds ber and Certification, or similar form, to makelater.) If the joint account contains combined
Issued After 1989 this certification. If you fail to make this certifica-funds, give the SSN of the person whose name
tion, backup withholding may begin immediatelyis listed first on the account.❏ 8818 Optional Form To Record on your new account or investment.These rules apply both to joint ownership byRedemption of Series EE and I
a married couple and to joint ownership by other Underreported interest and dividends.U.S. Savings Bonds Issued After
individuals. For example, if you open a joint1989 You will be considered to have underreported
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 3

Page 4 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
your interest and dividends if the IRS has deter- payment on that return, but you failed to show that at least one of the followi ng situations
mined for a tax year that: file the return. applies.
• You failed to include any part of a reporta- • No underreporting occurred.How to stop backup withholding due toble interest or dividend payment required underreporting. If you have been notified that • You have a bona fide dispute with the IRSto be shown on your return, or you underreported interest or dividends, you can about whether underreporting occurred.
request a determination from the IRS to prevent• You were required to file a return and to • Backup withholding will cause or is caus-backup withholding from starting or to stopinclude a reportable interest or dividend ing an undue hardship, and it is unlikelybackup withholding once it has begun. You must that you will underreport interest and divi-
dends in the future.Table 1-1. Where To Report Common Types of Investment Income
• You have corrected the underreporting by(For detailed information about reporting investment income, see the rest of this
filing a return if you did not previously filepublication, especially How To Report Interest Income and How To Report Dividend
one and by paying all taxes, penalties, andIncome in chapter 1.)
interest due for any underreported interest
or dividend payments.Type of Income If you file Form 1040, If you can file Form If you can file Form
report on ... 1040A, report on ... 1040EZ, report on ...
If the IRS determines that backup withholding
should stop, it will provide you with a certificationTaxable interest that Line 8a (You may need Line 8a (You may need Line 2
and will notify the payers who were sent noticestotals $1,500 or less to file Schedule B as to file Schedule 1 as
earlier.well.) well.)
How to stop backup withholding due to anTaxable interest that Line 8a; also use Line 8a; also use incorrect identification number. If you havetotals more than Schedule B Schedule 1 been notified by a payer that you are subject to$1,500 backup withholding because you have provided
an incorrect SSN or employer identificationSavings bond interest Schedule B; also use Schedule 1; also use
number, you can stop it by following the instruc-you will exclude Form 8815 Form 8815
tions the payer gives you.because of higher
education expenses Reporting backup withholding. If backup
withholding is deducted from your interest orOrdinary dividends Line 9a (You may need Line 9a (You may need dividend income or other reportable payment,that total $1,500 or to file Schedule B as to file Schedule 1 as the bank or other business must give you anless well.) well.)
information return for the year (for example, a
Form 1099-INT) that indicates the amount with-
Ordinary dividends Line 9a; also use Line 9a; also use
held. The information return will show anythat total more than Schedule B Schedule 1
backup withholding as “Federal income tax with-$1,500
held.”
Qualified dividends (if Line 9b; also use the Line 9b; also use the Nonresident aliens. Generally, paymentsyou do not have to file Qualified Dividends and Qualified Dividends and made to nonresident aliens are not subject toSchedule D) Capital Gain Tax Capital Gain Tax
backup withholding. You can use FormWorksheet Worksheet
W-8BEN, Certificate of Foreign Status of Benefi-
cial Owner for United States Tax Withholding, toQualified dividends (if Line 9b; also use the You cannot use Form
certify exempt status. However, this does notyou have to file Qualified Dividends and 1040A.
Schedule D) Capital Gain Tax exempt you from the 30% (or lower treaty) with-
Worksheet or the You cannot use Form holding rate that may apply to your investment
Schedule D Tax 1040EZ income. For information on the 30% rate, see
Worksheet Publication 519, U.S. Tax Guide for Aliens.
Penalties. There are civil and criminal pen-Capital gain Line 13; also use the Line 10; also use the
alties for giving false information to avoiddistributions (if you do Qualified Dividends and Qualified Dividends and
not have to file Capital Gain Tax Capital Gain Tax backup withholding. The civil penalty is $500.
Schedule D) Worksheet Worksheet The criminal penalty, upon conviction, is a fine of
up to $1,000, or imprisonment of up to 1 year, or
Capital gain Schedule D, line 13; also both.
distributions (if you use the Qualified
Where to report investment income. Tablehave to file Schedule Dividends and Capital
D) Gain Tax Worksheet or 1-1 gives an overview of the forms and sched-
the Schedule D Tax ules to use to report some common types of
Worksheet investment income. But, see the rest of this
publication for detailed information about report-
Gain or loss from sales Line 13; also use ing investment income.of stocks or bonds Schedule D and the
Qualified Dividends and Joint accounts. If two or more persons holdYou cannot use FormCapital Gain Tax property (such as a savings account, bond, or1040AWorksheet or the stock) as joint tenants, tenants by the entirety, or
Schedule D Tax tenants in common, each person’s share of anyWorksheet interest or dividends from the property is deter-
mined by local law.Gain or loss from Line 13; also use
exchanges of like-kind Schedule D, Form 8824, Example. You and your husband have ainvestment property and the Qualified
joint money market account. Under state law,Dividends and Capital
half the income from the account belongs to you,Gain Tax Worksheet or
and half belongs to your husband. If you filethe Schedule D Tax
Worksheet separate returns, you each report half of the
income.
Page 4 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 5 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Income from property given to a child. must still report all of your taxable interest in- Dividends that are actually interest. Certain
Property you give as a parent to your child under come. For example, you may receive distributive distributions commonly called dividends are ac-
the Model Gifts of Securities to Minors Act, the shares of interest from partnerships or sub- tually interest. You must report as interest
Uniform Gifts to Minors Act, or any similar law, chapter S corporations. This interest is reported so-called “dividends” on deposits or on share
becomes the child’s property. to you on Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) and Sched- accounts in:
ule K-1 (Form 1120S).Income from the property is taxable to the • Cooperative banks,child, except that any part used to satisfy a legal Nominees. Generally, if someone receivesobligation to support the child is taxable to the • Credit unions,interest as a nominee for you, that person willparent or guardian having that legal obligation. give you a Form 1099-INT showing the interest • Domestic building and loan associations,
Savings account with parent as trustee. received on your behalf. • Domestic savings and loan associations,Interest income from a savings account opened If you receive a Form 1099-INT that includes
for a child who is a minor, but placed in the name • Federal savings and loan associations,amounts belonging to another person, see the
and subject to the order of the parents as trust- anddiscussion on nominee distributions, later,
ees, is taxable to the child if, under the law of the under How To Report Interest Income. • Mutual savings banks.state in which the child resides, both of the
Incorrect amount. If you receive a Formfollowing are true.
1099-INT that shows an incorrect amount (or Money market funds. Generally, amounts• The savings account legally belongs to the other incorrect information), you should ask the you receive from money market funds should bechild. issuer for a corrected form. The new Form reported as dividends, not as interest.1099-INT you receive will be marked “Cor-• The parents are not legally permitted to
rected.”use any of the funds to support the child. Certificates of deposit and other deferred
interest accounts. If you open any of theseForm 1099-OID. Reportable interest income accounts, interest may be paid at fixed intervalsAccuracy-related penalty. An accu- may also be shown on Form 1099-OID, Original of 1 year or less during the term of the account.racy-related penalty of 20% can be charged for Issue Discount. For more information about You generally must include this interest in yourunderpayments of tax due to negligence or dis- amounts shown on this form, see Original Issue income when you actually receive it or are enti-regard of rules or regulations or substantial un- Discount (OID), later in this chapter. tled to receive it without paying a substantialderstatement of tax. For information on the
penalty. The same is true for accounts that ma-penalty and any interest that applies, see Penal- Exempt-interest dividends. Exempt-interest ture in 1 year or less and pay interest in a singleties in chapter 2. dividends you receive from a mutual fund or payment at maturity. If interest is deferred forother regulated investment company are not in- more than 1 year, see Original Issue Discountcluded in your taxable income. (However, see (OID), later.Information-reporting requirement , next.) Ex-
Interest Income Interest subject to penalty for early with-empt-interest dividends should be shown in box
drawal. If you withdraw funds from a deferred8 of Form 1099-INT.Terms you may need to know interest account before maturity, you may have
Information-reporting requirement. Al-(see Glossary): to pay a penalty. You must report the totalthough exempt-interest dividends are not tax- amount of interest paid or credited to your ac-Accrual method able, you must show them on your tax return if count during the year, without subtracting theyou have to file. This is an information-reporting penalty. See Penalty on early withdrawal of sav-Below-market loan requirement and does not change the ex- ings under How To Report Interest Income ,Cash method empt-interest dividends into taxable income. later, for more information on how to report theSee How To Report Interest Income, later. interest and deduct the penalty.Demand loan
Money borrowed to invest in certificate ofForgone interest Note. Exempt-interest dividends paid from
deposit. The interest you pay on money bor-specified private activity bonds may be subjectGift loan rowed from a bank or savings institution to meetto the alternative minimum tax. The ex-
the minimum deposit required for a certificate ofInterest empt-interest dividends subject to the alterna-
deposit from the institution and the interest youtive minimum tax are shown in box 9 of FormNominee earn on the certificate are two separate items.1099-INT. See Form 6251 and its instructions
You must report the total interest you earn onOriginal issue discount for more information about this tax. (Private ac-
the certificate in your income. If you itemizetivity bonds are discussed later under State orPrivate activity bond deductions, you can deduct the interest you payLocal Government Obligations.)
Term loan as investment interest, up to the amount of your
net investment income. See Interest ExpensesInterest on VA dividends. Interest on insur-
in chapter 3.ance dividends that you leave on deposit withThis section discusses the tax treatment of dif- the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) is notferent types of interest income. Example. You deposited $5,000 with ataxable. This includes interest paid on dividends
In general, any interest that you receive or bank and borrowed $5,000 from the bank toon converted United States Government Life
that is credited to your account and can be make up the $10,000 minimum deposit requiredInsurance policies and on National Service Life
withdrawn is taxable income. (It does not have to to buy a 6-month certificate of deposit. The cer-Insurance policies.
be entered in your passbook.) Exceptions to this tificate earned $575 at maturity in 2007, but you
rule are discussed later. received only $265, which represented the $575Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs).
you earned minus $310 interest charged on yourInterest on a Roth IRA generally is not taxable.Form 1099-INT. Interest income is generally $5,000 loan. The bank gives you a FormInterest on a traditional IRA is tax deferred. Youreported to you on Form 1099-INT, or a similar 1099-INT for 2007 showing the $575 interestgenerally do not include it in your income untilstatement, by banks, savings and loans, and you earned. The bank also gives you a state-you make withdrawals from the IRA. See Publi-other payers of interest. This form shows you the ment showing that you paid $310 interest forcation 590 for more information.interest you received during the year. Keep this 2007. You must include the $575 in your in-form for your records. You do not have to attach come. If you itemize your deductions on Sched-Taxable Interest — Generalit to your tax return. ule A (Form 1040), you can deduct $310, subject
Report on your tax return the total amount of to the net investment income limit.Taxable interest includes interest you receiveinterest income that you receive for the tax year. from bank accounts, loans you make to others,
Gift for opening account. If you receive non-Interest not reported on Form 1099-INT. and other sources. The following are some
cash gifts or services for making deposits or forEven if you do not receive Form 1099-INT, you sources of taxable interest.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 5

Page 6 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
opening an account in a savings institution, you The amount of interest you must exclude is A tax avoidance loan is any below-mar ket
may have to report the value as interest. loan where the avoidance of federal tax is one ofthe interest that was credited on the frozen de-
For deposits of less than $5,000, gifts or the main purposes of the interest arrangement.posits minus the sum of:
services valued at more than $10 must be re- • The net amount you withdrew from these Forgone interest. For any period, forgone in-ported as interest. For deposits of $5,000 or deposits during the year, and terest is:more, gifts or services valued at more than $20
must be reported as interest. The value is deter- • The amount you could have withdrawn as • The amount of interest that would be pay-
mined by the cost to the financial institution. of the end of the year (not reduced by any able for that period if interest accrued on
penalty for premature withdrawals of a the loan at the applicable federal rate and
Example. You open a savings account at time deposit). was payable annually on December 31,
your local bank and deposit $800. The account minusIf you receive a Form 1099-INT for interest in-earns $20 interest. You also receive a $15 cal- • Any interest actually payable on the loancome on deposits that were frozen at the end ofculator. If no other interest is credited to your for the period.2007, see Frozen deposits under How To Re-account during the year, the Form 1099-INT you port Interest Income  for information about re-receive will show $35 interest for the year. You Applicable federal rate. Applicable federalporting this interest income exclusion on yourmust report $35 interest income on your tax rates are published by the IRS each month in thetax return.return. Internal Revenue Bulletin. Some IRS officesThe interest you exclude is treated as creditedInterest on insurance dividends. Interest on have these bulletins available for research. Seeto your account in the following year. You mustinsurance dividends left on deposit with an in- chapter 5 for other ways to get this information.include it in income in the year you can withdrawsurance company that can be withdrawn annu- Rules for below-market loans. The rules thatit.ally is taxable to you in the year it is credited to apply to a below-market loan depend onyour account. However, if you can withdraw it Example. $100 of interest was credited on whether the loan is a gift loan, demand loan, oronly on the anniversary date of the policy (or your frozen deposit during the year. You with- term loan.other specified date), the interest is taxable in drew $80 but could not withdraw any more as ofthe year that date occurs. Gift and demand loans. A gift loan is anythe end of the year. You must include $80 in below-market loan where the forgone interest isPrepaid insurance premiums. Any increase your income and exclude $20 from your income in the nature of a gift.in the value of prepaid insurance premiums, for the year. You must include the $20 in your A demand loan is a loan payable in full at anyadvance premiums, or premium deposit funds is income for the year you can withdraw it. time upon demand by the lender. A demand loaninterest if it is applied to the payment of premi- is a below-market loan if no interest is chargedums due on insurance policies or made avail- Bonds traded flat. If you buy a bond at a or if interest is charged at a rate below theable for you to withdraw. discount when interest has been defaulted or applicable federal rate.when the interest has accrued but has not been A demand loan or gift loan that is a be-U.S. obligations. Interest on U.S. obligations, paid, the transaction is described as trading a low-market loan is generally treated as ansuch as U.S. Treasury bills, notes, and bonds, bond flat. The defaulted or unpaid interest is not arm’s-length transaction in which the lender isissued by any agency or instrumentality of the income and is not taxable as interest if paid later. treated as having made:United States is taxable for federal income tax When you receive a payment of that interest, it ispurposes. • A loan to the borrower in exchange for aa return of capital that reduces the remaining
note that requires the payment of interestInterest on tax refunds. Interest you receive cost basis of your bond. Interest that accrues
at the applicable federal rate, andon tax refunds is taxable income. after the date of purchase, however, is taxable
interest income for the year received or accrued. • An additional payment to the borrower inInterest on condemnation award. If the con- See Bonds Sold Between Interest Dates, later in an amount equal to the forgone interest.demning authority pays you interest to compen- this chapter.sate you for a delay in payment of an award, the The borrower is generally treated as transferring
interest is taxable. the additional payment back to the lender asBelow-Market Loans interest. The lender must report that amount asInstallment sale payments. If a contract for
interest income.If you make a below-market gift or demand loan,the sale or exchange of property provides for
you must report as interest income any forgonedeferred payments, it also usually provides for The lender’s additional payment to the bor-
interest (defined later) from that loan. The be-interest payable with the deferred payments. rower is treated as a gift, dividend, contribution
low-market loan rules and exceptions are de-That interest is taxable when you receive it. If to capital, pay for services, or other payment,
scribed in this section. For more information,little or no interest is provided for in a deferred depending on the substance of the transaction.
see section 7872 of the Internal Revenue Codepayment contract, part of each payment may be The borrower may have to report this payment
and its regulations.treated as interest. See Unstated Interest and as taxable income, depending on its classifica-
Original Issue Discount in Publication 537. If you receive a below-market loan, you may tion.
be able to deduct the forgone interest as well as These transfers are considered to occur an-Interest on annuity contract. Accumulated any interest that you actually paid, but not if it is nually, generally on December 31.interest on an annuity contract you sell before its personal interest.maturity date is taxable. Term loans. A term loan is any loan that is
not a demand loan. A term loan is a be-Usurious interest. Usurious interest is inter- Loans subject to the rules. The rules for be- low-market loan if the amount of the loan is moreest charged at an illegal rate. This is taxable as low-market loans apply to: than the present value of all payments dueinterest unless state law automatically changes under the loan.• Gift loans,it to a payment on the principal. A lender who makes a below-market term• Pay-related loans, loan other than a gift loan is treated as transfer-Interest income on frozen deposits. Ex-
• Corporation-shareholder loans, ring an additional lump-sum cash payment toclude from your gross income interest on frozen
the borrower (as a dividend, contribution to capi-deposits. A deposit is frozen if, at the end of the • Tax avoidance loans, and tal, etc.) on the date the loan is made. Theyear, you cannot withdraw any part of the de-
• Certain loans made to qualified continuing amount of this payment is the amount of the loanposit because:
care facilities under a continuing care con- minus the present value, at the applicable fed-• The financial institution is bankrupt or in- tract. eral rate, of all payments due under the loan. Ansolvent, or equal amount is treated as original issue dis-
A pay-related loan is any below-market loan• The state in which the institution is located count (OID). The lender must report the annual
between an employer and an employee or be-has placed limits on withdrawals because part of the OID as interest income. The borrower
tween an independent contractor and a personother financial institutions in the state are may be able to deduct the OID as interest ex-
for whom the contractor provides services.bankrupt or insolvent. pense. See Original Issue Discount (OID), later.
Page 6 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 7 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Exceptions to the below-market loan rules. • The cost to you of complying with the be- Series HH bonds. These bonds were issued
Exceptions to the below-market loan rules are low-market loan rules, if they were to ap- at face value. Interest is paid twice a year by
discussed here. ply, and direct deposit to your bank account. If you are a
cash method taxpayer, you must report interestException for loans of $10,000 or less. • Any reasons other than taxes for structur- on these bonds as income in the year you re-The rules for below-market loans do not apply to ing the transaction as a below-market ceive it.any day on which the total outstanding amount loan. Series HH bonds were first offered in 1980;of loans between the borrower and lender is
they were last offered in August 2004. Before$10,000 or less. This exception applies only to: If you structure a transaction to meet this 1980, series H bonds were issued. Series Hexception, and one of the principal purposes of bonds are treated the same as series HH bonds.1. Gift loans between individuals if the gift structuring the transaction in that way is the If you are a cash method taxpayer, you mustloan is not directly used to buy or carry avoidance of federal tax, the loan will be consid- report the interest when you receive it.income-producing assets, and ered a tax-avoidance loan and this exception will
Series H bonds have a maturity period of 30not apply.2. Pay-related loans or corpora- years. Series HH bonds mature in 20 years.tion-shareholder loans if the avoidance of Limit on forgone interest for gift loans of
federal tax is not a principal purpose of the $100,000 or less. For gift loans between indi- Series EE and series I bonds. Interest oninterest arrangement. viduals, if the outstanding loans between the these bonds is payable when you redeem the
lender and borrower total $100,000 or less, theThis exception does not apply to a term loan bonds. The difference between the purchase
forgone interest to be included in income by thedescribed in (2) above that previously has been price and the redemption value is taxable inter-
lender and deducted by the borrower is limited tosubject to the below-market loan rules. Those est.
the amount of the borrower’s net investmentrules will continue to apply even if the outstand-
income for the year. If the borrower’s net invest- Series EE bonds. Series EE bonds were firsting balance is reduced to $10,000 or less.
ment income is $1,000 or less, it is treated as offered in January 1980. They have a maturityException for loans to continuing care fa- zero. This limit does not apply to a loan if the period of 30 years. Before July 1980, series Ecilities. Loans to qualified continuing care fa- avoidance of federal tax is one of the main bonds were issued. The original 10-year matur-cilities under continuing care contracts are not purposes of the interest arrangement. ity period of series E bonds has been extendedsubject to the rules for below-market loans for to 40 years for bonds issued before DecemberEffective dates.  These rules apply to termthe calendar year if the lender or the lender’s 1965 and 30 years for bonds issued after No-loans made after June 6, 1984, and to demandspouse is age 62 or older at the end of the year. vember 1965. Paper series EE and series Eloans outstanding after that date.For the definitions of qualified continuing care bonds are issued at a discount. The face value isfacility and continuing care contract, see Internal payable to you at maturity. Electronic series EERevenue Code section 7872(h). U.S. Savings Bonds bonds are issued at their face value. The face
Exception for loans without significant tax value plus accrued interest is payable to you atThis section provides tax information on U.S.effect. Loans are excluded from the be- maturity.savings bonds. It explains how to report thelow-market loan rules if their interest arrange-  Owners of paper series E and EE bonds caninterest income on these bonds and how to treatments do not have a significant effect on the convert them to electronic bonds. These con-transfers of these bonds.federal tax liability of the borrower or the lender. verted bonds do not retain the denominationU.S. savings bonds currently offered to indi-These loans include: listed on the paper certificate but are posted atviduals are the following. their purchase price (with accrued interest).1. Loans made available by the lender to the • Series EE bonds
general public on the same terms and con- Series I bonds. Series I bonds were first of-• Series I bondsditions that are consistent with the lender’s fered in 1998. These are inflation-indexed bonds
customary business practice, issued at their face amount with a maturity pe-
For other information on U.S. savings riod of 30 years. The face value plus all accrued2. Loans subsidized by a federal, state, or
bonds, write to: interest is payable to you at maturity.municipal government that are made avail-
able under a program of general applica- Reporting options for cash method tax-For Series HH/H:tion to the public, payers. If you use the cash method of report-Bureau of the Public Debt ing income, you can report the interest on series3. Certain employee-relocation loans, Division of Customer Assistance EE, series E, and series I bonds in either of theP.O. Box 21864. Certain loans from a foreign person, un- following ways.Parkersburg, WV 26106-2186.less the interest income would be effec-
1. Method 1. Postpone reporting the interesttively connected with the conduct of a U.S.
until the earlier of the year you cash ortrade or business and would not be ex-
dispose of the bonds or the year in whichempt from U.S. tax under an income tax
For Series EE and I they mature. (However, see Savingstreaty,
bonds traded, later.)Bureau of the Public Debt5. Gift loans to a charitable organization, con- Note. Series E bonds issued in 1977 ma-Division of Customer Assistancetributions to which are deductible, if the tured in 2007. If you have used method 1,P.O. Box 7012total outstanding amount of loans between you generally must report the interest onParkersburg, WV 26106-7012.the organization and lender is $250,000 or these bonds on your 2007 return.less at all times during the tax year, and Or, on the Internet, visit: www. 2. Method 2. Choose to report the increase6. Other loans on which the interest arrange- treasurydirect.gov/indiv/products/ in redemption value as interest each year.ment can be shown to have no significant products.htm/.
effect on the federal tax liability of the
You must use the same method for all series EE,lender or the borrower. Accrual method taxpayers. If you use an ac-
series E, and series I bonds you own. If you docrual method of accounting, you must reportFor a loan described in (6) above, all the not choose method 2 by reporting the increaseinterest on U.S. savings bonds each year as itfacts and circumstances are used to determine if in redemption value as interest each year, youaccrues. You cannot postpone reporting interestthe interest arrangement has a significant effect must use method 1.until you receive it or until the bonds mature.on the federal tax liability of the lender or bor-
Cash method taxpayers. If you use the cash If you plan to cash your bonds in therower. Some factors to be considered are:
method of accounting, as most individual tax- same year that you will pay for higher• Whether items of income and deduction payers do, you generally report the interest on educational expenses, you may want
TIP
generated by the loan offset each other, U.S. savings bonds when you receive it. But see to use method 1 because you may be able to
• The amount of these items, Series EE and series I bonds, below. exclude the interest from your income. To learn
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 7

Page 8 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you. If you file separate returns, each of youTable 1-2. Who Pays the Tax on U.S. Savings Bond Interest
generally must report one-half of the bond inter-
est. For more information about communityIF ... THEN the interest must be reported by ... property, see Publication 555, Community Prop-
erty.you buy a bond in your name and the name of you.
another person as co-owners, using only your Table 1-2. These rules are also shown inown funds Table 1-2.
you buy a bond in the name of another person, the person for whom you bought the bond. Child as only owner. Interest on U.S. savingswho is the sole owner of the bond
bonds bought for and registered only in the
you and another person buy a bond as both you and the other co-owner, in proportion name of your child is income to your child, even
co-owners, each contributing part of the to the amount each paid for the bond. if you paid for the bonds and are named as
purchase price beneficiary. If the bonds are series EE, series E,
or series I bonds, the interest on the bonds isyou and your spouse, who live in a community you and your spouse. If you file separate income to your child in the earlier of the year theproperty state, buy a bond that is community returns, both you and your spouse generally
bonds are cashed or disposed of or the year theproperty report one-half of the interest.
bonds mature, unless your child chooses to re-
port the interest income each year.
how, see Education Savings Bond Program, have filed your original return for the year of the Choice to report interest each year. The
later. change by the due date (including extensions). choice to report the accrued interest each year
can be made either by your child or by you forBy the date you file the original state-Change from method 1. If you want to your child. This choice is made by filing an in-ment with your return, you must alsochange your method of reporting the interest come tax return that shows all the interestsend a copy to the address below.from method 1 to method 2, you can do so earned to date, and by stating on the return thatInternal Revenue Servicewithout permission from the IRS. In the year of your child chooses to report the interest eachAttention: CC:IT&A (Automatic Rulingschange, you must report all interest accrued to year. Either you or your child should keep a copyBranch)date and not previously reported for all your of this return.P.O. Box 7604bonds. Unless your child is otherwise required to fileBenjamin Franklin StationOnce you choose to report the interest each a tax return for any year after making this choice,Washington, DC 20044.year, you must continue to do so for all series your child does not have to file a return only toIf you use a private delivery service, send theEE, series E, and series I bonds you own and for report the annual accrual of U.S. savings bondcopy to the address below.any you get later, unless you request permission interest under this choice. However, see Tax on
to change, as explained next. investment income of a child under age 18 ,Internal Revenue Service
earlier, under General Information. Neither youAttention: CC:IT&A (Automatic RulingsChange from method 2. To change from
nor your child can change the way you report theBranch)method 2 to method 1, you must request permis-
interest unless you request permission from the1111 Constitution Avenue, NWsion from the IRS. Permission for the change is
IRS, as discussed earlier under Change fromWashington, DC 20224.automatically granted if you send the IRS a
method 2.statement that meets all the following require-
Instead of filing this statement, you can re-ments. Ownership transferred. If you bought seriesquest permission to change from method 2 to E, series EE, or series I bonds entirely with your1. You have typed or printed at the top, method 1 by filing Form 3115. In that case, own funds and had them reissued in your“Change in Method of Accounting Under follow the form instructions for an automatic co-owner’s name or beneficiary’s name alone,Section 6.01 of the Appendix of Rev. Proc. change. No user fee is required. you must include in your gross income for the2002-9” (or later update).
Co-owners. If a U.S. savings bond is issued in year of reissue all interest that you earned on2. It includes your name and social security the names of co-owners, such as you and your these bonds and have not previously reported.number under the label in (1). child or you and your spouse, interest on the But, if the bonds were reissued in your name
bond is generally taxable to the co-owner who alone, you do not have to report the interest3. It identifies the savings bonds for which
bought the bond. accrued at that time.you are requesting this change.
This same rule applies when bonds (otherOne co-owner’s funds used. If you used4. It includes your agreement to: than bonds held as community property) areyour funds to buy the bond, you must pay the tax transferred between spouses or incident to di-a. Report all interest on any bonds ac- on the interest. This is true even if you let the vorce.quired during or after the year of other co-owner redeem the bond and keep all
change when the interest is realized the proceeds. Under these circumstances, since Example. You bought series EE bonds en-upon disposition, redemption, or final the other co-owner will receive a Form 1099-INT tirely with your own funds. You did not choose tomaturity, whichever is earliest, and at the time of redemption, the other co-owner report the accrued interest each year. Later, youmust provide you with another Form 1099-INTb. Report all interest on the bonds ac- transfer the bonds to your former spouse undershowing the amount of interest from the bondquired before the year of change when a divorce agreement. You must include the de-that is taxable to you. The co-owner who re-the interest is realized upon disposition, ferred accrued interest, from the date of thedeemed the bond is a “nominee.” See Nomineeredemption, or final maturity, whichever original issue of the bonds to the date of transfer,distributions under How To Report Interest In-is earliest, with the exception of the in- in your income in the year of transfer. Yourcome, later, for more information about how aterest reported in prior tax years. former spouse includes in income the interest onperson who is a nominee reports interest in- the bonds from the date of transfer to the date ofcome belonging to another person.5. It includes your signature. redemption.
Both co-owners’ funds used. If you andYou must attach this statement to your tax re- Purchased jointly. If you and a co-ownerthe other co-owner each contribute part of theturn for the year of change, which you must file each contributed funds to buy series E, seriesbond’s purchase price, the interest is generallyby the due date (including extensions). EE, or series I bonds jointly and later have thetaxable to each of you, in proportion to theYou can have an automatic extension of 6 bonds reissued in the co-owner’s name alone,amount each of you paid.months from the due date of your return for the you must include in your gross income for the
year of change (excluding extensions) to file the Community property. If you and your year of reissue your share of all the interest
statement with an amended return. At the top of spouse live in a community property state and earned on the bonds that you have n ot previ-
the statement, enter “Filed pursuant to section hold bonds as community property, one-half of ously reported. The former co-owner  does not
301.9100-2.” To get this extension, you must the interest is considered received by each of have to include in gross income at th e time of
Page 8 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 9 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
reissue his or her share of the interest earned had not chosen to report the interest each year, Example 4. When your aunt died, she
that was not reported before the transfer. This and who had bought the bonds entirely with his owned series H bonds that she had acquired in a
interest, however, as well as all interest earned or her own funds, all interest earned before trade for series E bonds. You were the benefi-
after the reissue, is income to the former death must be reported in one of the following ciary of these bonds. Your aunt used the cash
co-owner. ways. method and did not choose to report the interest
This income-reporting rule also applies when on the series E bonds each year as it accrued.1. The surviving spouse or personal repre-the bonds are reissued in the name of your Your aunt’s executor chose not to include anysentative (executor, administrator, etc.)former co-owner and a new co-owner. But the interest earned before your aunt’s death on herwho files the final income tax return of thenew co-owner will report only his or her share of final return.decedent can choose to include on thatthe interest earned after the transfer. The income in respect of the decedent is thereturn all of the interest earned on theIf bonds that you and a co-owner bought sum of the unreported interest on the series Ebonds before the decedent’s death. Thejointly are reissued to each of you separately in bonds and the interest, if any, payable on theperson who acquires the bonds then in-the same proportion as your contribution to the series H bonds but not received as of the date ofcludes in income only interest earned afterpurchase price, neither you nor your co-owner your aunt’s death. You must report any interestthe date of death.has to report at that time the interest earned received during the year as income on yourbefore the bonds were reissued. 2. If the choice in (1) is not made, the interest return. The part of the interest that was payable
earned up to the date of death is income in but not received before your aunt’s death isExample 1. You and your spouse each respect of the decedent. It should not be income in respect of the decedent and mayspent an equal amount to buy a $1,000 series included in the decedent’s final return. All qualify for the estate tax deduction. For informa-EE savings bond. The bond was issued to you of the interest earned both before and after tion on when to report the interest on the seriesand your spouse as co-owners. You both post- the decedent’s death (except any part re- E bonds traded, see Savings bonds traded ,pone reporting interest on the bond. You later ported by the estate on its income tax re- later.have the bond reissued as two $500 bonds, one turn) is income to the person who acquiresin your name and one in your spouse’s name. At the bonds. If that person uses the cash Savings bonds distributed from a retirementthat time neither you nor your spouse has to method and does not choose to report the or profit-sharing plan. If you acquire a U.S.report the interest earned to the date of reissue. interest each year, he or she can postpone savings bond in a taxable distribution from a
reporting it until the year the bonds are retirement or profit-sharing plan, your income forExample 2. You bought a $1,000 series EE cashed or disposed of or the year they the year of distribution includes the bond’s re-savings bond entirely with your own funds. The mature, whichever is earlier. In the year demption value (its cost plus the interest ac-bond was issued to you and your spouse as that person reports the interest, he or she crued before the distribution). When you redeemco-owners. You both postponed reporting inter- can claim a deduction for any federal es- the bond (whether in the year of distribution orest on the bond. You later have the bond reis- tate tax that was paid on the part of the later), your interest income includes only thesued as two $500 bonds, one in your name and interest included in the decedent’s estate. interest accrued after the bond was distributed.one in your spouse’s name. You must report half
To figure the interest reported as a taxable distri-the interest earned to the date of reissue. For more information on income in respect of a bution and your interest income when you re-decedent, see Publication 559, Survivors, Exec-Transfer to a trust. If you own series E, series deem the bond, see Worksheet for savingsutors, and Administrators.EE, or series I bonds and transfer them to a bonds distributed from a retirement or
trust, giving up all rights of ownership, you must profit-sharing plan under How To Report InterestExample 1. Your uncle, a cash method tax-include in your income for that year the interest Income, later.payer, died and left you a $1,000 series EEearned to the date of transfer if you have not bond. He had bought the bond for $500 and hadalready reported it. However, if you are consid- Savings bonds traded. If you postponed re-not chosen to report the interest each year. Atered the owner of the trust and if the increase in porting the interest on your series EE or series Ethe date of death, interest of $200 had accruedvalue both before and after the transfer contin- bonds, you did not recognize taxable incomeon the bond and its value of $700 was includedues to be taxable to you, you can continue to when you traded the bonds for series HH orin your uncle’s estate. Your uncle’s executordefer reporting the interest earned each year. series H bonds, unless you received cash in thechose not to include the $200 accrued interest inYou must include the total interest in your in- trade. (You cannot trade series I bonds for se-your uncle’s final income tax return. The $200 iscome in the year you cash or dispose of the ries HH bonds. After August 31, 2004, you can-income in respect of the decedent.bonds or the year the bonds finally mature, not trade any other series of bonds for series HHYou are a cash method taxpayer and do notwhichever is earlier. bonds.) Any cash you received is income up tochoose to report the interest each year as it isThe same rules apply to previously unre- the amount of the interest earned on the bondsearned. If you cash the bond when it reachesported interest on series EE or series E bonds if traded. When your series HH or series H bondsmaturity value of $1,000, you report $500 inter-the transfer to a trust consisted of series HH or mature, or if you dispose of them before matur-est income—the difference between maturityseries H bonds you acquired in a trade for the ity, you report as interest the difference betweenvalue of $1,000 and the original cost of $500.series EE or series E bonds. See Savings bonds their redemption value and your cost. Your costFor that year, you can deduct (as a miscellane-traded, later. is the sum of the amount you paid for the tradedous itemized deduction not subject to the
series EE or series E bonds plus any amount2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit) any federalDecedents. The manner of reporting interest
you had to pay at the time of the trade.estate tax paid because the $200 interest wasincome on series E, series EE, or series I bonds,
included in your uncle’s estate.after the death of the owner, depends on the
Example.  In 2004, you traded series EEaccounting and income-reporting methods pre-
bonds (on which you postponed reporting theExample 2. If, in Example 1, the executorviously used by the decedent.
interest) for $2,500 in series HH bonds and $223had chosen to include the $200 accrued interestDecedent who reported interest each year. in cash. You reported the $223 as taxable in-in your uncle’s final return, you would report onlyIf the bonds transferred because of death were come in 2004, the year of the trade. At the time$300 as interest when you cashed the bond atowned by a person who used an accrual of the trade, the series EE bonds had accruedmaturity. $300 is the interest earned after yourmethod, or who used the cash method and had interest of $523 and a redemption value ofuncle’s death.chosen to report the interest each year, the $2,723. You hold the series HH bonds until ma-interest earned in the year of death up to the turity, when you receive $2,500. You must reportExample 3. If, in Example 1, you make ordate of death must be reported on that person’s $300 as interest income in the year of maturity.have made the choice to report the increase infinal return. The person who acquires the bonds This is the difference between their redemptionredemption value as interest each year, youincludes in income only interest earned after the value, $2,500, and your cost, $2,200 (theinclude in gross income for the year you acquiredate of death. amount you paid for the series EE bonds). (It isthe bond all of the unreported increase in value
also the difference between the accrued interestDecedent who postponed reporting inter- of all series E, series EE, and series I bonds you
of $523 on the series EE bonds and the $223est. If the transferred bonds were owned by a hold, including the $200 on the bond you inher-
cash received on the trade.)decedent who had used the cash method and ited from your uncle.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 9

Page 10 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Choice to report interest in year of trade. interest in box 3. Do not include this income on Reduction for certain benefits. You must
You could have chosen to treat all of the previ- reduce your qualified higher educational ex-your state or local income tax return.
ously unreported accrued interest on series EE penses by all of the following tax-free benefits.
or series E bonds traded for series HH bonds as
1. Tax-free part of scholarships and fellow-income in the year of the trade. If you made this Education Savings Bond Program ships.choice, it is treated as a change from method 1.
See Change from method 1  under Series EE You may be able to exclude from income all or 2. Expenses used to figure the tax-free por-
and series I bonds, earlier. part of the interest you receive on the redemp- tion of distributions from a Coverdell ESA.
tion of qualified U.S. savings bonds during theForm 1099-INT for U.S. savings bond inter- 3. Expenses used to figure the tax-free por-year if you pay qualified higher educational ex-est. When you cash a bond, the bank or other tion of distributions from a qualified tuitionpenses during the same year. This exclusion ispayer that redeems it must give you a Form program.known as the Education Savings Bond Program.1099-INT if the interest part of the payment you
You do not qualify for this exclusion if your 4. Any tax-free payments (other than gifts orreceive is $10 or more. Box 3 of your Form
filing status is married filing separately. inheritances) received as educational as-1099-INT should show the interest as the differ-
sistance, such as:ence between the amount you received and the Form 8815. Use Form 8815, Exclusion of In-amount paid for the bond. However, your Form a. Veterans’ educational assistance bene-terest From Series EE and I U.S. Savings Bonds1099-INT may show more interest than you fits,Issued After 1989, to figure your exclusion. At-have to include on your income tax return. For tach the form to your Form 1040 or Form 1040A.example, this may happen if any of the following b. Qualified tuition reductions, or
are true. Qualified U.S. savings bonds. A qualified c. Employer-provided educational assis-
• You chose to report the increase in the U.S. savings bond is a series EE bond issued tance.
redemption value of the bond each year. after 1989 or a series I bond. The bond must be
The interest shown on your Form issued either in your name (sole owner) or in 5. Any expense used in figuring the Hope
1099-INT will not be reduced by amounts your and your spouse’s names (co-owners). and lifetime learning credits.
previously included in income. You must be at least 24 years old before the For information about these benefits, see Pub-bond’s issue date. For example, a bond bought• You received the bond from a decedent. lication 970.by a parent and issued in the name of his or herThe interest shown on your Form Amount excludable. If the total proceeds (in-child under age 24 does not qualify for the exclu-1099-INT will not be reduced by any inter- terest and principal) from the qualified U.S. sav-sion by the parent or child.est reported by the decedent before death, ings bonds you redeem during the year are notor on the decedent’s final return, or by the The issue date of a bond may be earlier more than your adjusted qualified higher educa-estate on the estate’s income tax return. than the date the bond is purchased tional expenses for the year, you may be able tobecause the issue date assigned to aCAUTION
!
• Ownership of the bond was transferred. exclude all of the interest. If the proceeds arebond is the first day of the month in which it isThe interest shown on your Form more than the expenses, you may be able topurchased.1099-INT will not be reduced by interest exclude only part of the interest.
that accrued before the transfer. To determine the excludable amount, multi-Beneficiary. You can designate any individ-
ply the interest part of the proceeds by a fraction.ual (including a child) as a beneficiary of the• You were named as a co-owner and the The numerator (top part) of the fraction is thebond.other co-owner contributed funds to buy qualified higher educational expenses you paidthe bond. The interest shown on your Verification by IRS. If you claim the exclu- during the year. The denominator (bottom part)Form 1099-INT will not be reduced by the sion, the IRS will check it by using bond redemp- of the fraction is the total proceeds you receivedamount you received as nominee for the tion information from the Department of during the year.other co-owner. (See Co-owners, earlier in Treasury.
this section, for more information about Example. In February 2007, Mark andthe reporting requirements.) Qualified expenses. Qualified higher educa- Joan, a married couple, cashed a qualified se-
tional expenses are tuition and fees required for• You received the bond in a taxable distri- ries EE U.S. savings bond they bought in April
you, your spouse, or your dependent (for whombution from a retirement or profit-sharing 1996. They received proceeds of $7,512, repre-
you claim an exemption) to attend an eligibleplan. The interest shown on your Form senting principal of $5,000 and interest of
educational institution.1099-INT will not be reduced by the inter- $2,512. In 2007, they paid $4,000 of their daugh-
Qualified expenses include any contributionest portion of the amount taxable as a ter’s college tuition. They are not claiming an
you make to a qualified tuition program or to adistribution from the plan and not taxable education credit for that amount, and their
Coverdell education savings account. For infor-as interest. (This amount is generally daughter does not have any tax-free educational
mation about these programs, see Publicationshown on Form 1099-R, Distributions assistance. They can exclude $1,338 ($2,512 ×
970, Tax Benefits for Education.From Pensions, Annuities, Retirement or ($4,000 ÷ $7,512)) of interest in 2007. They
Qualified expenses do not include expensesProfit-Sharing Plans, IRAs, Insurance must pay tax on the remaining $1,174 ($2,512 −
for room and board or for courses involvingContracts, etc., for the year of distribution.) $1,338) interest.
sports, games, or hobbies that are not part of a Figuring the interest part of the proceedsdegree or certificate granting program.For more information on including the correct (Form 8815, line 6). To figure the amount ofamount of interest on your return, see U.S. sav- Eligible educational institutions. These interest to report on Form 8815, line 6, use theings bond interest previously reported  or Nomi- institutions include most public, private, and Line 6 Worksheet in the Form 8815 instructions.nee distributions under How To Report Interest nonprofit universities, colleges, and vocationalIncome, later. schools that are accredited and are eligible to
participate in student aid programs run by theInterest on U.S. savings bonds is ex-
Department of Education. See chapter 10 ofempt from state and local taxes. The
Publication 970 for information on foreignForm 1099-INT you receive will indi-
TIP
schools that are eligible.cate the amount that is for U.S. savings bonds
Page 10 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 11 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you previously reported any interest deduction for interest expenses until you have Treasury notes and bonds. Treasury notes
from savings bonds cashed during have maturity periods of more than 1 year, rang-figured this exclusion of savings bond interest.
2007, use the Alternate Line 6 Work- ing up to 10 years. Maturity periods for TreasuryTherefore, if you had interest expenses that are
sheet below instead. bonds are longer than 10 years. Both of thesedue to royalties and deductible on Schedule E
Treasury issues generally are issued in denomi-(Form 1040), you must make a special computa-
nations of $1,000 to $1 million. Both notes andtion of your deductible interest to figure the netAlternate Line 6 Worksheet
bonds generally pay interest every 6 months.royalty income included in your modified AGI.1. Enter the amount from Form 8815, Generally, you report this interest for the yearYou must figure deductible interest without re-line 5 .................... paid. When the notes or bonds mature, you cangard to this exclusion of bond interest.2. Enter the face value of all post-1989 redeem these securities for face value.You can use a “dummy” Form 4952, Invest-paper series EE bonds cashed in Treasury notes and bonds are sold by auc-ment Interest Expense Deduction, to make the2007 ..................... tion. Two types of bids are accepted: competi-3. Multiply line 2 above by 50% (.50) special computation. On this form, include in tive bids and noncompetitive bids. If you make a4. Enter the face value of all electronic your net investment income your total interest competitive bid and a determination is made thatseries EE bonds (including income for the year from series EE and I U.S. the purchase price is less than the face value,post-1989 series EE bonds savings bonds. Use the deductible interest you will receive a refund for the difference be-converted from paper to electronic amount from this form only to figure the net tween the purchase price and the face value.format) and all series I bonds royalty income included in your modified AGI. This amount is considered original issue dis-cashed in 2007 .............. Do not attach this form to your tax return.5. Add lines 3 and 4 ............ count. However, the original issue discount rulesAfter you figure this interest exclusion, use a6. Subtract line 5 from line 1 ....... (discussed later) do not apply if the discount isseparate Form 4952 to figure your actual deduc-7. Enter the amount of interest less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025) of the face
tion for investment interest expenses, and at-reported as income in previous amount, multiplied by the number of full years
tach that form to your return.years .................... from the date of original issue to maturity. See
8. Subtract line 7 from line 6. Enter the De minimis OID  under Original Issue DiscountRecordkeeping. If you claim the inter-result here and on Form 8815, line 6 (OID), later. If the purchase price is determinedest exclusion, you must keep a written
to be more than the face amount, the differencerecord of the qualified U.S. savingsRECORDS
Modified adjusted gross income limit. is a premium. (See Bond Premium Amortizationbonds you redeem. Your record must includeThe interest exclusion is limited if your modified in chapter 3.)the serial number, issue date, face value, andadjusted gross income (modified AGI) is: total redemption proceeds (principal and inter- For other information on these notes or• $65,600 to $80,600 for taxpayers filing sin- est) of each bond. You can use Form 8818, bonds, write to:gle or head of household, and Optional Form To Record Redemption of Series
EE and I U.S. Savings Bonds Issued After 1989, Bureau of The Public Debt• $98,400 to $128,400 for married taxpayers
to record this information. You should also keep P.O. Box 7015filing jointly, or for a qualifying widow(er)
bills, receipts, canceled checks, or other docu- Parkersburg, WV 26106-7015with dependent child.
mentation that shows you paid qualified higher
You do not qualify for the interest exclusion if Or, on the Internet, visit: http://www.educational expenses during the year.
your modified AGI is equal to or more than the treasurydirect.gov/indiv/indiv.htm.
upper limit for your filing status.
U.S. Treasury Bills,
Modified AGI. Modified AGI, for purposes Notes, and Bondsof this exclusion, is adjusted gross income
Treasury inflation-protected securities(Form 1040A, line 21, or Form 1040, line 37) Treasury bills, notes, and bonds are direct debts (TIPS). These securities pay interest twice afigured before the interest exclusion, and modi- (obligations) of the U.S. Government. year at a fixed rate, based on a principal amountfied by adding back any:
that is adjusted to take into account inflation andTaxation of interest. Interest income from1. Foreign earned income exclusion, deflation. For the tax treatment of these securi-Treasury bills, notes, and bonds is subject to ties, see Inflation-Indexed Debt Instruments2. Foreign housing exclusion and deduction, federal income tax, but is exempt from all state under Original Issue Discount (OID), later.and local income taxes. You should receive3. Exclusion of income for bona fide residents
Form 1099-INT showing the amount of interestof American Samoa, Retirement, sale, or redemption. For infor-(in box 3) that was paid to you for the year. mation on the retirement, sale, or redemption of4. Exclusion for income from Puerto Rico, Payments of principal and interest generally U.S. government obligations, see Capital or Or-
will be credited to your designated checking or5. Exclusion for adoption benefits received dinary Gain or Loss in chapter 4. Also see Non-
savings account by direct deposit through theunder an employer’s adoption assistance taxable Trades  in chapter 4 for information
TREASURY DIRECT system.program, about trading U.S. Treasury obligations for cer-
tain other designated issues.6. Deduction for tuition and fees, Treasury bills. These bills generally have a
7. Deduction for student loan interest, and 4-week, 13-week, or 26-week maturity period. Bonds Sold Between Interest
They are issued at a discount in the amount of8. Deduction for domestic production activi- Dates$1,000 and multiples of $1,000. The differenceties. between the discounted price you pay for the If you sell a bond between interest paymentUse the worksheet in the instructions for line bills and the face value you receive at maturity is dates, part of the sales price represents interest9, Form 8815, to figure your modified AGI. If you interest income. Generally, you report this inter- accrued to the date of sale. You must report thatclaim any of the exclusion or deduction items est income when the bill is paid at maturity. See part of the sales price as interest income for thelisted above (except items 6, 7, and 8), add the Discount on Short-Term Obligations under Dis- year of sale.amount of the exclusion or deduction (except count on Debt Instruments, later. If you buy a bond between interest paymentany deduction for tuition and fees, student loan If you reinvest your Treasury bill at its matur- dates, part of the purchase price representsinterest, or domestic production activities) to the ity in a new Treasury bill, note, or bond, you will interest accrued before the date of purchase.amount on line 5 of the worksheet, and enter the receive payment for the difference between the When that interest is paid to you, treat it as atotal on Form 8815, line 9, as your modified AGI. proceeds of the maturing bill (par amount less return of your capital investment, rather than
any tax withheld) and the purchase price of theRoyalties included in modified AGI. Be- interest income, by reducing your basis in the
new Treasury security. However, you must re-cause the deduction for interest expenses due bond. See Accrued interest on bonds  under
port the full amount of the interest income onto royalties and other investments is limited to How To Report Interest Income , later in this
each of your Treasury bills at the time it reachesyour net investment income (see Investment chapter, for information on reporting the pay-
maturity.Interest in chapter 3), you cannot figure the ment.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 11

Page 12 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Registration requirement. A bond issued af- expected to be used to buy (or to replace fundsInsurance
ter June 30, 1983, generally must be in regis- used to buy) higher yielding investments. A
tered form for the interest to be tax exempt. bond is treated as an arbitrage bond if the issuerLife insurance proceeds paid to you as benefi-
intentionally uses any part of the proceeds of theciary of the insured person are usually not tax- Indian tribal government. Bonds issued after issue in this manner.able. But if you receive the proceeds in 1982 by an Indian tribal government are treatedinstallments, you must usually report part of as issued by a state. Interest on these bonds is Private activity bonds. Interest on a privateeach installment payment as interest income. generally tax exempt if the bonds are part of an activity bond that is not a qualified bond (definedFor more information about insurance pro- issue of which substantially all of the proceeds below) is taxable. Generally, a private activityceeds received in installments, see Publication are to be used in the exercise of any essential bond is part of a state or local government bond525. government function. However, interest on pri- issue that meets both of the following require-
vate activity bonds (other than certain bonds for ments.Interest option on insurance. If you leave life
tribal manufacturing facilities) is taxable.insurance proceeds on deposit with an insur- 1. More than 10% of the proceeds of the is-ance company under an agreement to pay inter- Original issue discount. Original issue dis- sue is to be used for a private businessest only, the interest paid to you is taxable. count (OID) on tax-exempt state or local govern- use.
ment bonds is treated as tax-exempt interest.Annuity. If you buy an annuity with life insur- 2. More than 10% of the payment of the prin-For information on the treatment of OIDance proceeds, the annuity payments you re- cipal or interest is:when you dispose of a tax-exempt bond, seeceive are taxed as pension and annuity income
Tax-exempt state and local government bondsfrom a nonqualified plan, not as interest income. a. Secured by an interest in property to beunder Discounted Debt Instruments  in chapterSee Publication 939, General Rule for Pensions used for a private business use (or pay-4.and Annuities, for information on taxation of ments for this property), or
pension and annuity income from nonqualified Stripped bonds or coupons. For special b. Derived from payments for property (orplans. rules that apply to stripped tax-exempt obliga- borrowed money) used for a privatetions, see Stripped Bonds and Coupons  under business use.Original Issue Discount (OID), later.State or Local
Government Obligations Information reporting requirement. If you Also, a bond is generally considered a private
must file a tax return, you are required to show activity bond if the amount of the proceeds toInterest you receive on an obligation issued by a any tax-exempt interest you received on your be used to make or finance loans to personsstate or local government is generally not tax- return. This is an information-reporting require- other than government units is more than 5%able. The issuer should be able to tell you ment only. It does not change tax-exempt inter- of the proceeds or $5 million (whichever iswhether the interest is taxable. The issuer est to taxable interest. See Reporting less).should also give you a periodic (or year-end) tax-exempt interest under How To Report Inter- Qualified bond. Interest on a private activ-statement showing the tax treatment of the obli- est Income, later in this chapter. ity bond that is a qualified bond is tax exempt. Agation. If you invested in the obligation through a
qualified bond is an exempt-facility bond (includ-trust, a fund, or other organization, that organi-
ing an enterprise zone facility bond, a New Yorkzation should give you this information. Taxable Interest Liberty bond, or a Gulf Opportunity Zone BondEven if interest on the obligation is not treated as an exempt facility bond), qualifiedInterest on some state or local obligations issubject to income tax, you may have to student loan bond, qualified small issue bondtaxable.report capital gain or loss when you sellCAUTION
!
(including a tribal manufacturing facility bond),it. Estate, gift, or generation-skipping tax may Federally guaranteed bonds. Interest on qualified redevelopment bond, qualified mort-apply to other dispositions of the obligation. federally guaranteed state or local obligations gage bond (including a Gulf Opportunity Zoneissued after 1983 is generally taxable. This rule Bond treated as a qualified mortgage bond),does not apply to interest on obligations guaran- qualified veterans’ mortgage bond, or qualifiedteed by the following U.S. Government agen-Tax-Exempt Interest 501(c)(3) bond (a bond issued for the benefit ofcies. certain tax-exempt organizations).Interest on a bond used to finance government Interest that you receive on these• Bonneville Power Authority (if the guaran-operations generally is not taxable if the bond is tax-exempt bonds (except qualified 501(c)(3)tee was under the Northwest Power Act asissued by a state, the District of Columbia, a bonds, New York Liberty bonds, and Gulf Op-in effect on July 18, 1984).U.S. possession, or any of their political subdivi- portunity Zone Bonds), if issued after August 7,sions. Political subdivisions include: • Department of Veterans Affairs. 1986, generally is a “tax preference item” and
may be subject to the alternative minimum tax.• Port authorities, • Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corpora-
See Form 6251 and its instructions for moretion.• Toll road commissions, information.• Federal Housing Administration.• Utility services authorities, Enterprise zone facility bonds. Interest on• Federal National Mortgage Association. certain private activity bonds issued by a state or• Community redevelopment agencies, and
local government to finance a facility used in an• Government National Mortgage Corpora-• Qualified volunteer fire departments (for empowerment zone or enterprise community istion.certain obligations issued after 1980). tax exempt. For information on these bonds, see• Resolution Funding Corporation. Publication 954.There are other requirements for tax-exempt
bonds. Contact the issuing state or local govern- • Student Loan Marketing Association. New York Liberty bonds. New York Libertyment agency or see sections 103 and 141 bonds are bonds issued after March 9, 2002, tothrough 150 of the Internal Revenue Code and finance the construction and rehabilitation ofMortgage revenue bonds. The proceeds ofthe related regulations. real property in the designated “Liberty Zone” ofthese bonds are used to finance mortgage loans
New York City. Interest on these bonds is taxfor homebuyers. Generally, interest on state orObligations that are not bonds. Inter- exempt.local government home mortgage bonds issuedest on a state or local government obli- after April 24, 1979, is taxable unless the bondsgation may be tax exempt even if the Market discount. Market discount on a
TIP
are qualified mortgage bonds or qualified veter-obligation is not a bond. For example, interest on tax-exempt bond is not tax-exempt. If youans’ mortgage bonds.a debt evidenced only by an ordinary written bought the bond after April 30, 1993, you can
agreement of purchase and sale may be tax Arbitrage bonds. Interest on arbitrage bonds choose to accrue the market discount over the
exempt. Also, interest paid by an insurer on issued by state or local governments after Octo- period you own the bond and include it in your
default by the state or political subdivision may ber 9, 1969, is taxable. An arbitrage bond is a income currently, as taxable interest. See Mar-
be tax exempt. bond any portion of the proceeds of which is ket Discount Bonds  under Discount on Debt
Page 12 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 13 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Instruments, later. If you do not make that The OID accrual rules generally do not apply also will show, in box 2, the stated interest that
to short-term obligations (those with a fixed ma- you must include in your income. A copy of Formchoice, or if you bought the bond before May 1,
turity date of 1 year or less from date of issue). 1099-OID will be sent to the IRS. Do not file your1993, any gain from market discount is taxable
See Discount on Short-Term Obligations, later. copy with your return. Keep it for your records.when you dispose of the bond.
For information about the sale of a debt in- In most cases, you must report the entireFor more information on the treatment of
strument with OID, see chapter 4. amount in boxes 1 and 2 of Form 1099-OID asmarket discount when you dispose of a
interest income. But see Refiguring OID showntax-exempt bond, see Discounted Debt Instru- De minimis OID. You can treat the discount on Form 1099-OID, later in this discussion, andments under Capital or Ordinary Gain or Loss in as zero if it is less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025) also Original issue discount (OID) adjustmentchapter 4. of the stated redemption price at maturity multi- under How To Report Interest Income , later inplied by the number of full years from the date of this chapter, for more information.original issue to maturity. This small discount is
known as “de minimis” OID. Form 1099-OID not received. If you had OIDDiscount on for the year but did not receive a Form
Example 1. You bought a 10-year bond with 1099-OID, see the OID tables found at http://Debt Instruments a stated redemption price at maturity of $1,000, www.irs.gov/formspubs/article/
issued at $980 with OID of $20. One-fourth of 0,,id=109875,00.html, which list total OID onTerms you may need to know 1% of $1,000 (stated redemption price) times 10 certain debt instruments and has information(see Glossary): (the number of full years from the date of original that will help you figure OID. If your debt instru-
issue to maturity) equals $25. Because the $20 ment is not listed, consult the issuer for furtherMarket discount discount is less than $25, the OID is treated as information about the accrued OID for the year.
zero. (If you hold the bond at maturity, you willMarket discount bond
recognize $20 ($1,000 − $980) of capital gain.) Nominee. If someone else is the holder ofOriginal issue discount (OID) record (the registered owner) of an OID instru-
Example 2. The facts are the same as inPremium ment that belongs to you and receives a Form
Example 1, except that the bond was issued at 1099-OID on your behalf, that person must give
$950. The OID is $50. Because the $50 discount you a Form 1099-OID.
is more than the $25 figured in Example 1, youIn general, a debt instrument, such as a bond, If you receive a Form 1099-OID that includesmust include the OID in income as it accruesnote, debenture, or other evidence of indebted- amounts belonging to another person, see Nom-over the term of the bond.ness, that bears no interest or bears interest at a inee distributions under How To Report Interest
lower than current market rate will usually be Income, later.Debt instrument bought after original is-
issued at less than its face amount. This dis- sue. If you buy a debt instrument with de
count is, in effect, additional interest income. Refiguring OID shown on Form 1099-OID.minimis OID at a premium, the discount is not
The following are some of the types of dis- You must refigure the OID shown in box 1 or boxincludible in income. If you buy a debt instrument
counted debt instruments. 6 of Form 1099-OID if either of the followingwith de minimis OID at a discount, the discount
apply.is reported under the market discount rules. See• U.S. Treasury bonds.
Market Discount Bonds, later in this chapter. • You bought the debt instrument after its• Corporate bonds. original issue and paid a premium or anExceptions to reporting OID. The OID rules• Municipal bonds. acquisition premium.discussed here do not apply to the following debt
instruments. • Certificates of deposit. • The debt instrument is a stripped bond or
a stripped coupon (including certain zero• Notes between individuals. 1. Tax-exempt obligations. (However, see coupon instruments). See Figuring OID
Stripped tax-exempt obligations, later.)• Stripped bonds and coupons. under Stripped Bonds and Coupons, later
in this chapter.2. U.S. savings bonds.• Collateralized debt obligations (CDOs).
3. Short-term debt instruments (those with aThe discount on these instruments (except mu- See Original issue discount (OID) adjustmentfixed maturity date of not more than 1 yearnicipal bonds) is taxable in most instances. The under How To Report Interest Income , later infrom the date of issue).discount on municipal bonds generally is not this chapter, for information about reporting thetaxable (but see State or Local Government 4. Obligations issued by an individual before correct amount of OID.Obligations, earlier, for exceptions). See also March 2, 1984.
Premium. You bought a debt instrument atREMICs, FASITs, and Other CDOs , later, for 5. Loans between individuals, if all the follow- a premium if its adjusted basis immediately afterinformation about applying the rules discussed ing are true. purchase was greater than the total of allin this section to the regular interest holder of a
amounts payable on the instrument after thereal estate mortgage investment conduit, a fi- a. The lender is not in the business of purchase date, other than qualified stated inter-nancial asset securitization investment trust, or lending money. est.other CDO.
b. The amount of the loan, plus the If you bought an OID debt instrument at a
amount of any outstanding prior loans premium, you generally do not have to reportOriginal Issue between the same individuals, is any OID as ordinary income.Discount (OID) $10,000 or less.
Qualified stated interest. In general, this is
c. Avoiding any federal tax is not one ofOID is a form of interest. You generally include stated interest that is unconditionally payable in
the principal purposes of the loan.OID in your income as it accrues over the term of cash or property (other than debt instruments of
the debt instrument, whether or not you receive the issuer) at least annually at a fixed rate.
any payments from the issuer. Acquisition premium. You bought a debtA debt instrument generally has OID when instrument at an acquisition premium if both ofForm 1099-OIDthe instrument is issued for a price that is less the following are true.
than its stated redemption price at maturity. OID The issuer of the debt instrument (or your bro- • You did not pay a premium.is the difference between the stated redemption ker, if you held the instrument through a broker)
price at maturity and the issue price. should give you Form 1099-OID, Original Issue • The instrument’s adjusted basis immedi-
All debt instruments that pay no interest Discount, or a similar statement, if the total OID ately after purchase (including purchase at
before maturity are presumed to be issued at a for the calendar year is $10 or more. Form original issue) was greater than its ad-
discount. Zero coupon bonds are one example 1099-OID will show, in box 1, the amount of OID justed issue price. This is the issue price
of these instruments. for the part of the year that you held the bond. It plus the OID previously accrued, minus
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 13

Page 14 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
any payment previously made on the in- • Time deposits, the payer showing the amount you must report
strument other than qualified stated inter- as OID and any qualified stated interest paid to• Bonus plans,est. you during the year. For more information, see
• Savings certificates, Publication 1212.
• Deferred income certificates,Acquisition premium reduces the amount of OID
includible in your income. For information about Stripped Bonds and Coupons• Bonus savings certificates, andfiguring the correct amount of OID to include in
• Growth savings certificates.your income, see Figuring OID on Long-Term If you strip one or more coupons from a bond
Debt Instruments in Publication 1212. and sell the bond or the coupons, the bond and
coupons are treated as separate debt instru-Bearer CDs. CDs issued after 1982 generallyRefiguring periodic interest shown on Form ments issued with OID.must be in registered form. Bearer CDs are CDs1099-OID. If you disposed of a debt instrument The holder of a stripped bond has the right tothat are not in registered form. They are notor acquired it from another holder during the receive the principal (redemption price) pay-issued in the depositor’s name and are transfer-year, see Bonds Sold Between Interest Dates , ment. The holder of a stripped coupon has theable from one individual to another.earlier, for information about the treatment of right to receive interest on the bond.Banks must provide the IRS and the personperiodic interest that may be shown in box 2 of redeeming a bearer CD with a Form 1099-INT. Stripped bonds and stripped coupons in-Form 1099-OID for that instrument. clude:Time deposit open account arrangement.
This is an arrangement with a fixed maturity date • Zero coupon instruments available
Applying the OID Rules in which you make deposits on a schedule ar- through the Department of the Treasury’s
ranged between you and your bank. But there is Separate Trading of Registered InterestThe rules for reporting OID depend on the date no actual or constructive receipt of interest until and Principal of Securities (STRIPS) pro-the long-term debt instrument was issued. the fixed maturity date is reached. For instance, gram and government-sponsored enter-
you and your bank enter into an arrangement prises such as the Resolution FundingDebt instruments issued after 1954 and under which you agree to deposit $100 each Corporation and the Financing Corpora-before May 28, 1969 (before July 2, 1982, if a month for a period of 5 years. Interest will be tion, andgovernment instrument). For these instru- compounded twice a year at 71/2%, but payablements, you do not report the OID until the year • Instruments backed by U.S. Treasury se-only at the end of the 5-year period. You mustyou sell, exchange, or redeem the instrument. If curities that represent ownership interestsinclude a part of the interest in your income asa gain results and the instrument is a capital in those securities, such as obligationsOID each year. Each year the bank must giveasset, the amount of the gain equal to the OID is backed by U.S. Treasury bonds that areyou a Form 1099-OID to show you the amountordinary interest income. The rest of the gain is offered primarily by brokerage firms.you must include in your income for the year.capital gain. If there is a loss on the sale of the
instrument, the entire loss is a capital loss and Redemption before maturity. If, before the Seller. If you strip coupons from a bond andno reporting of OID is required. maturity date, you redeem a deferred interest sell the bond or coupons, include in income theIn general, the amount of gain that is ordinary account for less than its stated redemption price interest that accrued while you held the bondinterest income equals the following amount: at maturity, you can deduct the amount of OID before the date of sale to the extent you did notthat you previously included in income but did previously include this interest in your income.not receive. For an obligation acquired after October 22,Number of full
1986, you must also include the market discountRenewable certificates. If you renew a CD atmonths you held Original
that accrued before the date of sale of thethe instrument × Issue maturity, it is treated as a redemption and a
stripped bond (or coupon) to the extent you didNumber of full Discount purchase of a new certificate. This is true re-
months from date not previously include this discount in your in-gardless of the terms of renewal.
of original issue come.
to date of maturity Add the interest and market discount that
Face-Amount Certificates you include in income to the basis of the bond
Debt instruments issued after May 27, 1969 and coupons. Allocate this adjusted basis be-These certificates are subject to the OID rules.(after July 1, 1982, if a government instru- tween the items you keep and the items you sell,They are a form of endowment contracts issuedment), and before 1985. If you hold these based on the fair market value of the items. Theby insurance or investment companies for eitherdebt instruments as capital assets, you must difference between the sale price of the bond (ora lump-sum payment or periodic payments, withinclude a part of the discount in your gross coupon) and the allocated basis of the bond (orthe face amount becoming payable on the ma-income each year that you own the instruments. coupon) is your gain or loss from the sale.turity date of the certificate. Treat any item you keep as an OID bondEffect on basis.  Your basis in the instru- In general, the difference between the face originally issued and bought by you on the salement is increased by the amount of OID that you amount and the amount you paid for the contract date of the other items. If you keep the bond,include in your gross income. is OID. You must include a part of the OID in treat the amount of the redemption price of theyour income over the term of the certificate. bond that is more than the basis of the bond asDebt instruments issued after 1984. For The issuer must give you a statement on the OID. If you keep the coupons, treat thethese debt instruments, you report the total OID Form 1099-OID indicating the amount you must amount payable on the coupons that is morethat applies each year regardless of whether include in your income each year. than the basis of the coupons as the OID.you hold that debt instrument as a capital asset.
Effect on basis.  Your basis in the instru- Buyer. If you buy a stripped bond or strippedInflation-Indexedment is increased by the amount of OID that you coupon, treat it as if it were originally issued onDebt Instrumentsinclude in your gross income. the date you buy it. If you buy a stripped bond,
treat as OID any excess of the stated redemp-If you hold an inflation-indexed debt instrument
tion price at maturity over your purchase price. If(other than a series I U.S. savings bond), youCertificates of Deposit (CDs) you buy a stripped coupon, treat as OID anymust report as OID any increase in the infla-
excess of the amount payable on the due date ofIf you buy a CD with a maturity of more than 1 tion-adjusted principal amount of the instrument
the coupon over your purchase price.year, you must include in income each year a that occurs while you held the instrument during
part of the total interest due and report it in the the year. In general, an inflation-indexed debt
Figuring OID. The rules for figuring OID onsame manner as other OID. instrument is a debt instrument on which the
stripped bonds and stripped coupons depend onThis also applies to similar deposit arrange- payments are adjusted for inflation and deflation
the date the debt instruments were purchased,ments with banks, building and loan associa- (such as Treasury Inflation-Protected Securi-
not the date issued.tions, etc., including: ties). You should receive Form 1099-OID from
Page 14 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 15 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
You must refigure the OID shown on the • If you borrow money to buy or carry the OID), treat the bond as having been issued on
Form 1099-OID you receive for a stripped bond the date you acquired it. Treat the amount ofbond, your deduction for interest paid on
or coupon. For information about figuring the your basis (immediately after you acquired thethe debt is limited. See Limit on interest
correct amount of OID on these instruments to bond) as the issue price. Then apply the formuladeduction for market discount bonds
include in your income, see Figuring OID on shown in Publication 1212.under When To Deduct Investment Inter-
Stripped Bonds and Coupons  in Publication est in chapter 3.
Choosing to include market discount in in-1212. However, owners of stripped bonds and
come currently. You can make this choice ifcoupons should not rely on the OID shown in Market discount. Market discount is the you have not revoked a prior choice to includeSection II of The OID tables (available at http:// amount of the stated redemption price of a bond market discount in income currently within thewww.irs.gov/formspubs/article/ at maturity that is more than your basis in the last 5 calendar years. Make the choice by at-0,,id=109875,00.html ) because the amounts bond immediately after you acquire it. You treat taching to your timely filed return a statement inlisted in Section II for stripped bonds or coupons market discount as zero if it is less than which you:are figured without reference to the date or price one-fourth of 1% (.0025) of the stated redemp-at which you acquired them. • State that you have included market dis-tion price of the bond multiplied by the number of
Stripped inflation-indexed debt instru- count in your gross income for the yearfull years to maturity (after you acquire the
ments. OID on stripped inflation-indexed debt under section 1278(b) of the Internal Rev-bond).
instruments is figured under the discount bond enue Code, andIf a market discount bond also has OID, the
method. This method is described in Regula- market discount is the sum of the bond’s issue • Describe the method you used to figuretions section 1.1275-7(e). price and the total OID includible in the gross the accrued market discount for the year.
income of all holders (for a tax-exempt bond, the
Stripped tax-exempt obligations. You do total OID that accrued) before you acquired the Once you make this choice, it will apply to allnot have to pay tax on OID on any stripped bond, reduced by your basis in the bond immedi- market discount bonds that you acquire duringtax-exempt bond or coupon that you bought ately after you acquired it. the tax year and in later tax years. You cannotbefore June 11, 1987. However, if you acquired revoke your choice without the consent of theit after October 22, 1986, you must accrue OID Bonds acquired at original issue. Generally, IRS. For information on how to revoke youron it to determine its basis when you dispose of a bond that you acquired at original issue is not a choice, see section 12A of the Appendix to Rev-it. See Original issue discount (OID) on debt market discount bond. If your adjusted basis in a enue Procedure 2002-9 in Internal Revenueinstruments under Stocks and Bonds in chapter bond is determined by reference to the adjusted Bulletin 2002-3. You can find this Internal Reve-4. basis of another person who acquired the bond nue Bulletin at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/
at original issue, you are also considered toYou may have to pay tax on part of the OID irb02-03.pdf.
have acquired it at original issue.on stripped tax-exempt bonds or coupons that Also see Election To Report All Interest asyou bought after June 10, 1987. For information OID, later. If you make that election, you mustExceptions. A bond you acquired at origi-on figuring the taxable part, see Tax-Exempt use the constant yield method.nal issue can be a market discount bond if eitherBonds and Coupons  under Figuring OID on of the following is true. Effect on basis. You increase the basis ofStripped Bonds and Coupons  in Publication
your bonds by the amount of market discount• Your cost basis in the bond is less than1212.
you include in your income.the bond’s issue price.
Market Discount Bonds • The bond is issued in exchange for a mar- Partial principal payments. If you receive aket discount bond under a plan of reorgan- partial payment of principal on a market discountA market discount bond is any bond having ization. (This does not apply if the bond is bond that you acquired after October 22, 1986,market discount except: issued in exchange for a market discount and you did not choose to include the discount in
bond issued before July 19, 1984, and the• Short-term obligations (those with fixed income currently, you must treat the payment as
terms and interest rates of both bonds arematurity dates of up to 1 year from the ordinary interest income up to the amount of the
the same.)date of issue), bond’s accrued market discount. Reduce the
amount of accrued market discount reportable• Tax-exempt obligations that you bought
as interest at disposition by that amount.Accrued market discount. The accrued mar-before May 1, 1993,
There are 3 methods you can use to figureket discount is figured in one of two ways.• U.S. savings bonds, and accrued market discount for this purpose. YouRatable accrual method. Treat the market can choose to figure accrued market discount:• Certain installment obligations. discount as accruing in equal daily installments
during the period you hold the bond. Figure the 1. On the basis of the constant yield method,Market discount arises when the value of a daily installments by dividing the market dis- described earlier,debt obligation decreases after its issue date, count by the number of days after the date yougenerally because of an increase in interest 2. In proportion to the accrual of OID for anyacquired the bond, up to and including its matur-rates. If you buy a bond on the secondary mar- accrual period, if the debt instrument hasity date. Multiply the daily installments by theket, it may have market discount. OID, ornumber of days you held the bond to figure your
When you buy a market discount bond, you accrued market discount. 3. In proportion to the amount of stated inter-can choose to accrue the market discount over est paid in the accrual period, if the debtConstant yield method. Instead of usingthe period you own the bond and include it in instrument has no OID.the ratable accrual method, you can choose toyour income currently as interest income. If you
figure the accrued discount using a constant Under method (2) above, figure accrueddo not make this choice, the following rules
interest rate (the constant yield method). Make market discount for a period by multiplying thegenerally apply.
this choice by attaching to your timely filed return total remaining market discount by a fraction.• You must treat any gain when you dispose a statement identifying the bond and stating that The numerator (top part) of the fraction is theof the bond as ordinary interest income, you are making a constant interest rate election. OID for the period, and the denominator (bottomup to the amount of the accrued market The choice takes effect on the date you acquired part) is the total remaining OID at the beginningdiscount. See Discounted Debt Instru- the bond. If you choose to use this method for of the period.ments under Capital Gains and Losses in any bond, you cannot change your choice for Under method (3) above, figure accruedchapter 4. that bond. market discount for a period by multiplying the
For information about using the constant• You must treat any partial payment of prin- total remaining market discount by a fraction.
yield method, see Figuring OID using the con-cipal on the bond as ordinary interest in- The numerator is the stated interest paid in the
stant yield method  under Debt Instruments Is-come, up to the amount of the accrued accrual period, and the denominator is the total
sued After 1984 in Publication 1212. To use thismarket discount. See Partial principal pay- stated interest remaining to be paid at the begin-
method to figure market discount (instead ofments, later in this discussion. ning of the accrual period.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 15

Page 16 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
any other accrued interest payable. If you Accrual methodDiscount on
choose the constant yield method to figure ac- Cash methodShort-Term Obligations crued OID, apply it by using the obligation’s
issue price.When you buy a short-term obligation (one with
When to report your interest income depends ona fixed maturity date of 1 year or less from the Choosing to include accrued acquisition
date of issue), other than a tax-exempt obliga- whether you use the cash method or an accrualdiscount instead of OID. You can choose to
tion, you can generally choose to include any method to report income.report accrued acquisition discount (defined
discount and interest payable on the obligation earlier under Government obligations ) rather
in income currently. If you do not make this than accrued OID on these short-term obliga- Cash method. Most individual taxpayers usechoice, the following rules generally apply. tions. Your choice will apply to the year for which the cash method. If you use this method, you
it is made and to all later years and cannot be• You must treat any gain when you sell, generally report your interest income in the yearchanged without the consent of the IRS.exchange, or redeem the obligation as or- in which you actually or constructively receive it.
dinary income, up to the amount of the You must make your choice by the due date However, there are special rules for reportingratable share of the discount. See Dis- of your return, including extensions, for the first the discount on certain debt instruments. Seecounted Debt Instruments under Capital year for which you are making the choice. Attach U.S. Savings Bonds and Discount on Debt In-Gains and Losses in chapter 4. a statement to your return or amended return struments, earlier.indicating:• If you borrow money to buy or carry the
Example. On September 1, 2005, youobligation, your deduction for interest paid • Your name, address, and social security
on the debt is limited. See Limit on interest loaned another individual $2,000 at 12% com-number,
deduction for short-term obligations under pounded annually. You are not in the business• The choice you are making and that it isWhen To Deduct Investment Interest in of lending money. The note stated that principalbeing made under section 1283(c)(2) ofchapter 3. and interest would be due on August 31, 2007.the Internal Revenue Code, In 2007, you received $2,508.80 ($2,000 princi-
• The period for which the choice is being pal and $508.80 interest). If you use the cashShort-term obligations for which no choice
made and the obligation to which it ap- method, you must include in income on youris available. You must include any discount or
plies, andinterest in current income as it accrues for any 2007 return the $508.80 interest you received in
short-term obligation (other than a tax-exempt that year.• Any other information necessary to showobligation) that is: you are entitled to make this choice. Constructive receipt. You constructively
• Held by an accrual-basis taxpayer, receive income when it is credited to your ac-
count or made available to you. You do not needChoosing to include accrued discount and• Held primarily for sale to customers in the
to have physical possession of it. For example,other interest in current income. If you ac-ordinary course of your trade or business,
you are considered to receive interest, divi-quire short-term discount obligations that are not• Held by a bank, regulated investment dends, or other earnings on any deposit or ac-subject to the rules for current inclusion in in-company, or common trust fund, come of the accrued discount or other interest, count in a bank, savings and loan, or similar
you can choose to have those rules apply. This financial institution, or interest on life insurance• Held by certain pass-through entities,
choice applies to all short-term obligations you policy dividends left to accumulate, when they• Identified as part of a hedging transaction, acquire during the year and in all later years. are credited to your account and subject to youror You cannot change this choice without the con- withdrawal. This is true even if they are not yet
• A stripped bond or stripped coupon held sent of the IRS. entered in your passbook.
by the person who stripped the bond or The procedures to use in making this choice You constructively receive income on thecoupon (or by any other person whose are the same as those described for choosing to deposit or account even if you must:basis in the obligation is determined by include acquisition discount instead of OID on
reference to the basis in the hands of that • Make withdrawals in multiples of evennongovernment obligations in current income.
person). amounts,However, you should indicate that you are mak-
ing the choice under section 1282(b)(2) of the • Give a notice to withdraw before making
Internal Revenue Code.Effect on basis. Increase the basis of your the withdrawal,
obligation by the amount of discount you include Also see the following discussion. If you • Withdraw all or part of the account to with-in income currently. make the election to report all interest currently
draw the earnings, oras OID, you must use the constant yield method.Figuring the accrued discount. Figure the • Pay a penalty on early withdrawals, unlessaccrued discount by using either the ratable the interest you are to receive on an earlyElection To Reportaccrual method or the constant yield method
withdrawal or redemption is substantiallyAll Interest as OIDdiscussed previously in Accrued market dis-
less than the interest payable at maturity.count under Market Discount Bonds, earlier.
Generally, you can elect to treat all interest on a
Government obligations. For an obligation debt instrument acquired during the tax year as Accrual method. If you use an accrualdescribed above that is a short-term govern- OID and include it in income currently. For pur- method, you report your interest income whenment obligation, the amount you include in your poses of this election, interest includes stated you earn it, whether or not you have received it.income for the current year is the accrued acqui- interest, acquisition discount, OID, de minimis Interest is earned over the term of the debtsition discount, if any, plus any other accrued OID, market discount, de minimis  market dis- instrument.interest payable on the obligation. The acquisi- count, and unstated interest as adjusted by any
tion discount is the stated redemption price at amortizable bond premium or acquisition pre- Example. If, in the previous example, youmaturity minus your basis. mium. See Regulations section 1.1272-3. use an accrual method, you must include theIf you choose to use the constant yield
interest in your income as you earn it. You wouldmethod to figure accrued acquisition discount,
report the interest as follows: 2005, $80; 2006,treat the cost of acquiring the obligation as the
$249.60; and 2007, $179.20.issue price. If you choose to use this method, When To Reportyou cannot change your choice.
Coupon bonds. Interest on coupon bonds isInterest IncomeNongovernment obligations. For an obliga-
taxable in the year the coupon becomes due andtion listed above that is not a government obliga-
Terms you may need to know payable. It does not matter when you mail thetion, the amount you include in your income for
coupon for payment.the current year is the accrued OID, if any, plus (see Glossary):
Page 16 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 17 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
6. You received tax-exempt interest from pri- Box 3 of Form 1099-INT shows the amount
vate activity bonds issued after August 7, of interest income you received from U.S. sav-How To Report
1986. ings bonds, Treasury bills, Treasury notes, and
Treasury bonds. Add the amount shown in box 3Interest Income
Schedule B. You must complete Schedule to any other taxable interest income you re-
B (Form 1040), Part I, if you file Form 1040 andTerms you may need to know ceived, unless part of the amount in box 3 was
any of the following apply. previously included in your interest income. If(see Glossary):
part of the amount shown in box 3 was previ-
1. Your taxable interest income is more thanNominee ously included in your interest income, see U.S.
$1,500. savings bond interest previously reported, later.Original issue discount (OID)
If you redeemed U.S. savings bonds you bought2. You are claiming the interest exclusion
after 1989 and you paid qualified educationalunder the Education Savings Bond Pro-
expenses, see Interest excluded under the Edu-Generally, you report all of your taxable interest gram (discussed earlier).
cation Savings Bond Program, later.income on Form 1040, line 8a; Form 1040A, line 3. You had a foreign account or you received Box 4 (federal income tax withheld) of Form8a; or Form 1040EZ, line 2. a distribution from, or were a granter of, or 1099-INT will contain an amount if you wereYou cannot use Form 1040EZ if your interest transferor to, a foreign trust. subject to backup withholding. Report theincome is more than $1,500. Instead, you must
amount from box 4 on Form 1040EZ, line 7, onuse Form 1040A or Form 1040. 4. You received interest from a
Form 1040A, line 38, or on Form 1040, line 64.In addition, you cannot use Form 1040EZ if seller-financed mortgage, and the buyer
Box 5 of Form 1099-INT shows investmentyou must use Form 1040, as described later, or used the property as a home.
expenses you may be able to deduct as anif any of the statements listed under Schedule B, 5. You received a Form 1099-INT for U.S. itemized deduction. Chapter 3 discusses invest-later, are true. savings bond interest that includes ment expenses.
amounts you reported before 2007.Form 1040A. You must complete Schedule 1 If there are entries in boxes 6 and 7 of Form
(Form 1040A), Part I, if you file Form 1040A and 1099-INT, you must file Form 1040. You may be6. You received, as a nominee, interest thatany of the following are true. able to take a credit for the amount shown in boxactually belongs to someone else.
6 (foreign tax paid) unless you deduct this1. Your taxable interest income is more than 7. You received a Form 1099-INT for interest amount on Schedule A of Form 1040 as “Other$1,500. on frozen deposits. taxes.” To take the credit, you may have to file
Form 1116, Foreign Tax Credit. For more infor-2. You are claiming the interest exclusion 8. You received a Form 1099-INT for interest
mation, see Publication 514, Foreign Tax Creditunder the Education Savings Bond Pro- on a bond that you bought between inter-
for Individuals.gram (discussed earlier). est payment dates.
3. You received interest from a 9. Statement (4) or (5) in the preceding list is Form 1099-OID. The taxable OID on a dis-seller-financed mortgage, and the buyer true. counted obligation for the part of the year youused the property as a home. owned it is shown in box 1 of Form 1099-OID.On Part I, line 1, list each payer’s name and the
Include this amount in your total taxable interest4. You received a Form 1099-INT for U.S. amount received from each. If you received a
income. But see Refiguring OID shown on Formsavings bond interest that includes Form 1099-INT or Form 1099-OID from a bro-
1099-OID under Original Issue Discount (OID) ,amounts you reported before 2007. kerage firm, list the brokerage firm as the payer.
earlier.5. You received, as a nominee, interest that You must report all taxable OID even if youReporting tax-exempt interest. The total ofactually belongs to someone else. do not receive a Form 1099-OID.your tax-exempt interest (such as interest or
Box 2 of Form 1099-OID shows any taxable6. You received a Form 1099-INT for interest accrued OID on certain state and municipal
interest on the obligation other than OID. Addon frozen deposits. bonds) and exempt-interest dividends from a
this amount to the OID shown in box 1 andmutual fund as shown in box 8 of FormList each payer’s name and the amount of inter- include the result in your total taxable income.1099-INT. Add this amount to any otherest income received from each payer on line 1. If If you forfeited interest or principal on thetax-exempt interest you received. Report theyou received a Form 1099-INT or Form obligation because of an early withdrawal, thetotal on line 8b of Form 1040A or Form 1040. If1099-OID from a brokerage firm, list the broker- deductible amount will be shown in box 3. Seeyou file Form 1040EZ, enter “TEI” and theage firm as the payer. Penalty on early withdrawal of savings, later.amount in the space to the left of line 2. Do notYou cannot use Form 1040A if you must use Box 4 of Form 1099-OID will contain anadd tax-exempt interest in the total on FormForm 1040, as described next. amount if you were subject to backup withhold-1040EZ, line 2.
ing. Report the amount from box 4 on FormBox 9 shows the tax-exempt interest subjectForm 1040. You must use Form 1040 instead 1040EZ, line 7, on Form 1040A, line 38, or onto the alternative minimum tax on Form 6251,of Form 1040A or Form 1040EZ if: Form 1040, line 64.Alternative Minimum Tax—Individuals. It is al-
Box 7 of Form 1099-OID shows investment1. You forfeited interest income because of ready included in the amount in box 8. Do not
expenses you may be able to deduct as anthe early withdrawal of a time deposit, add the amount in box 9 to, or subtract it from,
itemized deduction. Chapter 3 discusses invest-the amount in box 8.2. You received or paid accrued interest on ment expenses.securities transferred between interest Do not report interest from an individ-
payment dates, ual retirement arrangement (IRA) as U.S. savings bond interest previously re-
tax-exempt interest. ported. If you received a Form 1099-INT for
CAUTION
!
3. You had a financial account in a foreign
U.S. savings bond interest, the form may showcountry, unless the combined value of all
interest you do not have to report. See FormForm 1099-INT. Your taxable interest income,foreign accounts was $10,000 or less dur-
1099-INT for U.S. savings bond interest  underexcept for interest from U.S. savings bonds anding all of 2007 or the accounts were with
U.S. Savings Bonds, earlier.Treasury obligations, is shown in box 1 of Formcertain U.S. military banking facilities,
On Schedule B (Form 1040), Part I, line 1, or1099-INT. Add this amount to any other taxable4. You acquired taxable bonds after 1987 on Schedule 1 (Form 1040A), Part I, line 1,interest income you received. You must reportand choose to reduce interest income from report all the interest shown on your Formall of your taxable interest income even if you dothe bonds by any amortizable bond pre- 1099-INT. Then follow these steps.not receive a Form 1099-INT.mium (discussed in chapter 3 under Bond If you forfeited interest income because of 1. Several lines above line 2, enter a subtotalPremium Amortization), the early withdrawal of a time deposit, the de- of all interest listed on line 1.5. You are reporting OID in an amount more ductible amount will be shown on Form
2. Below the subtotal enter “U.S. Savingsor less than the amount shown on Form 1099-INT, in box 2. See Penalty on early with-
Bond Interest Previously Reported” and1099-OID, or drawal of savings, later.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 17

Page 18 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
CORRECTED (if checked)
Payer’s RTN (optional)PAYER’S name, street address, city, state, ZIP code, and telephone no. OMB No. 1545-0112
Interest Income
PAYER’S federal identification number RECIPIENT’S identification number
RECIPIENT’S name
Street address (including apt. no.)
City, state, and ZIP code
Account number (see instructions)
$
Department of the Treasury - Internal Revenue ServiceForm 1099-INT
Copy B
For Recipient
This is important tax
information and is
being furnished to the
Internal Revenue
Service. If you are
required to file a return,
a negligence penalty or
other sanction may be
imposed on you if this
income is taxable and
the IRS determines that
it has not been
reported.
(keep for your records)
Form 1099-INT
Interest on U.S. Savings Bonds and Treas. obligations3
$
Federal income tax withheld Investment expenses54
$$
Foreign tax paid6
$
Specified private activity
bond interest
9Tax-exempt interest8
Foreign country or U.S.
possession
7
$
Early withdrawal penalty2
$
Interest income1
$ 2007
enter amounts previously reported or inter- The bank where you redeem the bond gives Your employer should tell you the value of
you a Form 1099-INT showing interest incomeest accrued before you received the bond. each bond on the date it was distributed.
of $500. You also receive a Form 1099-INT3. Subtract these amounts from the subtotal showing taxable interest income of $300 from Example. You received a distribution of se-and enter the result on line 2. your savings account. ries EE U.S. savings bonds in December 2004
You file Form 1040 and you complete from your company’s profit-sharing plan.
Example 1. Your parents bought U.S. sav- Schedule B. On line 1 of Schedule B, you list the In March 2007, you redeemed a $100 seriesings bonds for you when you were a child. The $500 and $300 interest amounts shown on your EE bond that was part of the distribution youbonds were issued in your name, and the inter- Forms 1099. Several lines above line 2, you put received in 2004. You received $112.24 for theest on the bonds was reported each year as it a subtotal of $800. Below this subtotal, enter
bond the company bought in May 1992. Theaccrued. (See Choice to report interest each “U.S. Savings Bond Interest Previously Re-
value of the bond at the time of distribution inported” and enter the $200 interest included inyear under U.S. Savings Bonds, earlier.)
2004 was $103.68. (This is the amount youyour uncle’s final return. Subtract the $200 fromIn March 2007, you redeemed one of the
included on your 2004 return.) The bank gavethe subtotal and enter $600 on line 2. You thenbonds — a $1,000 series EE bond. The bond
complete the rest of the form. you a Form 1099-INT that shows $62.24 interestwas originally issued in March 1988. When you
(the total interest from the date the bond wasredeemed the bond, you received $1,341.20 for Worksheet for savings bonds distributed
purchased to the date of redemption). Since ait. from a retirement or profit-sharing plan. If
part of the interest was included in your incomeThe Form 1099-INT you received shows in- you cashed a savings bond acquired in a taxable
in 2004, you need to include in your 2007 in-terest income of $841.20. However, since the distribution from a retirement or profit-sharing
interest on your savings bonds was reported come only the interest that accrued after theplan (as discussed under U.S. Savings Bonds ,
yearly, you need only include the $26.00 interest earlier), your interest income does not include bond was distributed to you.
that accrued from January 2007 to March 2007. the interest accrued before the distribution and On Schedule B (Form 1040), line 1, includetaxed as a distribution from the plan.You received no other taxable interest for all the interest shown on your Form 1099-INT as
2007. You file Form 1040A. Use the worksheet below to figure the well as any other taxable interest income you
On Schedule 1 (Form 1040A), Part I, line 1, amount you subtract from the interest received. Several lines above line 2, put a sub-
enter your interest income as shown on Form shown on Form 1099-INT. total of all interest listed on line 1. Below this1099-INT — $841.20. (If you had other taxable subtotal enter “U.S. Savings Bond Interest Pre-interest income, you would enter it next and then viously Reported” and enter the amount figuredenter a subtotal, as described earlier, before A. Enter the amount of cash received on the worksheet below.upon redemption of the bond ....going to the next step.) Several lines above line
2, enter “U.S. Savings Bond Interest Previously
B. Enter the value of the bond at the A. Enter the amount of cash receivedReported” and enter $815.20 ($841.20 −
time of distribution by the plan .... upon redemption of the bond . . . $112.24$26.00). Subtract $815.20 from $841.20 and
B. Enter the value of the bond at theenter $26.00 on line 2. Enter $26.00 on Sched-
C. Subtract the amount on line B from time of distribution by the plan . . . 103.68ule 1, line 4, and on Form 1040A, line 8a.
the amount on line A. This is the C. Subtract the amount on line B from
amount of interest accrued on the the amount on line A. This is theExample 2. Your uncle died and left you a bond since it was distributed by the amount of interest accrued on the$1,000 series EE bond. You redeem the bond plan ..................... bond since it was distributed bywhen it reaches maturity. the plan .................. $8.56Your uncle paid $500 for the bond, so $500 D. Enter the amount of interest shown D. Enter the amount of interest shownof the amount you receive upon redemption is on your Form 1099-INT ........ on your Form 1099-INT ....... $62.24
interest income. Your uncle’s executor included E. Subtract the amount on line C from
in your uncle’s final return $200 of the interest E. Subtract the amount on line C from the amount on line D. This is the
that had accrued at the time of your uncle’s the amount on line D. This is the amount you include in “U.S.
death. You have to include only $300 in your amount you include in “U.S. Savings Savings Bond Interest Previously
income. Bond Interest Previously Reported” Reported” ................ $53.68
Page 18 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 19 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Subtract $53.68 from the subtotal and enter the the result on line 2 and also on line 8a of Form Adjustment” and subtract it from  the subtotal. If
result on Schedule B, line 2. You then complete 1040A or 1040. the OID to be reported is greater than the
the rest of the form. amount shown on Form 1099-OID, show theFile Form 1099-INT with the IRS. If you additional OID below the subtotal. Identify thereceived interest as a nominee in 2007, youInterest excluded under the Education Sav- amount as “OID Adjustment” and add it to themust file a Form 1099-INT for that interest withings Bond Program. Use Form 8815 to figure subtotal.the IRS. Send Copy A of Form 1099-INT with ayour interest exclusion when you redeem quali-
Form 1096, Annual Summary and Transmittal offied savings bonds and pay qualified higher edu- Penalty on early withdrawal of savings. If
U.S. Information Returns, to your Internal Reve-cational expenses during the same year. you withdraw funds from a certificate of deposit
nue Service Center by February 28, 2008For more information on the exclusion and or other deferred interest account before matur-
(March 31, 2008 if you file Form 1099-INT elec-qualified higher educational expenses, see the ity, you may be charged a penalty. The Form
tronically). Give the actual owner of the interestearlier discussion under Education Savings 1099-INT or similar statement given to you by
Copy B of the Form 1099-INT by January 31,Bond Program. the financial institution will show the total
2008. On Form 1099-INT, you should be listedYou must show your total interest from quali- amount of interest in box 1 and will show the
as the “Payer.” Prepare one Form 1099-INT forfied savings bonds that you cashed during 2007 penalty separately in box 2. You must include in
each other owner and show that person as theon Form 8815, line 6, and on line 1 of either income all the interest shown in box 1. You can
“Recipient.” However, you do not have to fileSchedule 1 (Form 1040A) or Schedule B (Form deduct the penalty on Form 1040, line 30. De-
Form 1099-INT to show payments for your1040). After completing Form 8815, enter the duct the entire penalty even if it is more than
spouse. For more information about the report-result from line 14 (Form 8815) on Schedule 1 your interest income.
ing requirements and the penalties for failure to(Form 1040A), line 3, or Schedule B (Form
file (or furnish) certain information returns, see1040), line 3.
the General Instructions for Forms 1099, 1098,
Interest on seller-financed mortgage. If an 5498, and W2-G. Dividends andindividual buys his or her home from you in a Similar rules apply to OID reported to you as
sale that you finance, you must report the a nominee on Form 1099-OID. You must file a Other Corporatebuyer’s name, address, and social security num- Form 1099-OID with Form 1096 to show the
ber on Schedule 1 (Form 1040A), line 1, or proper distributions of the OID. DistributionsSchedule B (Form 1040), line 1. If you do not,
you may have to pay a $50 penalty. The buyer Example. You and your sister have a joint Dividends are distributions of money, stock, ormay have to pay a $50 penalty if he or she does savings account that paid $1,500 interest for other property paid to you by a corporation. Younot give you this information. 2007. Your sister deposited 30% of the funds in also may receive dividends through a partner-You must also give your name, address, and this account, and you and she have agreed to ship, an estate, a trust, or an association that issocial security number (or employer identifica- share the yearly interest income in proportion to taxed as a corporation. However, sometion number) to the buyer. If you do not, you may the amount that each of you has invested. Be- amounts you receive that are called dividendshave to pay a $50 penalty. cause your social security number was given to are actually interest income. (See Dividends that
the bank, you received a Form 1099-INT for are actually interest  under Taxable Interest —Frozen deposits. Even if you receive a Form 2007 that includes the interest income earned General, earlier.)1099-INT for interest on deposits that you could belonging to your sister. This amount is $450, or The most common kinds of distributions are:not withdraw at the end of 2007, you must ex- 30% of the total interest of $1,500.clude these amounts from your gross income. • Ordinary dividends,You must give your sister a Form 1099-INT(See Interest income on frozen deposits  under by January 31, 2008, showing $450 of interest • Capital gain distributions, andInterest Income , earlier.) Do not include this income that she earned for 2007. You must alsoincome on line 8a of Form 1040A or Form 1040. • Nondividend distributions.send a copy of the nominee Form 1099-INT,In Schedule 1 (Form 1040A), Part I, or Schedule along with Form 1096, to the Internal Revenue Most distributions are paid in cash (check).B (Form 1040), Part I, include the full amount of Service Center by February 28, 2008 (March 31, However, distributions can consist of moreinterest shown on your Form 1099-INT on line 1. 2008, if you file Form 1099-INT electronically). stock, stock rights, other property, or services.Several lines above line 2, put a subtotal of all Show your own name, address, and social se-interest income. Below this subtotal, enter “Fro- curity number as that of the “Payer” on the Form Form 1099-DIV. Most corporations use Formzen Deposits” and show the amount of interest 1099-INT. Show your sister’s name, address, 1099-DIV, Dividends and Distributions, to showthat you are excluding. Subtract this amount and social security number in the blocks pro- you the distributions you received from themfrom the subtotal and enter the result on line 2. vided for identification of the “Recipient.” during the year. Keep this form with your rec-
Accrued interest on bonds. If you received a When you prepare your own federal income ords. You do not have to attach it to your tax
Form 1099-INT that reflects accrued interest tax return, report the total amount of interest return.
paid on a bond you bought between interest income, $1,500, on Schedule 1 (Form 1040A), Dividends not reported on Form 1099-DIV.payment dates, include the full amount shown Part I, line 1, or Schedule B (Form 1040), Part I, Even if you do not receive Form 1099-DIV, youas interest on the Form 1099-INT on Schedule B line 1, and identify the name of the bank that must still report all of your taxable dividend in-(Form 1040), Part I, line 1. Then, below a sub- paid this interest. Show the amount belonging to come. For example, you may receive distributivetotal of all interest income listed, enter “Accrued your sister, $450, as a subtraction from a sub- shares of dividends from partnerships or sub-Interest” and the amount of accrued interest that total of all interest on Schedule 1 (or Schedule chapter S corporations. These dividends areyou paid to the seller. That amount is taxable to B) and identify this subtraction as a “Nominee reported to you on Schedule K-1 (Form 1065)the seller, not you. Subtract that amount from Distribution.” (Your sister will report the $450 of and Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S).the interest income subtotal. Enter the result on interest income on her own tax return, if she has
Nominees. If someone receives distribu-line 2 and also on Form 1040, line 8a. to file a return, and identify you as the payer of
tions as a nominee for you, that person will giveFor more information, see Bonds Sold Be- that amount.)
you a Form 1099-DIV, which will show distribu-tween Interest Dates, earlier. Original issue discount (OID) adjustment. If tions received on your behalf.Nominee distributions. If you received a you are reporting OID in an amount greater or If you receive a Form 1099-DIV that includesForm 1099-INT that includes an amount you less than the amount shown on Form 1099-OID amounts belonging to another person, see Nom-received as a nominee for the real owner, report or other written statement (such as for a REMIC inees under How To Report Dividend Income ,the full amount shown as interest on the Form regular interest), include the full amount of OID later, for more information.1099-INT on Part I, line 1 of Schedule 1 (Form shown on your Form 1099-OID or other state-
1040A) or Schedule B (Form 1040). Then, be- ment on Schedule B (Form 1040), Part I, line 1. Form 1099-MISC. Certain substitute pay-
low a subtotal of all interest income listed, enter If the OID to be reported is less than the amount ments in lieu of dividends or tax-exempt interest
“Nominee Distribution” and the amount that ac- shown on Form 1099-OID, show the OID you do that are received by a broker on your behalf
tually belongs to someone else. Subtract that not have to report below a subtotal of the interest must be reported to you on Form  1099-MISC,
amount from the interest income subtotal. Enter and OID listed. Identify the amount as “OID Miscellaneous Income, or a similar st atement.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 19

Page 20 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
See also Reporting Substitute Payments under that begins 60 days before the ex-dividend date. 1. You had an option to sell, were under a
Short Sales in chapter 4. contractual obligation to sell, or had madeThe ex-dividend date is the first date following
(and not closed) a short sale of substan-the declaration of a dividend on which the buyerIncorrect amount shown on a Form 1099. If tially identical stock or securities.of a stock will not receive the next dividendyou receive a Form 1099 that shows an incorrect
payment. When counting the number of daysamount (or other incorrect information), you 2. You were grantor (writer) of an option to
you held the stock, include the day you disposedshould ask the issuer for a corrected form. The buy substantially identical stock or securi-
new Form 1099 you receive will be marked “Cor- ties.of the stock, but not the day you acquired it. See
rected.” the examples, later. 3. Your risk of loss is diminished by holding
Dividends on stock sold. If stock is sold, one or more other positions in substantiallyException for preferred stock. In the case
exchanged, or otherwise disposed of after a similar or related property.of preferred stock, you must have held the stock
dividend is declared, but before it is paid, the more than 90 days during the 181-day period For information about how to apply conditionowner of record (usually the payee shown on the that begins 90 days before the ex-dividend date (3), see Regulations section 1.246-5.dividend check) must include the dividend in if the dividends are due to periods totaling moreincome. Qualified foreign corporation. A foreign cor-than 366 days. If the preferred dividends are due poration is a qualified foreign corporation if itDividends received in January. If a mutual to periods totaling less than 367 days, the hold- meets any of the following conditions. fund (or other regulated investment company) or ing period in the preceding paragraph applies.
real estate investment trust (REIT) declares a 1. The corporation is incorporated in a U.S.
dividend (including any exempt-interest divi- Example 1. You bought 5,000 shares of possession.
dend or capital gain distribution) in October, XYZ Corp. common stock on June 28, 2007. 2. The corporation is eligible for the benefitsNovember, or December payable to sharehold- XYZ Corp. paid a cash dividend of 10 cents per of a comprehensive income tax treaty withers of record on a date in one of those months share. The ex-dividend date was July 6, 2007. the United States that the Treasury De-but actually pays the dividend during January of Your Form 1099-DIV from XYZ Corp. shows partment determines is satisfactory for thisthe next calendar year, you are considered to $500 in box 1a (ordinary dividends) and in box purpose and that includes an exchange ofhave received the dividend on December 31.
1b (qualified dividends). However, you sold the information program. For a list of thoseYou report the dividend in the year it was de-
treaties, see Table 1-3.5,000 shares on August 1, 2007. You held yourclared.
shares of XYZ Corp. for only 34 days of the 3. The corporation does not meet (1) or (2)121-day period (from June 29, 2007, throughOrdinary Dividends above, but the stock for which the dividend
August 1, 2007). The 121-day period began on is paid is readily tradable on an estab-
Ordinary (taxable) dividends are the most com- May 7, 2007 (60 days before the ex-dividend lished securities market in the United
mon type of distribution from a corporation. They date), and ended on September 4, 2007. You States. See Readily tradable stock, later.
are paid out of the earnings and profits of a have no qualified dividends from XYZ Corp. be-
corporation and are ordinary income to you. This Exception. A corporation is not a qualifiedcause you held the XYZ stock for less than 61
means they are not capital gains. You can as- foreign corporation if it is a passive foreign in-days.
sume that any dividend you receive on common vestment company during its tax year in which
or preferred stock is an ordinary dividend unless the dividends are paid or during its previous taxExample 2. Assume the same facts as in
the paying corporation tells you otherwise. Ordi- year.Example 1 except that you bought the stock onnary dividends will be shown in box 1a of the July 5, 2007 (the day before the ex-dividend Controlled foreign corporation (CFC).Form 1099-DIV you receive. date), and you sold the stock on September 6, Dividends paid out of a CFC’s earnings and
2007. You held the stock for 63 days (from July profits that were not previously taxed are quali-
6, 2007, through September 6, 2007). The $500 fied dividends if the CFC is otherwise a qualifiedQualified Dividends
foreign corporation and the other requirementsof qualified dividends shown in box 1b of your
in this discussion are met. Certain dividendsQualified dividends are the ordinary dividends Form 1099-DIV are all qualified dividends be-
paid by a CFC that would be treated as a pas-that are subject to the same 5% or 15% maxi- cause you held the stock for 61 days of the
sive foreign investment company but for sectionmum tax rate that applies to net capital gain. 121-day period (from July 6, 2007, through Sep-
1297(e) of the Internal Revenue Code may beThey should be shown in box 1b of the Form tember 4, 2007). treated as qualified dividends. For more infor-1099-DIV you receive.
mation, see Notice 2004-70, which is on pageQualified dividends are subject to the 15% Example 3. You bought 10,000 shares of
724 of Internal Revenue Bulletin 2004-44 atrate if the regular tax rate that would apply is ABC Mutual Fund common stock on June 28, www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb04-44.pdf.25% or higher. If the regular tax rate that would 2007. ABC Mutual Fund paid a cash dividend ofapply is lower than 25%, qualified dividends are Readily tradable stock. Any stock (such as10 cents per share. The ex-dividend date wassubject to the 5% rate. common, ordinary, or preferred stock), or anJuly 6, 2007. The ABC Mutual Fund advises youTo qualify for the 5% or 15% maximum rate, American depositary receipt in respect of thatthat the portion of the dividend eligible to beall of the following requirements must be met. stock, is considered to satisfy requirement (3) iftreated as qualified dividends equals 2 cents per
it is listed on one of the following securities• The dividends must have been paid by a share. Your Form 1099-DIV from ABC Mutual markets: the New York Stock Exchange, theU.S. corporation or a qualified foreign cor- Fund shows total ordinary dividends of $1,000 NASDAQ Stock Market, the American Stock Ex-poration. (See Qualified foreign corpora- and qualified dividends of $200. However, you change, the Boston Stock Exchange, the Cincin-tion later.) sold the 10,000 shares on August 1, 2007. You nati Stock Exchange, the Chicago Stock• The dividends are not of the type listed have no qualified dividends from ABC Mutual Exchange, the Philadelphia Stock Exchange, orlater under Dividends that are not qualified Fund because you held the ABC Mutual Fund the Pacific Exchange, Inc.dividends. stock for less than 61 days.
• You meet the holding period (discussed Holding period reduced where risk of loss
next). is diminished. When determining whether
you met the minimum holding period discussed
earlier, you cannot count any day during whichHolding period. You must have held the stock
for more than 60 days during the 121-day period you meet any of the following conditions.
Page 20 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 21 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Report undistributed capital gains (box 1a ofTable 1-3. Income Tax Treaties Dividends Used To
Form 2439) as long-term capital gains onBuy More Stock
Income tax treaties that the United States Schedule D (Form 1040), line 11, column (f).
The corporation in which you own stock mayhas with the following countries satisfy Enter on line 11 of the Unrecaptured Section
requirement (2) under Qualified foreign have a dividend reinvestment plan. This plan 1250 Gain Worksheet in the Schedule D instruc-
corporation. lets you choose to use your dividends to buy tions the part reported to you as unrecaptured
(through an agent) more shares of stock in the section 1250 gain. For any gain on qualifiedAustralia Indonesia Romania corporation instead of receiving the dividends in small business stock, follow the reporting in-Austria Ireland Russian cash. If you are a member of this type of plan structions under Section 1202 Exclusion  inBangladesh1 Israel Federation and you use your dividends to buy more stock at chapter 4. Enter the collectibles gain on line 4 ofBarbados2 Italy Slovak a price equal to its fair market value, you still the 28% Rate Gain Worksheet in the ScheduleBelgium Jamaica Republic must report the dividends as income. D instructions.Canada Japan Slovenia If you are a member of a dividend reinvest- The tax paid on these gains by the mutualChina Kazakhstan South Africa ment plan that lets you buy more stock at a price fund or REIT is shown in box 2 of Form 2439.Cyprus Korea Spain less than its fair market value, you must report You take credit for this tax by including it onCzech Latvia Sri Lanka 3
as dividend income the fair market value of the Form 1040, line 70, and checking box a on thatRepublic Lithuania Sweden additional stock on the dividend payment date. line. Attach Copy B of Form 2439 to your return,Denmark Luxembourg Switzerland You also must report as dividend income any and keep Copy C for your records.Egypt Mexico Thailand service charge subtracted from your cash divi-
Estonia Morocco Trinidad and Basis adjustment. Increase your basis indends before the dividends are used to buy the
your mutual fund, or your interest in a REIT, byFinland Netherlands Tobago additional stock. But you may be able to deduct
the difference between the gain you report andFrance New Zealand Tunisia the service charge. See Expenses of Producing
the credit you claim for the tax paid.Germany Norway Turkey Income in chapter 3.
In some dividend reinvestment plans, youGreece Pakistan Ukraine
can invest more cash to buy shares of stock at aHungary Philippines United Nondividend Distributions
price less than fair market value. If you chooseIceland Poland Kingdom
to do this, you must report as dividend income A nondividend distribution is a distribution that isIndia Portugal Venezuela
the difference between the cash you invest and not paid out of the earnings and profits of a1Effective for dividends paid after August 6, 2006.
2Effective for dividends paid after December 19, the fair market value of the stock you buy. When corporation. You should receive a Form
2004. figuring this amount, use the fair market value of 1099-DIV or other statement from the corpora-3Effective for dividends paid after July 11, 2004. the stock on the dividend payment date. tion showing you the nondividend distribution.
On Form 1099-DIV, a nondividend distribution
will be shown in box 3. If you do not receive such
Money Market Funds a statement, you report the distribution as anDividends that are not qualified dividends.
The following dividends are not qualified divi- ordinary dividend.Report amounts you receive from money marketdends. They are not qualified dividends even if funds as dividend income. Money market funds Basis adjustment. A nondividend distributionthey are shown in box 1b of Form 1099-DIV. are a type of mutual fund and should not be reduces the basis of your stock. It is not taxed• Capital gain distributions. confused with bank money market accounts that until your basis in the stock is fully recovered.
pay interest. This nontaxable portion is also called a return of• Dividends paid on deposits with mutual
capital; it is a return of your investment in thesavings banks, cooperative banks, credit
Capital Gain Distributions stock of the company. If you buy stock in aunions, U.S. building and loan associa-
corporation in different lots at different times,tions, U.S. savings and loan associations,
Capital gain distributions (also called capital and you cannot definitely identify the sharesfederal savings and loan associations, and
gain dividends) are paid to you or credited to subject to the nondividend distribution, reducesimilar financial institutions. (Report these
your account by mutual funds (or other regu- the basis of your earliest purchases first.amounts as interest income.)
lated investment companies) and real estate When the basis of your stock has been re-• Dividends from a corporation that is a investment trusts (REITs). They will be shown in duced to zero, report any additional nondividendtax-exempt organization or farmer’s coop- box 2a of the Form 1099-DIV you receive from distribution that you receive as a capital gain.erative during the corporation’s tax year in the mutual fund or REIT. Whether you report it as a long-term orwhich the dividends were paid or during Report capital gain distributions as long-term short-term capital gain depends on how longthe corporation’s previous tax year. capital gains, regardless of how long you owned you have held the stock. See Holding Period inyour shares in the mutual fund or REIT. See• Dividends paid by a corporation on em- chapter 4.Capital gain distributions under How To Reportployer securities which are held on the
Dividend Income, later in this chapter.date of record by an employee stock own- Example. You bought stock in 1995 for
ership plan (ESOP) maintained by that $100. In 1998, you received a nondividend dis-Undistributed capital gains of mutual funds
corporation. tribution of $80. You did not include this amountand REITs. Some mutual funds and REITs
in your income, but you reduced the basis ofkeep their long-term capital gains and pay tax on• Dividends on any share of stock to the your stock to $20. You received a nondividendthem. You must treat your share of these gainsextent that you are obligated (whether distribution of $30 in 2007. The first $20 of thisas distributions, even though you did not actu-under a short sale or otherwise) to make amount reduced your basis to zero. You reportally receive them. However, they are not in-related payments for positions in substan- the other $10 as a long-term capital gain forcluded on Form 1099-DIV. Instead, they aretially similar or related property. 2007. You must report as a long-term capitalreported to you on Form 2439, Notice to Share-
• Payments in lieu of dividends, but only if gain any nondividend distribution you receive onholder of Undistributed Long-Term Capital
you know or have reason to know that the this stock in later years.Gains.
payments are not qualified dividends. Form 2439 will also show how much, if any,
of the undistributed capital gains is: Liquidating Distributions• Payments shown in Form 1099-DIV, box
1b, from a foreign corporation to the extent • Unrecaptured section 1250 gain (box 1b), Liquidating distributions, sometimes called liqui-you know or have reason to know the pay- dating dividends, are distributions you receive• Gain from qualified small business stockments are not qualified dividends. during a partial or complete liquidation of a cor-(section 1202 gain, box 1c), or
poration. These distributions are, at least in part,• Collectibles (28%) gain (box 1d). one form of a return of capital. They may be paid
in one or more installments. You will receiveFor information about these terms, see Capital
Form 1099-DIV from the corporation showingGain Tax Rates in chapter 4.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 21

Page 22 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you the amount of the liquidating distribution in The term “stock” includes rights to acquire 4. The stock was issued after Decemb er 19,
box 8 or 9. 1995, and is redeemable solely at the op-stock, and the term “shareholder” includes a
tion of the issuer, but the redemption pre-holder of rights or convertible securities.Any liquidating distribution you receive is not
mium is in the nature of a penalty fortaxable to you until you have recovered the If you receive taxable stock dividends or
premature redemption or redemption is notbasis of your stock. After the basis of your stock stock rights, include their fair market value at the
more likely than not to occur. The redemp-has been reduced to zero, you must report the time of the distribution in your income. tion will be treated under a “safe harbor” asliquidating distribution as a capital gain. Whether
not more likely than not to occur if all of theyou report the gain as a long-term or short-term Constructive distributions. You must treat following are true.capital gain depends on how long you have held certain transactions that increase your propor-
the stock. See Holding Period in chapter 4. tionate interest in the earnings and profits or a. You and the issuer are not related
assets of a corporation as if they were distribu-Stock acquired at different times. If you under the rules discussed in chapter 4
tions of stock or stock rights. These constructiveacquired stock in the same corporation in more under Losses on Sales or Trades of
distributions are taxable if they have the samethan one transaction, you own more than one Property, substituting “20%” for “50%.”
block of stock in the corporation. If you receive result as a distribution described in (2), (3), (4), b. There are no plans, arrangements, ordistributions from the corporation in complete or (5) of the above discussion. agreements that effectively require orliquidation, you must divide the distribution This treatment applies to a change in your are intended to compel the issuer toamong the blocks of stock you own in the follow- stock’s conversion ratio or redemption price, a redeem the stock.ing proportion: the number of shares in that difference between your stock’s redemption
block over the total number of shares you own. c. The redemption would not reduce theprice and issue price, a redemption that is notDivide distributions in partial liquidation among stock’s yield.treated as a sale or exchange of your stock, andthat part of the stock that is redeemed in the any other transaction having a similar effect onpartial liquidation. After the basis of a block of your interest in the corporation. Basis. Your basis in stock or stock rights re-stock is reduced to zero, you must report the ceived in a taxable distribution is their fair marketPreferred stock redeemable at a premium.part of any later distribution for that block as a value when distributed. If you receive stock orIf you hold preferred stock having a redemptioncapital gain. stock rights that are not taxable to you, seeprice higher than its issue price, the differenceDistributions less than basis. If the total Stocks and Bonds  under Basis of Investment(the redemption premium) generally is taxableliquidating distributions you receive are less Property in chapter 4 for information on how toas a constructive distribution of additional stockthan the basis of your stock, you may have a figure their basis.on the preferred stock.capital loss. You can report a capital loss only
Fractional shares. You may not own enoughFor stock issued before October 10, 1990,after you have received the final distribution in
stock in a corporation to receive a full share ofyou include the redemption premium in yourliquidation that results in the redemption or can-
stock if the corporation declares a stock divi-income ratably over the period during which thecellation of the stock. Whether you report the
dend. However, with the approval of the share-stock cannot be redeemed. For stock issuedloss as a long-term or short-term capital loss
holders, the corporation may set up a plan inafter October 9, 1990, you include the redemp-depends on how long you held the stock. See
which fractional shares are not issued, but in-tion premium on the basis of its economic ac-Holding Period in chapter 4.
stead are sold, and the cash proceeds are givencrual over the period during which the stock
to the shareholders. Any cash you receive forcannot be redeemed, as if it were original issueDistributions of Stock fractional shares under such a plan is treated asdiscount on a debt instrument. See Original Is-and Stock Rights an amount realized on the sale of the fractionalsue Discount (OID), earlier in this chapter. shares. You must determine your gain or lossThe redemption premium is not a construc-Distributions by a corporation of its own stock and report it as a capital gain or loss on Sched-tive distribution, and therefore is not taxable, inare commonly known as stock dividends. Stock ule D (Form 1040). Your gain or loss is thethe following situations.rights (also known as “stock options”) are distri- difference between the cash you receive and thebutions by a corporation of rights to acquire the basis of the fractional shares sold.1. The stock was issued before October 10,corporation’s stock. Generally, stock dividends
1990 (before December 20, 1995, if re-and stock rights are not taxable to you, and you Example. You own one share of commondeemable solely at the option of the is-do not report them on your return. stock that you bought on January 3, 1999, forsuer), and the redemption premium is $100. The corporation declared a common stockTaxable stock dividends and stock rights. “reasonable.” (For stock issued before Oc- dividend of 5% on June 30, 2007. The fair mar-Distributions of stock dividends and stock rights tober 10, 1990, only the part of the re- ket value of the stock at the time the stockare taxable to you if any of the following apply. demption premium that is not “reasonable” dividend was declared was $200. You were paidis a constructive distribution.) The redemp- $10 for the fractional-share stock dividend under1. You or any other shareholder has the tion premium is reasonable if it is not more a plan described in the above paragraph. Youchoice to receive cash or other property than 10% of the issue price on stock not figure your gain or loss as follows:instead of stock or stock rights. redeemable for 5 years from the issue date
or is in the nature of a penalty for making a2. The distribution gives cash or other prop- Fair market value of old stock .... $200.00
erty to some shareholders and an increase premature redemption. Fair market value of stock dividend
in the percentage interest in the corpora- (cash received) .............. +  10.002. The stock was issued after October 9,tion’s assets or earnings and profits to Fair market value of old stock and1990 (after December 19, 1995, if redeem- stock dividend ............... $210.00other shareholders. able solely at the option of the issuer), and Basis (cost) of old stock3. The distribution is in convertible preferred the redemption premium is “de minimis.” after the stock dividendstock and has the same result as in (2). The redemption premium is de minimis if it (($200 ÷ $210) × $100) ......... $95.24
is less than one-fourth of 1% (.0025) of the Basis (cost) of stock dividend4. The distribution gives preferred stock to
redemption price multiplied by the number (($10 ÷ $210) × $100) .......... +  4.76some common stock shareholders and
Total ..................... $100.00of full years from the date of issue to thecommon stock to other common stock
date redeemable.shareholders. Cash received ...............  $10.00
Basis (cost) of stock dividend ..... − 4.763. The stock was issued after October 9,5. The distribution is on preferred stock. (The
1990, and must be redeemed at a speci-distribution, however, is not taxable if it is Gain  $5.24fied time or is redeemable at your option,an increase in the conversion ratio of con-
but the redemption is unlikely because it isvertible preferred stock made solely to take Because you had held the share of stock for
subject to a contingency outside your con-into account a stock dividend, stock split, more than 1 year at the time the stock dividend
trol (not including the possibility of default,or similar event that would otherwise result was declared, your gain on the stock dividend is
insolvency, etc.).in reducing the conversion right.) a long-term capital gain.
Page 22 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 23 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Scrip dividends. A corporation that de- • Property bought for your personal use, or • You received, as a nominee, dividends
clares a stock dividend may issue you a scrip that actually belong to someone else.• Capital assets or depreciable propertycertificate that entitles you to a fractional share. bought for use in your business. But you If your ordinary dividends are more than $1,500,The certificate is generally nontaxable when you must reduce the basis (cost) of the items you must also complete Schedule B, Part III.receive it. If you choose to have the corporation bought. If the dividend is more than the List on Schedule B, Part II, line 5, eachsell the certificate for you and give you the pro- adjusted basis of the assets, you must re- payer’s name and the amount of ordinary divi-ceeds, your gain or loss is the difference be- port the excess as income. dends you received. If your securities are heldtween the proceeds and the part of your basis in
by a brokerage firm (in “street name”), list thethe corporation’s stock that is allocated to the These rules are the same whether the cooper- name of the brokerage firm that is shown oncertificate. ative paying the dividend is a taxable or Form 1099-DIV as the payer. If your stock isHowever, if you receive a scrip certificate tax-exempt cooperative. held by a nominee who is the owner of record,that you can choose to redeem for cash instead
and the nominee credited or paid you dividendsof stock, the certificate is taxable when you re- Alaska Permanent Fund dividends. Do not on the stock, show the name of the nominee andceive it. You must include its fair market value in report these amounts as dividends. Instead, re- the dividends you received or for which you wereincome on the date you receive it. port these amounts on Form 1040, line 21, Form credited.1040A, line 13, or Form 1040EZ, line 3.
Enter on line 6 the total of the amounts listedOther Distributions
on line 5. (However, if you hold stock as a
You may receive any of the following distribu- nominee, see Nominees, later.) Also enter this
tions during the year. total on Form 1040, line 9a.How To Report
Exempt-interest dividends. Exempt-interest Dividends received on restricted stock. Re-Dividend Incomedividends you receive from a mutual fund or stricted stock is stock that you get from yourother regulated investment company are not in- employer for services you perform and that isTerms you may need to knowcluded in your taxable income. Exempt-interest nontransferable and subject to a substantial risk(see Glossary):dividends should be shown on box 8 of Form of forfeiture. You do not have to include the1099-INT. value of the stock in your income when youNominee
receive it. However, if you get dividends on re-Information reporting requirement. Al-
Restricted stock stricted stock, you must include them in yourthough exempt-interest dividends are not tax-
income as wages, not dividends. See Restrictedable, you must show them on your tax return if
Property in Publication 525 for information onyou have to file a return. This is an information Generally, you can use either Form 1040 or restricted stock dividends.reporting requirement and does not change the Form 1040A to report your dividend income.exempt-interest dividends to taxable income. Your employer should include these divi-Report the total of your ordinary dividends onSee Reporting tax-exempt interest  under How dends in the wages shown on your Form W-2. Ifline 9a of Form 1040 or Form 1040A. ReportTo Report Interest Income, earlier. you also get a Form 1099-DIV for these divi-qualified dividends on line 9b. dends, list them on Schedule 1 (Form 1040A),Alternative minimum tax treatment. Ex- If you receive capital gain distributions, you line 5, or Schedule B (Form 1040), line 5, withempt-interest dividends paid from specified pri- may be able to use Form 1040A or you may the other dividends you received. Enter a sub-vate activity bonds may be subject to the have to use Form 1040. See Capital gain distri- total of all your dividend income several linesalternative minimum tax. The exempt-interest butions, later. If you receive nondividend distri- above line 6. Below the subtotal, enter “Divi-dividends subject to the alternative minimum tax butions required to be reported as capital gains, dends on restricted stock reported as wages onshould be shown in box 9 of Form 1099-INT. you must use Form 1040. You cannot use Form Form 1040 (or Form 1040A), line 7,” and enterSee Form 6251 and its instructions for more 1040EZ if you receive any dividend income. the amount of the dividends included in yourinformation. wages on line 7 of Form 1040 or Form 1040A.Form 1099-DIV. If you owned stock on whichDividends on insurance policies. Insurance Subtract this amount from the subtotal and enteryou received $10 or more in dividends and otherpolicy dividends that the insurer keeps and uses the result on line 6.distributions, you should receive a Formto pay your premiums are not taxable. However, 1099-DIV. Even if you do not receive a Form Election. You can choose to include theyou must report as taxable interest income the 1099-DIV, you must report all of your taxable value of restricted stock in gross income as payinterest that is paid or credited on dividends left dividend income. for services. If you make this choice, report thewith the insurance company. dividends on the stock like any other dividends.See Form 1099-DIV for more information on If dividends on an insurance contract (other List them on Part II, line 5, of Schedule 1 orhow to report dividend income.than a modified endowment contract) are distrib- Schedule B, along with your other dividends (ifuted to you, they are a partial return of the the amount of ordinary dividends received fromForm 1040A. You must complete Schedule 1premiums you paid. Do not include them in your all sources is more than $1,500). If you receive(Form 1040A), Part II, and attach it to your Formgross income until they are more than the total of both a Form 1099-DIV and a Form W-2 showing1040A, if:all net premiums you paid for the contract. (For these dividends, do not include the dividends ininformation on the treatment of a distribution • Your ordinary dividends (Form 1099-DIV, your wages reported on line 7 of Form 1040 orfrom a modified endowment contract, see Distri- box 1a) are more than $1,500, or Form 1040A. Attach a statement to your Formbution Before Annuity Starting Date From a 1040 or Form 1040A explaining why the amount• You received, as a nominee, dividendsNonqualified Plan  under Taxation of Nonperi- shown on line 7 of your Form 1040 or Formthat actually belong to someone else.odic Payments in Publication 575, Pension and 1040A is different from the amount shown onAnnuity Income.) Report any taxable distribu- List on line 5 each payer’s name and the amount your Form W-2.tions on insurance policies on Form 1040, line of ordinary dividends you received. If you re-
21. Independent contractor. If you receivedceived a Form 1099-DIV from a brokerage firm,
restricted stock for services as an independentlist the brokerage firm as the payer.Dividends on veterans’ insurance. Divi- contractor, the rules in the previous discussiondends you receive on veterans’ insurance poli- Enter on line 6 the total of the amounts listed apply. Generally, you must treat dividends youcies are not taxable. In addition, interest on on line 5. (However, if you hold stock as a receive on the stock as income fromdividends left with the Department of Veterans nominee, see Nominees, later.) Also enter this self-employment.Affairs is not taxable. total on Form 1040A, line 9a.
Patronage dividends. Generally, patronage Qualified dividends. Report qualified divi-Form 1040. You must fill in Schedule B, Partdividends you receive in money from a coopera- dends (Form 1099-DIV, box 1b) on line 9b ofII, and attach it to your Form 1040, if:tive organization are included in your income. Form 1040 or Form 1040A. The amount in box
Do not include in your income patronage • Your ordinary dividends (Form 1099-DIV, 1b is already included in box 1a. Do not add the
dividends you receive on: box 1a) are more than $1,500, or amount in box 1b to, or subtract it from, the
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 23

Page 24 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
CORRECTED (if checked)
PAYER’S name, street address, city, state, ZIP code, and telephone no.
RECIPIENT’S identification
number
PAYER’S federal identification
number
RECIPIENT’S name
Street address (including apt. no.)
City, state, and ZIP code
Account number (see instructions)
Dividends and
Distributions
Department of the Treasury - Internal Revenue ServiceForm 1099-DIV (keep for your records)
Copy B
This is important
tax information
and is being
furnished to the
Internal Revenue
Service. If you
are required to
file a return, a
negligence
penalty or other
sanction may be
imposed on you
if this income is
taxable and the
IRS determines
that it has not
been reported.
For Recipient
Unrecap. Sec. 1250 gain
OMB No. 1545-0110Total ordinary dividends1a
$
1b Qualified dividends
$
Total capital gain distr.2a
Collectibles (28%) gainSection 1202 gain 2d2c
$
3
5 Investment expenses
Noncash liquidation
distributions
9Cash liquidation
distributions
8
$
$
2b
$$
Nondividend distributions
Form 1099-DIV
$
76
$
Foreign tax paid Foreign country or U.S. possession
$
$
4 Federal income tax withheld
$
2007
amount in box 1a. Do not include any of the interest deduction. This is done on the Qualified only after your basis in the stock has been re-
Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet or duced to zero. After the basis of your stock hasfollowing on line 9b.
the Schedule D Tax Worksheet. For more infor- been reduced to zero, you must show this• Qualified dividends you received as a mation about the limit on investment interest, amount on Schedule D, Part I, line 1, if you heldnominee. See Nominees later. see Interest Expenses in chapter 3. the stock 1 year or less. Show it on Schedule D,
Part II, line 8, if you held the stock for more than• Dividends on stock for which you did not
Capital gain distributions. How to report 1 year. Enter “Nondividend Distribution Exceed-meet the holding period. See Holding pe-
capital gain distributions depends on whether ing Basis” in column (a) of Schedule D and theriod, earlier under Qualified Dividends.
you have any other capital gains or losses. If you name of the company. Report your gain in col-• Dividends on any share of stock to the do, report total capital gain distributions (box 2a umn (f). Your gain is the amount of the distribu-
extent that you are obligated (whether of Form 1099-DIV) on Schedule D (Form 1040), tion that is more than your basis in the stock.
under a short sale or otherwise) to make Part II, line 13. If you do not have any other
related payments for positions in substan- capital gains or losses, you may be able to Nominees. If you received ordinary dividendstially similar or related property. report your capital gain distributions directly on as a nominee (that is, the dividends are in yourForm 1040, line 13, or Form 1040A, line 10. In• Payments in lieu of dividends, but only if name but actually belong to someone else),either case, see Reporting Capital Gains andyou know or have reason to know that the include them on line 5 of Schedule 1 (FormLosses in chapter 4 for more information.payments are not qualified dividends. 1040A) or Schedule B (Form 1040). SeveralThe mutual fund (or other regulated invest- lines above line 6, put a subtotal of all dividend• Payments shown in Form 1099-DIV, box ment company) or real estate investment trust income listed on line 5. Below this subtotal, enter1b, from a foreign corporation to the extent (REIT) making the distribution should tell you “Nominee Distribution” and show the amounthow much of it is:you know or have reason to know the pay- received as a nominee. Subtract the total of yourments are not qualified dividends. nominee distributions from the subtotal. Enter• Unrecaptured section 1250 gain (box 2b),
the result on line 6.orIf you have qualified dividends, you must fig-
File Form 1099-DIV with the IRS. If you• Section 1202 gain (box 2c).ure your tax by completing the Qualified Divi-
received dividends as a nominee in 2007, youdends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet in the For information about these terms, see Capital must file a Form 1099-DIV for those dividendsForm 1040 or 1040A instructions or the Sched- Gain Tax Rates in chapter 4. with the IRS. Send the Form 1099-DIV with aule D Tax Worksheet in the Schedule D instruc-
Form 1096, Annual Summary and Transmittal ofEnter on line 11 of the Unrecaptured Sectiontions, whichever applies. Enter qualified
U.S. Information Returns, to your Internal Reve-1250 Gain Worksheet in the Schedule D instruc-dividends on line 2 of the worksheet.
nue Service Center by February 28, 2008tions the part reported to you as unrecaptured
Investment interest deducted. If you claim (March 31, 2008, if you file form 1099-DIV elec-section 1250 gain. If you have a gain on qualified
a deduction for investment interest, you may tronically). Give the actual owner of the divi-small business stock (section 1202 gain), follow
have to reduce the amount of your qualified dends Copy B of the Form 1099-DIV by Januarythe reporting instructions under Section 1202
dividends that are eligible for the 5% or 15% tax 31, 2008. On Form 1099-DIV, you should beExclusion in chapter 4.
rate. Reduce it by the amount of qualified divi- listed as the “Payer.” The other owner should be
dends you choose to include in investment in- Nondividend distributions. Report nondivi- listed as the “Recipient.” You do not, however,
come when figuring the limit on your investment dend distributions (box 3 of Form 1099-DIV) have to file a Form 1099-DIV to show payments
Page 24 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 25 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
for your spouse. For more information about the Form 1099-OID shows the amount of OID
reporting requirements and the penalties for fail- and interest, if any, that accrued to you for theREMICs, FASITs,ure to file (or furnish) certain information returns, period you held the regular interest. You will not
see the General Instructions for Forms 1099, need to make any adjustments to the amountsand Other CDOs
1098, 5498, and W-2G. reported even if you held the regular interest for
only a part of the calendar year. However, if youHolders of interests in real estate mortgage in-
Liquidating distributions. If you receive a bought the regular interest at a premium or ac-vestment conduits (REMICs), financial asset
liquidating distribution on stock, the corporation quisition premium, see Refiguring OID shown onsecuritization investment trusts (FASITs), and
will give you a Form 1099-DIV showing the Form 1099-OID under Original Issue Discountother collateralized debt obligations (CDOs)
amount of the liquidating distribution in boxes 8 must follow special rules for reporting income (OID), earlier.
and 9. and any expenses from these investment prod-
You may not get a Form 1099. Corpora-ucts.
tions and other persons specified in Regulations
section 1.6049-7(c) will not receive Forms 1099.REMICsStripped These persons and fiscal year taxpayers may
obtain tax information by contacting the REMICA real estate mortgage investment conduit
Preferred Stock or the issuer of the CDO, if they hold their inter-(REMIC) is an entity that is formed for the pur-
pose of holding a fixed pool of mortgages se- est directly from the REMIC or issuer of the
 If the dividend rights are stripped from certain cured by interests in real property. A REMIC CDO. Publication 938, Real Estate Mortgagepreferred stock, the holder of the stripped pre- issues regular and residual interests to inves- Investment Conduits (REMICs) Reporting Infor-ferred stock may have to include amounts in tors. For tax purposes, a REMIC is generally mation, explains how to request this information.income equal to the amounts that would have treated as a partnership with the residual inter- Publication 938 is available only on thebeen included if the stock were a bond with est holders treated as the partners. The regular Internet at www.irs.gov.original issue discount (OID). interests are treated as debt instruments.
REMIC income or loss is not income or lossStripped preferred stock defined. Stripped from a passive activity.preferred stock is any stock that meets both of If you hold a regular interest or CDO throughFor more information about the qualificationsthe following tests. a nominee (rather than directly), you can re-and the tax treatment that apply to a REMIC and
quest the information from the nominee.the interests of investors in a REMIC, see sec-1. There has been a separation in ownership
tions 860A through 860G of the Internal Reve-between the stock and any dividend on the
nue Code, and the regulations under those Allocated investment expenses. Regular in-stock that has not become payable.
sections. terest holders in a REMIC may be allowed to2. The stock: deduct the REMIC’s investment expenses, but
only if the REMIC is a single-class REMIC. Aa. Is limited and preferred as to dividends, Regular Interest single-class REMIC is one that generally would
b. Does not participate in corporate growth be classified as a trust for tax purposes if it hadA REMIC can have several classes (also knownto any significant extent, and not elected REMIC status.as “tranches”) of regular interests. A regular The single-class REMIC will report yourc. Has a fixed redemption price. interest unconditionally entitles the holder to re- share of its investment expenses in box 5 ofceive a specified principal amount (or other simi-
Form 1099-INT or box 7 of Form 1099-OID. Itlar amount).Treatment of buyer. If you buy stripped pre- will also include this amount in box 1 of FormA REMIC regular interest is treated as a debtferred stock after April 30, 1993, you must in- 1099-INT or box 2 of Form 1099-OID, and on theinstrument for income tax purposes. Accord-clude certain amounts in your gross income additional written statement.ingly, the OID, market discount, and incomewhile you hold the stock. These amounts are You may be able to take a deduction forreporting rules that apply to bonds and otherordinary income. They are equal to the amounts these expenses subject to a 2% limit that alsodebt instruments as described earlier in thisyou would have included in gross income if the applies to certain other miscellaneous itemizedpublication under Discount on Debt Instrumentsstock were a bond that: deductions. See chapter 3 for more information.apply, with certain modifications discussed be-
low.1. Was issued on the purchase date of the
Redemption of regular interests at maturity.Generally, you report your income from astock, and
Redemption of debt instruments at their maturityregular interest on Form 1040, line 8a. For more
2. Has OID equal to: is treated as a sale or exchange. You mustinformation on how to report interest and OID,
report redemptions on your tax return whether orsee How To Report Interest Income, earlier.a. The redemption price for the stock, mi- not you realize gain or loss on the transaction.nus Holders must use accrual method. Holders Your basis is your adjusted issue price, which
of regular interests must use an accrual methodb. The price at which you bought the includes any OID you previously reported in
of accounting to report OID and interest income.stock. income.
Because income under an accrual method is not Any amount that you receive on the retire-
determined by the receipt of cash, you may haveReport these amounts as other income on ment of a debt instrument is treated in the sameto include OID or interest income in your taxableForm 1040, line 21. For information about OID, way as if you had sold or exchanged that instru-income even if you have not received any cashsee Original Issue Discount (OID), earlier. ment. A debt instrument is retired when it ispayments.This treatment also applies to you if you reacquired or redeemed by the issuer and can-
acquire the stock in such a way (for example, by celed.Forms 1099-INT and 1099-OID. You shouldgift) that your basis in the stock is determined by
Sale or exchange of a regular interest.receive a copy of Form 1099-INT or Formusing a buyer’s basis.
Some of your gain on the sale or exchange of a1099-OID from the REMIC. You will also receive
REMIC regular interest may be ordinary income.a written statement by March 17, 2008 (if youTreatment of person stripping stock. If you
The ordinary income part, if any, is:are a calendar year taxpayer), that providesstrip the rights to one or more dividends from
additional information. The statement shouldstripped preferred stock, you are treated as hav- • The amount that would have been in-contain enough information to enable you toing purchased the stock. You are treated as cluded in your income if the yield to matur-figure your accrual of market discount or amor-making the purchase on the date you disposed ity on the regular interest had been 110%tizable bond premium.of the dividend rights. Your adjusted basis in the of the applicable federal rate at the begin-stripped preferred stock is treated as your Form 1099-INT shows the amount of interest ning of your holding period, minuspurchase price. The rules described in Treat- income that accrued to you for the period you
• The amount you included in your income.ment of buyer, earlier, apply to you. held the regular interest.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 25

Page 26 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
CDOs can be secured by a pool of mort-Residual Interest
gages, automobile loans, equipment leases, or S CorporationsA residual interest is an interest in a REMIC that credit card receivables.
is not a regular interest. It is designated as a For more information about the qualifications In general, an S corporation does not pay a taxresidual interest by the REMIC. and the tax treatment that apply to an issuer of a on its income. Instead, its income and expensesIf you acquire a residual interest in a REMIC, CDO, see section 1272(a)(6) of the Internal are passed through to the shareholders, whoyou must take into account, on a quarterly basis, Revenue Code and the regulations under that then report these items on their own income taxyour daily portion of the taxable income or net section. returns.loss of the REMIC for each day during the tax
The OID, market discount, and in- If you are an S corporation shareholder, youryear that you hold the residual interest. You
share of the corporation’s current year incomecome-reporting rules that apply to bonds andmust report these amounts as ordinary income
or loss and other tax items are taxed to youother debt instruments, as described earlier inor loss.
whether or not you receive any amount. Gener-this chapter under Discount on Debt Instru-
Basis in the residual interest. Your basis in ally, those items increase or decrease the basisments, also apply to a CDO.
the residual interest is increased by the amount of your S corporation stock as appropriate. ForYou must include interest income from yourof taxable income you take into account. Your more information on basis adjustments for SCDO in your gross income under your regularbasis is decreased (but not below zero) by the corporation stock, see Stocks and Bonds undermethod of accounting. Also include any OIDamount of cash or the fair market value of any Basis of Investment Property in chapter 4.accrued on your CDO during the tax year.property distributed to you, and by the amount of Generally, S corporation distributions, ex-Generally, you report your income from aany net loss you have taken into account. If you cept dividend distributions, are considered a re-CDO on Form 1040, line 8a. For more informa-sell your residual interest, you must adjust your turn of capital and reduce your basis in the stocktion about reporting these amounts on your re-basis to reflect your share of the REMIC’s tax- of the corporation. The part of any distributionturn, see How To Report Interest Income ,able income or net loss immediately before the that is more than your basis is treated as a gainearlier.sale. See Wash Sales , in chapter 4, for more from the sale or exchange of property. The cor-
information about selling a residual interest. poration’s distributions may be in the form ofForms 1099-INT and 1099-OID. You should cash or property.Treatment of distributions. You must in- receive a copy of Form 1099-INT or Form S corporation distributions are not treated asclude in your gross income the part of any distri- 1099-OID. You will also receive a written state- dividends except in certain cases in which thebution that is more than your adjusted basis. ment by March 17, 2008, that provides addi- corporation has accumulated earnings and prof-Treat the distribution as a gain from the sale or tional information. The statement should contain its from years before it became an S corporation.exchange of your residual interest. enough information about the CDO to enable
you to figure your accrual of market discount orSchedule Q. If you hold a REMIC residual Reporting S corporation income, deduc-amortizable bond premium.interest, you should receive Schedule Q (Form tions, and credits. The S corporation should
Form 1099-INT shows the amount of interest1066), Quarterly Notice to Residual Interest send you a copy of Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S)
income paid to you for the period you held theHolder of REMIC Taxable Income or Net Loss showing your share of the S corporation’s in-
CDO.Allocation, and instructions from the REMIC come, credits, and deductions for the tax year.
each quarter. Schedule Q will indicate your You must report your distributive share of the SForm 1099-OID shows the amount of OID
share of the REMIC’s quarterly taxable income corporation’s income, gain, loss, deductions, oraccrued to you and the interest, if any, paid to
(or loss). Do not attach the Schedule Q to your credits on the appropriate lines and schedules ofyou for the period you held the CDO. You should
tax return. Keep it for your records. your Form 1040.not need to make any adjustments to the
Use Schedule E (Form 1040), Part IV, to For more information about your treatment ofamounts reported even if you held the CDO for
report your total share of the REMIC’s taxable S corporation tax items, see Shareholder’s In-only a part of the calendar year. However, if you
income (or loss) for each quarter included in structions for Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S).bought the CDO at a premium or acquisitionyour tax year. premium, see Refiguring OID shown on Form Limit on losses and deductions. The de-For more information about reporting your 1099-OID under Original Issue Discount (OID) , duction for your share of losses and deductionsincome (or loss) from a residual interest in a earlier. shown on Schedule K-1 (Form 1120S) is limitedREMIC, follow the Schedule Q (Form 1066) and If you did not receive a Form 1099, see You to the adjusted basis of your stock and any debtSchedule E (Form 1040) instructions. may not get a Form 1099 under REMICs, earlier. the corporation owes you. Any loss or deduction
Expenses. Subject to the 2%-of-adjusted- not allowed because of this limit is carried over
gross-income limit, you may be able to claim a and treated as a loss or deduction in the next taxFASITs
miscellaneous itemized deduction for certain or- year.
A financial asset securitization investment trustdinary and necessary expenses that you paid or Passive activity losses. Rules apply thatincurred in connection with your investment in a (FASIT) is an entity that securitizes debt obliga- limit losses from passive activities. Your copy ofREMIC. These expenses may include certain tions such as credit card receivables, home eq- Schedule K-1 and its instructions will explain theexpense items incurred by the REMIC and uity loans, and automobile loans. limits and tell you where on your return to reportpassed through to you. The REMIC will report A regular interest in a FASIT is treated as a your share of S corporation items from passivethese expenses to you on Schedule Q, line 3b. debt instrument. The rules described under Col- activities.See chapter 3 for information on how to report lateralized Debt Obligations (CDOs), earlier, ap-
these expenses. Form 8582. If you have a passive activityply to a regular interest in a FASIT, except that a loss from an S corporation, you must completeholder of a regular interest in a FASIT must use Form 8582, Passive Activity Loss Limitations, toCollateralized Debt an accrual method of accounting to report OID figure the amount of the allowable loss to enterand interest income.Obligations (CDOs) on your return. See Publication 925 for moreFor more information about FASITs, see information.A collateralized debt obligation (CDO) is a debt sections 860H through 860L of the Internal Rev-
instrument, other than a REMIC regular interest, enue Code.
that is secured by a pool of mortgages or other
Beginning January 1, 2005, the specialevidence of debt and that has principal pay-
rules for FASITs are repealed. How- Investment Clubsments that are subject to acceleration. (Note:
ever, the special rules still apply to anyWhile REMIC regular interests are collateralized
CAUTION
!
FASIT in existence on October 22, 2004, to the An investment club is formed when a group ofdebt obligations, they have unique rules that do
extent that regular interests issued by the FASIT friends, neighbors, business associates, ornot apply to CDOs issued before 1987.) CDOs,
before that date continue to remain outstanding others pool their money to invest in stock oralso known as “pay-through bonds,” are com-
in accordance with the original terms of issu- other securities. The club may or may not have amonly divided into different classes (also called
ance. written agreement, a charter, or bylaws.“tranches”).
Page 26 Chapter 1 Investment Income

Page 27 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Usually the group operates informally with However, as a partner in the club, you must • It is formed under a state law that refers to
members pledging to pay a regular amount into report on your individual return your share of the it as a joint-stock company or joint-stock
the club monthly. Some clubs have a committee club’s income, gains, losses, deductions, and association, or
that gathers information on securities, selects credits for the club’s tax year. (Its tax year gener- • It chooses to be taxed as a corporation.the most promising securities, and recommends ally must be the same tax year as that of the
that the club invest in them. Other clubs rotate partners owning a majority interest.) You must
these responsibilities among all their members. report these items whether or not you actually Choosing to be taxed as a corporation. To
Most clubs require all members to vote for or receive any distribution from the partnership. choose to be taxed as a corporation, the club
against all investments, sales, trades, and other cannot be a trust (see Club as a Trust, later) or
Schedule K-1. You should receive a copy oftransactions. otherwise subject to special treatment under the
Schedule K-1 (Form 1065), Partner’s Share of tax law. The club must file Form 8832 to makeIdentifying number. Each club must have an Income, Deductions, Credits, etc., from the part- the choice.employer identification number (EIN) to use nership. The amounts shown on Schedule K-1when filing its return. The club’s EIN also may are your share of the partnership’s income, de- Filing requirement. If your club is taxed as ahave to be given to the payer of dividends or ductions, and credits. Report each amount on corporation, it must file Form 1120. In that case,other income from investments recorded in the the appropriate lines and schedules of your in-club’s name. To obtain an EIN, first get Form you do not report any of its income or expensescome tax return.SS-4, Application for Employer Identification on your individual return. All ordinary incomeThe club’s expenses for producing or collect-Number, from the Internal Revenue Service or and expenses and capital gains and losses musting income, for managing investment property,your nearest Social Security Administration of- be reported on the Form 1120. Any distributionor for determining any tax are listed separatelyfice. See chapter 5 of this publication for more the club makes that qualifies as a dividend muston Schedule K-1. Each individual partner whoinformation about how to get this form. be reported on Form 1099-DIV if total distribu-itemizes deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040)
tions to the shareholder are $10 or more for theInvestments in name of member. When can deduct his or her share of those expenses.
year.an investment is recorded in the name of one The expenses are listed on Schedule A, line 23,
club member, this member must give his or her along with other miscellaneous deductions sub- You must report any distributions that you
social security number (SSN) to the payer of ject to the 2% limit. See chapter 3 for more receive from the club on your individual return.
investment income. (When an investment is information on the 2% limit. You should receive a copy of Form 1099-DIV
held in the names of two or more club members, For more information about reporting your from the club showing the distributions you re-
the SSN of only one member must be given to income from a partnership, see the Schedule ceived.
the payer.) This member is considered as the K-1 instructions. Also see Publication 541, Part- Some corporations can choose not to berecord owner for the actual owner, the invest- nerships. taxed and have earnings taxed to the sharehold-ment club. This member is a “nominee” and ers. See S Corporations, earlier.Passive activity losses. Rules apply thatmust file an information return with the IRS. For limit losses from passive activities. Your copy of For more information about corporations,example, the nominee member must file Form Schedule K-1 (Form 1065) and its instructions see Publication 542, Corporations.1099-DIV for dividend income, showing the club will tell you where on your return to report youras the owner of the dividend, his or her SSN, share of partnership items from passive activi-and the EIN of the club. ties. If you have a passive activity loss from a Club as a Trust
partnership, you must complete Form 8582 toTax Treatment of the Club In a few cases, an investment club is taxed as afigure the amount of the allowable loss to enter
trust. In general, a trust is an arrangementon your tax return.Generally, an investment club is treated as a through which trustees take title to property forpartnership for federal tax purposes unless it No social security coverage for investment the purpose of protecting or conserving it for thechooses otherwise. In some situations, how- club earnings. If an investment club partner- beneficiaries under the ordinary rules applied inever, it is taxed as a corporation or a trust. ship’s activities are limited to investing in sav- chancery or probate courts. An arrangement is
ings certificates, stock, or securities, andClubs formed before 1997. Before 1997, the treated as a trust for tax purposes if its purpose
collecting interest or dividends for its members’rules for determining how an investment club is is to vest in trustees responsibility for protecting
accounts, a member’s share of income is nottreated were different from those explained in and conserving property for beneficiaries whoearnings from self-employment. You cannot vol-the following discussions. An investment club cannot share in that responsibility and so are notuntarily pay the self-employment tax to increasethat existed before 1997 is treated for later years associates in a joint enterprise for the conduct ofyour social security coverage and ultimate bene-the same way it was treated before 1997, unless business for profit. If you need more informationfits.it chooses to be treated a different way under the about trusts, see Regulations sectionnew rules. To make that choice, the club must 301.7701-4.file Form 8832, Entity Classification Election.
Club as a Corporation
Filing requirement. If your club is taxed as a
trust, it must file Form 1041. You should receiveAn investment club formed after 1996 is taxedClub as a Partnership
as a corporation if: a copy of Schedule K-1 (Form 1041) from the
If your club is not taxed as a corporation or a trust. Report the amounts shown on Schedule• It is formed under a federal or state lawtrust, it will be treated as a partnership. K-1 on the appropriate lines and schedules ofthat refers to it as incorporated or as a your income tax return.corporation, body corporate, or body poli-Filing requirement. If your investment club is
tic,treated as a partnership, it must file Form 1065.
Chapter 1 Investment Income Page 27

Page 28 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Rules To Curb
Abusive Tax SheltersAbusive Tax Shelters
2. Congress has enacted a series of income taxAbusive tax shelters are marketing schemes
laws designed to halt the growth of abusive taxthat involve artificial transactions with little or no
shelters. These provisions include the following.economic reality. They often make use of un-
realistic allocations, inflated appraisals, losses 1. Disclosure of reportable transactions.
Tax Shelters and in connection with nonrecourse loans, mis- You must disclose information for each re-
matching of income and deductions, financing portable transaction in which you partici-
pate. See Reportable Transactiontechniques that do not conform to standard com-Other Disclosure Statement, later.mercial business practices, or the mischaracter-
Material advisors with respect to any re-ization of the substance of the transaction.
portable transaction must disclose informa-Reportable Despite appearances to the contrary, the tax- tion about the transaction on Form 8918.payer generally risks little. This requirement applies to material advi-
Abusive tax shelters commonly involveTransactions sors who provide material aid, assistance,
package deals that are designed from the start or advice on any reportable transaction after
to generate losses, deductions, or credits that October 22, 2004.
Material advisors will receive a reportablewill be far more than present or future invest-
transaction number for the disclosed report-ment. Or, they may promise investors from theIntroduction
able transaction. They must provide thisstart that future inflated appraisals will enableInvestments that yield tax benefits are some- number to all persons to whom they actedthem, for example, to reap charitable contribu-times called “tax shelters.” In some cases, Con- as a material advisor. They must providetion deductions based on those appraisals. (Butgress has concluded that the loss of revenue is the number at the time the transaction issee the appraisal requirements discussed underan acceptable side effect of special tax provi- entered into. If they do not have the numberRules To Curb Abusive Tax Shelters , later.) at that time, they must provide it within 60sions designed to encourage taxpayers to make They are commonly marketed in terms of the days from the date the number is mailed tocertain types of investments. In many cases, ratio of tax deductions allegedly available to them. For information on penalties for fail-however, losses from tax shelters produce little each dollar invested. This ratio (or “write-off”) is ure to disclose and failure to maintain lists,or no benefit to society, or the tax benefits are frequently said to be several times greater than see Internal Revenue Code sections 6707,exaggerated beyond those intended. Those
one-to-one. 6707A, and 6708. cases are called “abusive tax shelters.” An in-
Because there are many abusive tax shel-vestment that is considered a tax shelter is sub- 2. Requirement to maintain list. Material
ters, it is not possible to list all the factors youject to restrictions, including the requirement advisors must maintain a list of persons to
should consider in determining whether an offer- whom they provide material aid, assis-that it be disclosed, as discussed later.
tance, or advice on any reportable transac-ing is an abusive tax shelter. However, you
tion after October 22, 2004. Beforeshould ask the following questions, which mightTopics
October 23, 2004, organizers and sellersprovide a clue to the abusive nature of the plan.This chapter discusses: who acted as material advisors with re-
• Do the tax benefits far outweigh the eco- spect to any potentially abusive tax shelter• How to recognize an abusive tax shelter, nomic benefits? (including a reportable transaction, dis-
cussed later) were required to maintain a• Rules enacted by Congress to curb tax • Is this a transaction you would seriously
list of persons involved in the tax shelter.shelters, consider, apart from the tax benefits, if you The list must be available for inspection byhoped to make a profit?• Investors’ reporting requirements, and the IRS, and the information required to be
• Do shelter assets really exist and, if so, included on the list generally must be kept• Penalties that may apply.
for 7 years. See Regulations sectionare they insured for less than their
301.6112-1 for more information (includingpurchase price?Useful Items what information is required to be included• Is there a nontax justification for the way on the list).You may want to see: profits and losses are allocated to part-
3. Confidentiality privilege. The confidenti-ners?Publication ality privilege between you and a federally
• Do the facts and supporting documents authorized tax practitioner does not apply❏ 538 Accounting Periods and Methods make economic sense? In that connec- to written communications made after Oc-
tion, are there sales and resales of the tax tober 21, 2004, regarding the promotion of❏ 556 Examination of Returns, Appeal
your direct or indirect participation in anyshelter property at ever increasing prices?Rights, and Claims for Refund
tax shelter.• Does the investment plan involve a gim-❏ 561 Determining the Value of Donated
4. Appraisal requirement for donatedProperty mick, device, or sham to hide the eco-
property. If you claim a deduction of morenomic reality of the transaction?❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules than $5,000 for an item or group of similar
• Does the promoter offer to backdate docu- items of donated property, you generallyForm (and Instructions) ments after the close of the year? Are you must get a qualified appraisal from a quali-
instructed to backdate checks covering fied appraiser and you must attach section❏ your investment? B of Form 8283 to your tax return. If you
❏ 8275 Disclosure Statement claim a deduction of more than $500,000• Is your debt a real debt or are you assured for the donated property, you generally❏ 8275-R Regulation Disclosure Statement by the promoter that you will never have to must attach the qualified appraisal to yourpay it?❏ 8283 Noncash Charitable Contributions tax return. For more information about ap-
praisals, including exceptions, see Publica-• Does this transaction involve laundering❏ 8886 Reportable Transaction Disclosure tion 561.United States source income through for-Statement
eign corporations incorporated in a tax ha- 5. Passive activity loss and credit limits.
ven and owned by United StatesSee chapter 5 for information about getting The passive activity loss and credit rules
these publications and forms. shareholders? limit the amount of losses and credits that
Page 28 Chapter 2 Tax Shelters and Other Reportable Transactions

Page 29 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
can be claimed from passive activities and on your realizing the tax benefits from the trans-Reportable Transaction Disclosure
action. For information on exceptions, see Rev-limit the amount that can offset nonpassive Statement
enue Procedure 2007-20 in Internal Revenueincome, such as certain portfolio income
Use Form 8886 to disclose information for each Bulletin 2007-7, available at  www.irs.gov/pub/from investments. For more detailed infor- reportable transaction in which you participated. irs-irbs/irb07-07.pdf.mation about determining and reporting in- Generally, you must attach Form 8886 to yourcome, losses, and credits from passive Loss transactions. For individuals, a lossreturn for each tax year in which you participated transaction is any transaction that results in aactivities, see Publication 925. in the transaction. In certain circumstances, a deductible loss if the gross amount of the loss istransaction must be disclosed within 90 days of6. Interest on penalties. If you are assessed at least $2 million in a single tax year or $4the transaction being identified as a listed trans-an accuracy-related or civil fraud penalty million in any combination of tax years. A lossaction or a transaction of interest. In addition, for(as discussed under Penalties, later), inter- from a foreign currency transaction under Inter-the first year Form 8886 is attached to yourest will be imposed on the amount of the nal Revenue Code section 988 is a loss transac-return, you must send a copy of the form to:penalty from the due date of the return tion if the gross amount of the loss is at least
(including any extensions) to the date you $50,000 in a single tax year, whether or not theInternal Revenue Service
loss flows through from an S corporation orpay the penalty. OTSA Mail Stop 4915
partnership.1973 North Rulon White Blvd.7. Accounting method restriction. Tax Ogden, Utah 84404 Certain losses (such as losses from casual-shelters generally cannot use the cash
ties, thefts, and condemnations) are exceptedmethod of accounting. from this category and do not have to be re-If you fail to file Form 8886 as required or fail8. Uniform capitalization rules. The uniform ported on Form 8886. For information on otherto include any required information on the form,capitalization rules generally apply to pro- exceptions, see Revenue Procedure 2004-66 inyou may have to pay a penalty. See Penalty for Internal Revenue Bulletin 2004-50 (or futureducing property or acquiring it for resale. failure to disclose a reportable transaction  later published guidance). This Internal Revenue Bul-Under those rules, the direct cost and part under Penalties. letin is available at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/of the indirect cost of the property must be The following discussion briefly describes re- irb04-50.pdf.capitalized or included in inventory. For portable transactions. For more details, see themore information, see Publication 538. Transactions of interest. A transaction ofinstructions for Form 8886.
interest is a transaction entered into after No-9. Denial of deduction for interest on an vember 1, 2006, that is the same as or substan-Reportable transaction.underpayment due to a reportable tially similar to one of the types of transactionsA reportable transaction is any of the follow-transaction. You cannot deduct any inter- that the IRS has identified by notice, regulation,ing.est you paid or accrued on any part of an or other form of published guidance as a trans-
underpayment of tax due to an understate- • A listed transaction. action of interest. As of the date this publication
ment arising from a reportable transaction was prepared for print, the IRS has identified the• A confidential transaction.(discussed later) if the relevant facts affect- following transactions of interest.
ing the tax treatment of the item are not • A transaction with contractual protection. • “Toggling” grantor trusts as described inadequately disclosed. This rule applies to • Loss transactions. Notice 2007-73, 2007-36 I.R.B. 545, avail-reportable transactions entered into in tax able at www.irs.gov/irb/2007-36_IRB/ar20.• Transactions of interest entered into afteryears beginning after October 22, 2004. html.November 1, 2006.
• Certain transactions involving contribu-
tions of a successor member interest in aAuthority for Disallowance of Tax Note. Transactions with a brief asset hold- limited liability company as described in
Benefits ing period were removed from the definition of Notice 2007-72, 2007-36 I.R.B. 544, avail-
reportable transaction for transactions entered able at www.irs.gov/irb/2007-36_IRB/ar19.The IRS has published guidance concluding that into after August 2, 2007. html.the claimed tax benefits of various abusive tax
Listed transaction. A listed transaction is ashelters should be disallowed. The guidance is
transaction that is the same as or substantially Penaltiesthe conclusion of the IRS on how the law is
similar to one of the types of transactions thatapplied to a particular set of facts. Guidance is the IRS has determined to be a tax-avoidance Investing in an abusive tax shelter may be anpublished in the Internal Revenue Bulletin for transaction. These transactions have been iden- expensive proposition when you consider all oftaxpayers’ information and also for use by IRS tified in notices, regulations, and other published the consequences. First, the promoter generallyofficials. So, if your return is examined and an charges a substantial fee. If your return is ex-guidance issued by the IRS. For a list of existingabusive tax shelter is identified and challenged, amined by the IRS and a tax deficiency is deter-guidance, see the instructions for Form 8886.published guidance dealing with that type of mined, you will be faced with payment of moreConfidential transaction. A confidentialshelter, which disallows certain claimed tax tax, interest on the underpayment, possibly atransaction is one that is offered to you undershelter benefits, could serve as the basis for the 20% or 30% accuracy-related penalty, or a 75%conditions of confidentiality and for which youexamining official’s challenge of the tax benefits civil fraud penalty. You may also be subject tohave paid an advisor a minimum fee. A transac-that you claimed. In such a case, the examiner the penalty for failure to pay tax. These penaltiestion is offered under conditions of confidentiality are explained in the following paragraphs.will not compromise even if you or your repre- if the advisor who is paid the fee places a limit onsentative believes that you have authority for the your disclosure of the tax treatment or tax struc-positions taken on your tax return. Accuracy-related penalties. An accuracy-ture of the transaction and the limit protects the related penalty of 20% can be imposed for un-confidentiality of the advisor’s tax strategies.The courts have generally been un- derpayments of tax due to:The transaction is treated as confidential even ifsympathetic to taxpayers involved in
the conditions of confidentiality are not legallyabusive tax shelter schemes and have • Negligence or disregard of rules or regula-CAUTION
!
binding on you.ruled in favor of the IRS in the majority of the tions,
cases in which these shelters have been chal- Transaction with contractual protection. • Substantial understatement of tax, orlenged. Generally, a transaction with contractual protec- • Substantial valuation misstatement.tion is a transaction in which you or a related
party has the right to a full or partial refund of This penalty will not be imposed if you can showInvestor Reporting
fees if all or part of the intended tax conse- that you had reasonable cause for any under-
You may be required to file a reportable transac- quences of the transaction are not sustained, or statement of tax and that you acted in good faith.
a transaction for which the fees are contingenttion disclosure statement. Your failure to disclose a reportable transaction
Chapter 2 Tax Shelters and Other Reportable Transactions Page 29

Page 30 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
is a strong indication that you failed to act in reasonable basis for your position on the tax information regarding a reportable  transaction
good faith. issue. Disclosure of the tax shelter item on a tax (discussed earlier) on a return or statement, you
return does not reduce the amount of the under- may have to pay a penalty. The amount of theIf you are charged an accuracy-related pen- statement. penalty is $10,000 if you are an individual, oralty, interest will be imposed on the amount of $50,000 if you are not. In the case of a listedAlso, the understatement penalty will not bethe penalty from the due date of the return (in- transaction, the amount of the penalty isimposed if you can show that there was reason-cluding extensions) to the date you pay the pen- $100,000 if you are an individual, or $200,000 ifable cause for the underpayment caused by thealty. understatement and that you acted in good faith. you are not. This penalty applies whether or not
Negligence or disregard of rules or regula- An important factor in establishing reasonable there is an understatement of tax and is in addi-
tions. The penalty for negligence or disregard cause and good faith will be the extent of your tion to any other penalty that may be imposed.
of rules or regulations is imposed only on the effort to determine your proper tax liability under The IRS may rescind or abate the penalty for
part of the underpayment that is due to negli- the law. failing to disclose a reportable transaction undergence or disregard of rules or regulations. The certain limited circumstances, but cannot re-Valuation misstatement. In general, youpenalty will not be charged if you can show that scind the penalty for failing to disclose a listedare liable for a 20% penalty for a substantialyou had reasonable cause for understating your transaction.valuation misstatement if all of the following aretax and that you acted in good faith. true. Negligence includes any failure to make a Accuracy-related penalty for a reportablereasonable attempt to comply with the provi- • The value or adjusted basis of any prop- transaction understatement. If you have asions of the Internal Revenue Code. It also in- erty claimed on the return is 150% or more reportable transaction understatement, you maycludes any failure to keep adequate books and of the correct amount. have to pay a penalty equal to 20% of therecords. A return position that has a reasonable amount of that understatement. This applies to• You underpaid your tax by more thanbasis is not negligence. any item due to a listed transaction or other$5,000 because of the misstatement.Disregard includes any careless, reckless, or reportable transaction with a significant purposeintentional disregard of rules or regulations. • You cannot establish that you had reason- of avoiding or evading federal income tax. TheThe penalty for disregard of rules and regula- able cause for the underpayment and that penalty is 30% rather than 20% for the part oftions can be avoided if all of the following are you acted in good faith. any reportable transaction understatement if thetrue. transaction was not properly disclosed. You mayThe 20% penalty does not apply to any under- not have to pay the 20% penalty if you meet the• You keep adequate books and records. statement that is subject to the accuracy-related strengthened reasonable cause and good faith• You have a reasonable basis for your po- penalty for a reportable transaction understate- exception.sition on the tax issue. ment (discussed later). This penalty does not apply to the part of anYou may be assessed a penalty of 40% for a• You make an adequate disclosure of your understatement on which the fraud penalty orgross valuation misstatement. If you misstateposition. gross valuation misstatement penalty is im-the value or the adjusted basis of property by posed. Use Form 8275 to make your disclosure, and 200% or more of the amount determined to be
attach it to your tax return. To disclose a position correct, you will be assessed a penalty of 40%, Civil fraud penalty. If there is any underpay-contrary to a regulation, use Form 8275-R. Also instead of 20%, of the amount you underpaid ment of tax on your return due to fraud, a penaltyuse Form 8886 to disclose a reportable transac- because of the gross valuation misstatement. of 75% of the underpayment will be added totion (discussed earlier). The penalty rate is also 40% if the property’s your tax.correct value or adjusted basis is zero.Substantial understatement of tax. An
Joint return. The fraud penalty on a jointunderstatement is considered to be substantial if Penalty for incorrect appraisals. The person return applies to a spouse only if some part ofit is more than the greater of: who prepares an appraisal of the value of prop- the underpayment is due to the fraud of that
• 10% of the tax required to be shown on erty may have to pay a penalty if: spouse.
the return, or • He or she knows, or reasonably should
Failure to pay tax. If a deficiency is assessed• $5,000. have known, that the appraisal would be
and is not paid within 10 days of the demand forused in connection with a return or claimAn “understatement” is the amount of tax re- payment, an investor can be penalized with upfor refund, andquired to be shown on your return for a tax year to a 25% addition to tax if the failure to payminus the amount of tax shown on the return, • The claimed value of the property on a continues.reduced by any rebates. The term “rebate” gen- return or claim for refund, which is based
erally means a decrease in the tax shown on on that appraisal, results in a substantial Whether To Investyour original return as the result of your filing an valuation misstatement or a gross valua-
amended return or claim for refund. tion misstatement as discussed above. In light of the adverse tax consequences and the
substantial amount of penalties and interest thatFor items other than tax shelters, you can file For details on the amount of the penalty and
will result if the claimed tax benefits are disal-Form 8275 or Form 8275-R to disclose items exceptions, see Publication 561.
lowed, you should consider tax shelter invest-that could cause a substantial understatement
ments carefully and seek competent legal andof income tax. In that way, you can avoid the Penalty for failure to disclose a reportable
financial advice.substantial understatement penalty if you have a transaction. If you fail to include any required
Page 30 Chapter 2 Tax Shelters and Other Reportable Transactions

Page 31 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
At-risk rules. Special at-risk rules apply to • Expenses (other than interest) that are
most income-producing activities. These rules clearly and directly allocable to your port-
limit the amount of loss you can deduct to the folio income, or
3. amount you risk losing in the activity. Generally, • Interest expense properly allocable tothis is the amount of cash and the adjusted basis portfolio income.of property you contribute to the activity. It also
However, this interest and other expenses mayincludes money you borrow for use in the activityInvestment be subject to other limits. These limits are ex-if you are personally liable for repayment or if
plained in the rest of this chapter.you use property not used in the activity as
security for the loan. For more information, seeExpenses Additional information. For more informa-Publication 925. tion about determining and reporting income
and losses from passive activities, see Publica-Passive activity losses and credits. TheTerms you may need to know
tion 925.amount of losses and tax credits you can claim(see Glossary):
from passive activities is limited. Generally, you
At-risk rules are allowed to deduct passive activity losses
only up to the amount of your passive activityPassive activity income. Also, you can use credits from passive Interest Expenses
Portfolio income activities only against tax on the income from
passive activities. There are exceptions for cer- This section discusses interest expenses you
tain activities, such as rental real estate activi- may be able to deduct as an investor.
ties. For information on business interest, seeTopics
chapter 4 of Publication 535.This chapter discusses: Passive activity. A passive activity gener-
You cannot deduct personal interest ex-ally is any activity involving the conduct of any
penses other than qualified home mortgage in-• Limits on deductions, trade or business in which you do not materially
terest, as explained in Publication 936, Homeparticipate and any rental activity. However, if• Interest expenses, Mortgage Interest Deduction, and interest onyou are involved in renting real estate, the activ-
certain student loans, as explained in Publica-• Bond premium amortization, ity is not a passive activity if both of the following
tion 970, Tax Benefits for Education.are true.• Expenses of producing income,
• More than one-half of the personal serv-• Nondeductible expenses, and Investment Interestices you perform during the year in all
• How to report investment expenses. trades or businesses are performed in real If you borrow money to buy property you hold forproperty trades or businesses in which investment, the interest you pay is investmentyou materially participate. interest. You can deduct investment interestUseful Items
subject to the limit discussed later. However,You may want to see: • You perform more than 750 hours of serv-
you cannot deduct interest you incurred to pro-ices during the year in real property trades
duce tax-exempt income. See Tax-exempt in-Publication or businesses in which you materially par-
come under Nondeductible Expenses, later. Norticipate.❏ 535 Business Expenses can you deduct interest expenses on straddles,
also discussed under Nondeductible Expenses.❏ 925 Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules The term “trade or business” generally means Investment interest does not include anyany activity that involves the conduct of a trade❏ 929 Tax Rules for Children and qualified home mortgage interest or any interestor business, is conducted in anticipation of start-Dependents taken into account in computing income or lossing a trade or business, or involves certain re- from a passive activity.search or experimental expenditures. However,Form (and Instructions)
it does not include rental activities or certain Investment property. Property held for in-❏ Schedule A (Form 1040) Itemized activities treated as incidental to holding prop- vestment includes property that produces inter-Deductions erty for investment. est, dividends, annuities, or royalties not derived
in the ordinary course of a trade or business. It❏ 4952 Investment Interest Expense You are considered to materially participate in
also includes property that produces gain or lossDeduction an activity if you are involved on a regular, con-
(not derived in the ordinary course of a trade ortinuous, and substantial basis in the operations
business) from the sale or trade of propertySee chapter 5 for information about getting of the activity.
producing these types of income or held forthese publications and forms. Other income (nonpassive income). Gen- investment (other than an interest in a passiveerally, you can use losses from passive activities activity). Investment property also includes anonly to offset income from passive activities. interest in a trade or business activity in whichYou generally cannot use passive activity losses you did not materially participate (other than aLimits on Deductions to offset your other income, such as your wages passive activity).or your portfolio income. Portfolio income in-Your deductions for investment expenses may Partners, shareholders, and beneficiaries.cludes gross income from interest, dividends,be limited by: To determine your investment interest, combineannuities, or royalties that is not derived in the
your share of investment interest from a partner-ordinary course of a trade or business. It also• The at-risk rules,
ship, S corporation, estate, or trust with yourincludes gains or losses (not derived in the ordi-• The passive activity loss limits, other investment interest.nary course of a trade or business) from the sale
or trade of property (other than an interest in a• The limit on investment interest, or
passive activity) producing portfolio income or• The 2% limit on certain miscellaneous Allocation of Interest Expenseheld for investment. This includes capital gainitemized deductions. distributions from mutual funds (and other regu- If you borrow money for business or personallated investment companies) and real estateThe at-risk rules and passive activity rules are purposes as well as for investment, you mustinvestment trusts.explained briefly in this section. The limit on allocate the debt among those purposes. OnlyYou cannot use passive activity losses toinvestment interest is explained later in this the interest expense on the part of the debt usedoffset Alaska Permanent Fund dividends.chapter under Interest Expenses. The 2% limit is for investment purposes is treated as invest-
explained later in this chapter under Expenses Expenses. Do not include in the computa- ment interest. The allocation is not affected by
of Producing Income. tion of your passive activity income or loss: the use of property that secures the debt.
Chapter 3 Investment Expenses Page 31

Page 32 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example 1. You borrow $10,000 and use entity, you can make the allocation using any the amount of any interest expense you were not
$8,000 to buy stock. You use the other $2,000 to reasonable method. allowed to deduct in earlier years because of the
buy items for your home. Since 80% of the debt limit.
Additional allocation rules. For more infor-is used for, and allocated to, investment pur- Choosing to deduct disallowed interestmation about allocating interest expense, seeposes, 80% of the interest on that debt is invest- expense before the year of disposition. Youchapter 4 of Publication 535.ment interest. The other 20% is nondeductible can choose to deduct disallowed interest ex-personal interest. pense in any year before the year you dispose of
the bond, up to your net interest income from theDebt proceeds received in cash. If you re- When To Deduct
bond during the year. The rest of the disallowedceive debt proceeds in cash, the proceeds are Investment Interest
interest expense remains deductible in the yeargenerally not treated as investment property.
If you use the cash method of accounting, you you dispose of the bond.
Debt proceeds deposited in account. If you must pay the interest before you can deduct it. Net interest income. This is the interestdeposit debt proceeds in an account, that de- If you use an accrual method of accounting, income (including OID) from the bond that youposit is treated as investment property, regard- you can deduct interest over the period it ac- include in income for the year, minus the interestless of whether the account bears interest. But, if crues, regardless of when you pay it. For an expense paid or accrued during the year toyou withdraw the funds and use them for an- exception, see Unpaid expenses owed to re- purchase or carry the bond.other purpose, you must reallocate the debt to lated party under When To Report Investment
determine the amount considered to be for in- Expenses, later in this chapter.
Limit on interest deduction for short-termvestment purposes.
obligations. If the current income inclusionExample. You borrowed $1,000 on Sep-
rules discussed in chapter 1 under Discount onExample 2. Assume in Example 1 that you tember 3, 2007, payable in 90 days at 12%
borrowed the money on March 1 and immedi- Short-Term Obligations do not apply to you, theinterest. On December 2, 2007, you paid this
ately bought the stock for $8,000. You did not amount you can deduct for interest expense youwith a new note for $1,030, due on March 2,
buy the household items until June 1. You had paid or accrued during the year to buy or carry a2008. If you use the cash method of accounting,
deposited the $2,000 in the bank. You had no short-term obligation is limited.you cannot deduct any part of the $30 interest
other transactions on the bank account until on your return for 2007 because you did not The interest is deductible only to the extent it
June. You did not sell the stock and you made actually pay it. If you use an accrual method, you is more than:
no principal payments on the debt. You paid may be able to deduct a portion of the interest on • The amount of acquisition discount or OIDinterest from another account. The $8,000 is the loans through December 31, 2007, on your on the obligation for the tax year, plustreated as being used for an investment pur- return for 2007.
pose. The $2,000 is treated as being used for an • The amount of any interest payable on the
Interest paid in advance. Generally, if youinvestment purpose for the 3-month period. obligation for the year that is not included
pay interest in advance for a period that goesYour total interest expense for 3 months on this in income because of your accounting
beyond the end of the tax year, you must spreaddebt is investment interest. In June, when you method (other than interest taken into ac-the interest over the tax years to which it belongsspend the $2,000 for household items, you must count in determining the amount of acqui-under the OID rules discussed in chapter 1. Youbegin to allocate 80% of the debt and the inter- sition discount or OID).can deduct in each year only the interest for thatest expense to investment purposes and 20% to
The method of determining acquisition discountyear.personal purposes.
and OID for short-term obligations is discussedAmounts paid within 30 days. If you re- Interest on margin accounts. If you are a in chapter 1 under Discount on Short-Term Obli-ceive loan proceeds in cash or if the loan pro- cash method taxpayer, you can deduct interest gations.ceeds are deposited in an account, you can treat on margin accounts to buy taxable securities as Interest not deducted due to limit. In theany payment (up to the amount of the proceeds) investment interest in the year you paid it. You year you dispose of the obligation, or if youmade from any account you own, or from cash, are considered to have paid interest on these choose, in another year in which you have netas made from those proceeds. This applies to accounts only when you actually pay the broker interest income from the obligation, you canany payment made within 30 days before or or when payment becomes available to the bro- deduct the amount of any interest expense youafter the proceeds are received in cash or de- ker through your account. Payment may be- were not allowed to deduct for an earlier yearposited in your account. come available to the broker through your because of the limit. Follow the same rules pro-If you received the loan proceeds in cash, account when the broker collects dividends or vided in the earlier discussion under Limit onyou can treat the payment as made on the date interest for your account, or sells securities held
interest deduction for market discount bonds ,you received the cash instead of the date you for you or received from you.
earlier.actually made the payment. You cannot deduct any interest on money
borrowed for personal reasons.Payments on debt may require new alloca- Limit on Deductiontion. As you repay a debt used for more than Limit on interest deduction for market dis-one purpose, you must reallocate the balance. count bonds. The amount you can deduct for Generally, your deduction for investment inter-You must first reduce the amount allocated to interest expense you paid or accrued during the est expense is limited to the amount of your netpersonal purposes by the repayment. You then year to buy or carry a market discount bond may investment income.reallocate the rest of the debt to find what part is be limited. This limit does not apply if you accrue You can carry over the amount of investmentfor investment purposes. the market discount and include it in your in- interest that you could not deduct because of
come currently. this limit to the next tax year. The interest carriedExample 3. If, in Example 2 , you repay Under this limit, the interest is deductible over is treated as investment interest paid or$500 on November 1, the entire repayment is only to the extent it is more than: accrued in that next year.applied against the amount allocated to per-
You can carry over disallowed investmentsonal purposes. The debt balance is now allo- 1. The total interest and OID includible in
interest to the next tax year even if it is more thancated as $8,000 for investment purposes, and gross income for the bond for the year,
your taxable income in the year the interest was$1,500 for personal purposes. Until the next plus
paid or accrued.reallocation is necessary, 84% ($8,000 ÷
2. The market discount for the number of$9,500) of the debt and the interest expense is
days you held the bond during the year.allocated to investment.
Net Investment IncomeFigure the amount in (2) above using the rulesPass-through entities. If you use borrowed for figuring accrued market discount in chapter 1 Determine the amount of your net investmentfunds to buy an interest in a partnership or S under Market Discount Bonds. income by subtracting your investment ex-corporation, then the interest on those funds
penses (other than interest expense) from yourmust be allocated based on the assets of the Interest not deducted due to limit. In the
investment income.entity. If you contribute to the capital of the year you dispose of the bond, you can deduct
Page 32 Chapter 3 Investment Expenses

Page 33 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Total investment income ........ $10,000Investment income. This generally includes the amount of your child’s income that you can
Minus: Investment expenses (otheryour gross income from property held for invest- consider your investment income, start with the
than interest) ................ 3,200ment (such as interest, dividends, annuities, and amount on Form 8814, line 6. Multiply that
Net investment income ......... $6,800royalties). Investment income does not include amount by a percentage that is equal to the
Alaska Permanent Fund dividends. It also does Alaska Permanent Fund dividends divided by Deductible investment interestnot include qualified dividends or net capital gain the total amount on Form 8814, line 4. Subtract expense for the year ........... $6,800unless you choose to include them. the result from the amount on Form 8814, line
12. The $2,000 of income from the passive activ-Choosing to include qualified dividends.
ity is not used in determining Ted’s net invest-Investment income generally does not include Example. Your 10-year-old child has tax- ment income. His investment interest deductionqualified dividends, discussed in chapter 1. able interest income of $4,000 and Alaska Per- for the year is limited to $6,800, the amount ofHowever, you can choose to include all or part of
manent Fund dividends of $2,000. You choose his net investment income.your qualified dividends in investment income.
to report this on your return. You enter $4,000 onYou make this choice by completing Form
Form 8814, line 1a, $2,000 on line 2a, and4952, line 4g, according to its instructions. Form 4952$6,000 on line 4. You then enter $4,300 on FormIf you choose to include any amount of your
8814, lines 6 and 12, and Form 1040, line 21.qualified dividends in investment income, you Use Form 4952, Investment Interest ExpenseYou figure the amount of your child’s incomemust reduce your qualified dividends that are Deduction, to figure your deduction for invest-that you can consider your investment incomeeligible for the lower capital gains tax rates by ment interest.as follows:the same amount.
Example. Jane Smith is single. Her 2007Choosing to include net capital gain. In- $4,300 − ($4,300 × ($2,000 ÷ $6,000)) income includes $3,000 in dividends (other thanvestment income generally does not include net
qualified dividends) and a net capital gain ofYou include the result, $2,867 on Form 4952,capital gain from disposing of investment prop-
$9,000 from the sale of investment property.line 4a.erty (including capital gain distributions from mu-
She also has a gain of $1,000 from the sale of atual funds). However, you can choose to include Child’s capital gain distributions. If part painting given to her by an artist friend. Theall or part of your net capital gain in investment of the amount you report is your child’s capital painting is not a capital asset because Jane’sincome. gain distributions, that part (which is reported on basis in the painting is determined by referenceYou make this choice by completing Form Schedule D, line 13, or Form 1040, line 13) to her friend’s basis in the painting. She incurred4952, line 4g, according to its instructions. generally does not count as investment income. $12,500 of investment interest expense. HerIf you choose to include any amount of your However, you can choose to include all or part of other investment expenses directly connectednet capital gain in investment income, you must it in investment income, as explained in Choos- with the production of investment income totalreduce your net capital gain that is eligible for ing to include net capital gain, earlier. $980 after applying the 2% limit on miscellane-the lower capital gains tax rates by the same
Your investment income also includes the ous itemized deductions on Schedule A (Formamount.
amount on Form 8814, line 12 (or, if applicable, 1040).For more information about the capital gains
the reduced amount figured under Child’s For 2007, Jane chooses to include all of herrates, see Capital Gain Tax Rates in chapter 4.
Alaska Permanent Fund dividends, earlier). net capital gain in investment income. Her totalBefore making either choice, consider investment income is $13,000 ($3,000 divi-the overall effect on your tax liability. dends + $9,000 net capital gain + $1,000 fromInvestment expenses. Investment expensesCompare your tax if you make one or
TIP
the sale of the painting). Her net investmentinclude all income-producing expenses (otherboth of these choices with your tax if you do not. income is $12,020 ($13,000 total investmentthan interest expense) relating to investment
income − $980 other investment expenses).property that are allowable deductions after ap-Investment income of child reported on par- Jane’s Form 4952 is illustrated, later. Herplying the 2% limit that applies to miscellaneousent’s return. Investment income includes the investment interest expense deduction is limiteditemized deductions. Use the smaller of:part of your child’s interest and dividend income to $12,020, the amount of her net investmentthat you choose to report on your return. If the • The investment expenses included on income. The $480 disallowed investment inter-child does not have qualified dividends, Alaska Schedule A (Form 1040), line 23, or est expense is carried forward to 2008.Permanent Fund dividends, or capital gain distri-
• The amount on Schedule A, line 27.butions, this is the amount on line 6 of Form Exception to use of Form 4952. You do not8814, Parents’ Election To Report Child’s Inter- See Expenses of Producing Income, later, for a have to complete Form 4952 or attach it to yourest and Dividends. Include it on line 4a of Form discussion of the 2% limit. return if you meet all of the following tests.4952.
• Your investment interest expense is notLosses from passive activities. Income or more than your investment income fromExample. Your 8-year-old son has interest expenses that you used in computing income or interest and ordinary dividends minus anyincome of $2,000, which you choose to report on loss from a passive activity are not included in qualified dividends.your own return. You enter $2,000 on Form determining your investment income or invest-8814, lines 1a and 4, and $300 on lines 6 and ment expenses (including investment interest • You do not have any other deductible in-12. Also enter $300 on Form 1040, line 21. Your expense). See Publication 925 for information vestment expenses.investment income includes this $300. about passive activities. • You have no carryover of investment inter-Child’s qualified dividends. If part of the est expense from 2006.Example. Ted is a partner in a partnershipamount you report is your child’s qualified divi-
that operates a business. However, he does notdends, that part (which is reported on Form If you meet all of these tests, you can deductmaterially participate in the partnership’s busi-1040, line 9b) generally does not count as in- all of your investment interest.ness. Ted’s interest in the partnership is consid-vestment income. However, you can choose to
ered a passive activity.include all or part of it in investment income, as
explained under Choosing to include qualified Ted’s investment income from interest and
dividends, earlier. dividends (other than qualified dividends) is
Your investment income also includes the $10,000. His investment expenses (other than Bond Premiumamount on Form 8814, line 12 (or, if applicable, interest) are $3,200 after taking into account the
the reduced amount figured next under Child’s 2% limit on miscellaneous itemized deductions. AmortizationAlaska Permanent Fund dividends). His investment interest expense is $8,000. Ted
also has income from the partnership of $2,000.Child’s Alaska Permanent Fund dividends. If you pay a premium to buy a bond, the pre-
Ted figures his net investment income andIf part of the amount you report is your child’s mium is part of your basis in the bond. If the
the limit on his investment interest expense de-Alaska Permanent Fund dividends, that part bond yields taxable interest, you can choose to
does not count as investment income. To figure duction in the following way: amortize the premium. This generally means
Chapter 3 Investment Expenses Page 33

Page 34 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Jane Smith 111-00-1111
12,500
0
12,500
3,000
10,000
9,000
1,000
9,000
13,000
980
12,020
480
12,020
3,000
OMB No. 1545-0191
Investment Interest Expense Deduction4952Form
/H17075Attach to your tax return.Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 51
Name(s) shown on return Identifying number
1Investment interest expense paid or accrued in 2007 (see instructions)1
2Disallowed investment interest expense from 2006 Form 4952, line 72
3Total investment interest expense. Add lines 1 and 23
4a
Gross income from property held for investment (excluding any net
gain from the disposition of property held for investment)
4a
Investment expenses (see instructions)5 5
Net investment income. Subtract line 5 from line 4h. If zero or less, enter -0-6 6
Total Investment Interest Expense
Net Investment Income
Investment Interest Expense Deduction
b Qualified dividends included on line 4a
c Subtract line 4b from line 4a
d Net gain from the disposition of property held for investment
e Enter the smaller of line 4d or your net capital gain from the disposition
of property held for investment (see instructions)
f Subtract line 4e from line 4d
Disallowed investment interest expense to be carried forward to 2008. Subtract line 6 from 
line 3. If zero or less, enter -0-
7
Investment interest expense deduction. Enter the smaller of line 3 or 6. See instructions8
4f
4b
4c
7
8
Part III
Part I
Part II
g Enter the amount from lines 4b and 4e that you elect to include in investment income (see
instructions)
h Investment income. Add lines 4c, 4f, and 4g 4h
4g
4d
4e
(99)
2007
that each year, over the life of the bond, you use who would properly include bonds in inventory length over the term of the bond , but each ac-
a part of the premium to reduce the amount of at the close of the tax year) cannot claim a crual period can be no longer than 1 year and
interest includible in your income. If you make deduction for amortizable bond premium. each scheduled payment of principal or interest
this choice, you must reduce your basis in the must occur either on the first or the final day ofSee section 75 of the Internal Revenue Code
bond by the amortization for the year. for the treatment of bond premium by a dealer in an accrual period. The computation is simplest if
If the bond yields tax-exempt interest, you tax-exempt bonds. accrual periods are the same as the intervals
must amortize the premium. This amortized between interest payment dates.
amount is not deductible in determining taxable How To Figure Step 3: determine the bond premium forincome. However, each year you must reduce Amortization the accrual period. To do this, multiply youryour basis in the bond (and tax-exempt interest adjusted acquisition price at the beginning of theotherwise reportable on Form 1040, line 8b) by For bonds issued after September 27, 1985, you accrual period by your yield. Then subtract thethe amortization for the year. must amortize bond premium using a constant result from the qualified stated interest for the
yield method on the basis of the bond’s yield to period.Bond premium. Bond premium is the amount maturity, determined by using the bond’s basis Your adjusted acquisition price at the begin-by which your basis in the bond right after you and compounding at the close of each accrual ning of the first accrual period is the same asget it is more than the total of all amounts pay- period.able on the bond after you get it (other than your basis. After that, it is your basis decreased
payments of qualified stated interest). For exam- by the amount of bond premium amortized forConstant yield method. Figure the bond pre-ple, a bond with a maturity value of $1,000 earlier periods and the amount of any paymentmium amortization for each accrual period asgenerally would have a $50 premium if you buy it previously made on the bond other than a pay-follows.for $1,050. ment of qualified stated interest.
Step 1: determine your yield. Your yield isBasis. In general, your basis for figuring the discount rate that, when used in figuring the Example. On February 3, 2006, you boughtbond premium amortization is the same as your present value of all remaining payments to be a taxable bond for $110,000. The bond has abasis for figuring any loss on the sale of the made on the bond (including payments of quali- stated principal amount of $100,000, payable atbond. However, you may need to use a different fied stated interest), produces an amount equal maturity on February 3, 2013, making your pre-basis for: to your basis in the bond. Figure the yield as of mium $10,000 ($110,000 − $100,000). The
the date you got the bond. It must be constant• Convertible bonds, bond pays qualified stated interest of $10,000over the term of the bond and must be figured to on February 3 of each year. Your yield is• Bonds you got in a trade, and at least two decimal places when expressed as 8.07439% compounded annually. You choosea percentage.• Bonds whose basis has to be determined to use annual accrual periods ending on Febru-
using the basis of the person who trans- If you do not know the yield, consult your ary 3 of each year. To find your bond premium
ferred the bond to you. broker or tax advisor. Databases available to amortization for the accrual period ending on
them are likely to show the yield at the date of February 3, 2007, you multiply the adjusted ac-See Regulations section 1.171-1(e). purchase. quisition price at the beginning of the period
($110,000) by your yield. When you subtract theDealers. A dealer in taxable bonds (or anyone Step 2: determine the accrual periods.
result ($8,881.83) from the qualified stated inter-who holds them mainly for sale to customers in You can choose the accrual periods to use.
est for the period ($10,000), you find that yourthe ordinary course of a trade or business or They may be of any length and may vary in
Page 34 Chapter 3 Investment Expenses

Page 35 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
bond premium amortization for the period is qualified stated interest for the period, you can reinvested in more shares of stock,  after the
$1,118.17. deduct the difference as a miscellaneous item- bank deducts a service charge.
ized deduction on Schedule A (Form 1040), line A corporation in which you own stock alsoSpecial rules. For special rules that apply 28. may have a dividend reinvestment plan. Thisto variable rate bonds, inflation-indexed bonds, plan lets you choose to use your dividends to But your deduction is limited to the amountand bonds that provide for alternative payment buy more shares of stock in the corporationby which your total interest inclusions on theschedules or remote or incidental contingen- instead of receiving the dividends in cash.bond in prior accrual periods is more than yourcies, see Regulations section 1.171-3. You can deduct the monthly service chargetotal bond premium deductions on the bond in
you pay to a bank to participate in an automaticprior periods. Any amount you cannot deduct
investment service. If you participate in a divi-because of this limit can be carried forward toBonds Issued Before dend reinvestment plan, you can deduct anythe next accrual period.September 28, 1985 service charge subtracted from your cash divi-
dends before the dividends are used to buyPre-1998 election to amortize bond premium.For these bonds, you can amortize bond pre-
more shares of stock. Deduct the charges in theGenerally, if you first elected to amortize bondmium using any reasonable method. Reasona-
year you pay them.premium before 1998, the above treatment ofble methods include:
the premium does not apply to bonds you ac-
• The straight-line method, and Clerical help and office rent. You can deductquired before 1988.
office expenses, such as rent and clerical help,• The Revenue Ruling 82-10 method. Bonds acquired before October 23, 1986. that you pay in connection with your investmentsThe amortization of the premium on these bonds and collecting the taxable income on them.is a miscellaneous itemized deduction not sub-Straight-line method. Under this method, the
ject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income limit.amount of your bond premium amortization is Cost of replacing missing securities. To re-
the same each month. Divide the number of place your taxable securities that are mislaid,Bonds acquired after October 22, 1986, but
months you held the bond during the year by the lost, stolen, or destroyed, you may have to postbefore 1988. The amortization of the premium
number of months from the beginning of the tax an indemnity bond. You can deduct the premiumon these bonds is investment interest expense
year (or, if later, the date of acquisition) to the you pay to buy the indemnity bond and thesubject to the investment interest limit, unless
date of maturity or earlier call date. Then multiply related incidental expenses.you choose to treat it as an offset to interest
the result by the bond premium (reduced by any You may, however, get a refund of part of theincome on the bond.
bond premium amortization claimed in earlier bond premium if the missing securities are re-
years). This gives you your bond premium amor- covered within a specified time. Under certain
tization for the year. types of insurance policies, you can recover
some of the expenses.Revenue Ruling 82-10 method. Under this Expenses of If you receive the refund in the tax year youmethod, the amount of your bond premium pay the amounts, you can deduct only the differ-Producing Incomeamortization increases each month over the life ence between the expenses paid and theof the bond. This method is explained in Reve- amount refunded. If the refund is made in a laterYou deduct investment expenses (other thannue Ruling 82-10, 1982-1 C.B. 46. tax year, you must include the refund in incomeinterest expenses) as miscellaneous itemized
in the year you received it, but only to the extentdeductions on Schedule A (Form 1040). To beChoosing To Amortize that the expenses decreased your tax in the yeardeductible, these expenses must be ordinary
you deducted them.and necessary expenses paid or incurred:You choose to amortize the premium on taxable
bonds by reporting the amortization for the year • To produce or collect income, or Fees to collect income. You can deduct feeson your income tax return for the first tax year for you pay to a broker, bank, trustee, or similar• To manage property held for producing in-which you want the choice to apply. You should agent to collect investment income, such ascome.attach a statement to your return that you are your taxable bond or mortgage interest, or yourmaking this choice under section 171. See How The expenses must be directly related to the dividends on shares of stock.To Report Amortization, next. income or income-producing property, and the Fees to buy or sell. You cannot deduct aThis choice is binding for the year you make income must be taxable to you. fee you pay to a broker to acquire investmentit and for later tax years. It applies to all taxable
The deduction for most income-producing ex- property, such as stocks or bonds. You mustbonds you own in the year you make the choice
penses is subject to a 2% limit that also applies add the fee to the cost of the property. See Basisand also to those you acquire in later years.
to certain other miscellaneous itemized deduc- of Investment Property in chapter 4.You can change your decision to amortize
tions. The amount deductible is limited to thebond premium only with the written approval of You cannot deduct any broker’s fees, com-
total of these miscellaneous deductions that isthe IRS. To request approval, use Form 3115, missions, or option premiums you pay (or that
more than 2% of your adjusted gross income.Application for Change in Accounting Method. were netted out) in connection with the sale of
For more information on requesting approval, investment property. They can be used only toFor information on how to report expenses of
see section 1C of the Appendix to Revenue figure gain or loss from the sale. See Reportingproducing income, see How To Report Invest-
Procedure 2002-9 in Internal Revenue Bulletin Capital Gains and Losses, in chapter 4, for morement Expenses, later.
2002-3. You can find this Internal Revenue Bul- information about the treatment of these sale
Attorney or accounting fees. You can de-letin at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb02-03.pdf. expenses.
duct attorney or accounting fees that are neces-
Investment counsel and advice. You cansary to produce or collect taxable income.How To Report deduct fees you pay for counsel and adviceHowever, in some cases, attorney or accountingAmortization about investments that produce taxable income.fees are part of the basis of property. See Basis
This includes amounts you pay for investmentof Investment Property in chapter 4.Subtract the bond premium amortization from advisory services.your interest income from these bonds. Automatic investment service and dividendReport the bond’s interest on Schedule B reinvestment plans. A bank may offer its Safe deposit box rent. You can deduct rent(Form 1040), line 1. Several lines above line 2, checking account customers an automatic in- you pay for a safe deposit box if you use the boxput a subtotal of all interest listed on line 1. vestment service so that, for a charge, each to store taxable income-producing stocks,Below this subtotal, print “ABP Adjustment,” and customer can choose to invest a part of the bonds, or other investment-related papers andthe amortization amount. Subtract this amount checking account each month in common stock. documents. If you also use the box to storefrom the subtotal, and enter the result on line 2. Or, a bank that is a dividend disbursing agent for tax-exempt securities or personal items, you can
Bond premium amortization more than inter- a number of publicly-owned corporations may deduct only part of the rent. See Tax-exempt
est. If the amount of your bond premium amor- set up an automatic dividend reinvestment serv- income under Nondeductible Expenses, later, to
tization for an accrual period is more than the ice. Through that service, cash dividends are figure what part you can deduct.
Chapter 3 Investment Expenses Page 35

Page 36 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
State and local transfer taxes. You cannot 1099-DIV is already reduced by your share of divide the expenses, using reasonable propor-
deduct the state and local transfer taxes you pay investment expenses. Therefore, you cannot tions based on facts and circumstances. You
when you buy or sell securities. If you pay these deduct the expenses on your return. must attach a statement to your return showing
transfer taxes when you buy securities, you Include the amount from box 1a of Form how you divided the expenses and stating that
must treat them as part of the cost of the prop- 1099-DIV in your income. each deduction claimed is not based on
erty. If you pay these transfer taxes when you tax-exempt income.
sell securities, you must treat them as a reduc- One accepted method for dividing expensestion in the amount realized. is to do it in the same proportion that each type
Nondeductible of income is to the total income. If the expensesTrustee’s commissions for revocable trust.
relate in part to capital gains and losses, includeIf you set up a revocable trust and have its Expensesincome distributed to you, you can deduct the the gains, but not the losses, in figuring this
commission you pay the trustee for managing proportion. To find the part of the expenses thatSome expenses that you incur as an investorthe trust to the extent it is to produce or collect is for the tax-exempt income, divide yourare not deductible.taxable income or to manage property. How- tax-exempt income by the total income and mul-
ever, you cannot deduct any part of the commis- tiply your expenses by the result.Stockholders’ meetings. You cannot deduct
sion that is for producing or collecting transportation and other expenses that you pay
tax-exempt income or for managing property Example. You received $6,000 interest;to attend stockholders’ meetings of companies
that produces tax-exempt income. $4,800 was tax-exempt and $1,200 was taxable.in which you have no interest other than owning
If you are a cash-basis taxpayer and pay the In earning this income, you had $500 of ex-stock. This is true even if your purpose in attend-
commissions for several years in advance, you ing is to get information that would be useful in penses. You cannot specifically identify the
must deduct a part of the commission each year. making further investments. amount of each expense item that is for each
You cannot deduct the entire amount in the year income item, so you must divide your expenses.Investment-related seminar. You cannot de-you pay it. 80% ($4,800 tax-exempt interest divided byduct expenses for attending a convention, semi- $6,000 total interest) of your expenses is for theInvestment expenses from pass-through en- nar, or similar meeting for investment purposes. tax-exempt income. You cannot deduct $400tities. If you hold an interest in a partnership, S
(80% of $500) of the expenses. You can deductcorporation, real estate mortgage investment Single-premium life insurance, endowment,
conduit (REMIC), or a nonpublicly offered regu- $100 (the rest of the expenses) because theyand annuity contracts. You cannot deduct
lated investment company (mutual fund), you are for the taxable interest.interest on money you borrow to buy or carry a
can deduct your share of that entity’s investment single-premium life insurance, endowment, or State income taxes. If you itemize your de-expenses. A partnership or S corporation will annuity contract. ductions, you can deduct, as taxes, state in-show your share of these expenses on your Used as collateral. If you use a single pre- come taxes on interest income that is exemptSchedule K-1. A nonpublicly offered mutual fund mium annuity contract as collateral to obtain or from federal income tax. But you cannot deduct,will indicate your share of these expenses in box continue a mortgage loan, you cannot deduct as either taxes or investment expenses, state5 of Form 1099-DIV, or on an equivalent state- any interest on the loan that is collateralized by income taxes on other exempt income.ment. Publicly-offered mutual funds are dis- the annuity contract. Figure the amount of inter-cussed later. est expense disallowed by multiplying the cur- Interest expense and carrying charges onIf you hold an interest in a REMIC, any ex- rent interest rate on the mortgage loan by the straddles. You cannot deduct interest andpenses relating to your residual interest invest- lesser of the amount of the annuity contract used carrying charges that are allocable to personalment will be shown on Schedule Q (Form 1066), as collateral or the amount of the loan. property that is part of a straddle. The nonde-line 3b. Any expenses relating to your regular
ductible interest and carrying charges are addedinterest investment will appear in box 5 of Form Borrowing on insurance. Generally, you to the basis of the straddle property. However,1099-INT or box 7 of Form 1099-OID. cannot deduct interest on money you borrow to this treatment does not apply if:Report your share of these investment ex- buy or carry a life insurance, endowment, orpenses on Schedule A (Form 1040), subject to annuity contract if you plan to systematically • All the offsetting positions making up thethe 2% limit, in the same manner as your other borrow part or all of the increases in the cash straddle either consist of one or moreinvestment expenses. value of the contract. This rule applies to the qualified covered call options and the op-
interest on the total amount borrowed to buy orIncluding mutual fund or REMIC expenses tioned stock or consist of section 1256
carry the contract, not just the interest on thein income. Your share of the investment ex- contracts (and the straddle is not part of a
borrowed increases in the cash value.penses of a REMIC or a nonpublicly offered larger straddle), or
mutual fund, as described above, are consid- Tax-exempt income. You cannot deduct ex- • The straddle is a hedging transaction.ered to be indirect deductions through that penses you incur to produce tax-exempt in-pass-through entity. You must include in your come. Nor can you deduct interest on moneygross income an amount equal to the amount of For information about straddles, including defini-you borrow to buy tax-exempt securities orthe expenses allocated to you, whether or not tions of the terms used in this discussion, seeshares in a mutual fund or other regulated in-you are able to claim a deduction for those chapter 4.vestment company that distributes only ex-expenses. If you are a shareholder in a nonpub- empt-interest dividends. Interest includes any amount you pay or incurlicly offered mutual fund, you must include on
in connection with personal property used in ayour return the full amount of ordinary dividends Short-sale expenses. The rule disallowing
short sale. However, you must first apply theor other distributions of stock, as shown in box a deduction for interest expenses on tax-exempt
rules discussed in Payments in lieu of dividends1a of Form 1099-DIV or an equivalent state- securities applies to amounts you pay in con-
under Short Sales in chapter 4.ment. If you are a residual interest holder in a nection with personal property used in a short
REMIC, you must report as ordinary income on To determine the interest on market discountsale or amounts paid by others for the use of any
Schedule E (Form 1040) the total amounts bonds and short-term obligations that are part ofcollateral in connection with the short sale. How-
shown on Schedule Q (Form 1066), lines 1b and ever, it does not apply to the expenses you incur a straddle, you must first apply the rules dis-
3b. If you are a REMIC regular interest holder, if you deposit cash as collateral for the property cussed under Limit on interest deduction for
you must include the amount of any expense used in the short sale and the cash does not market discount bonds  and Limit on interest
allocation you received on Form 1040, line 8a. earn a material return during the period of the deduction for short-term obligations (both under
sale. Short sales are discussed in chapter 4. Interest Expenses, earlier).Publicly-offered mutual funds. Pub-
licly-offered mutual funds, generally, are funds Expenses for both tax-exempt and taxable Nondeductible amount. Figure the nonde-
that are traded on an established securities ex- income. You may have expenses that are for ductible amount of interest and carrying charges
change. These funds do not pass investment both tax-exempt and taxable income. If you can- on straddle property as follows.
expenses through to you. Instead, the dividend not specifically identify what part of the ex-
1. Add:income they report to you in box 1a of Form penses is for each type of income, you can
Page 36 Chapter 3 Investment Expenses

Page 37 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
a. Interest on indebtedness incurred or Enter your deductible investment interest ex- Unpaid expenses owed to related party. If
continued to buy or carry the personal pense on Schedule A, line 14. Include any de- you use an accrual method, you cannot deduct
property, and ductible short sale expenses. (See Short Sales interest and other expenses owed to a related
in chapter 4 for information on these expenses.) cash-basis person until payment is made andb. All other amounts (including charges to Also attach a completed Form 4952 if you used the amount is includible in the gross income ofinsure, store, or transport the personal that form to figure your investment interest ex- that person. The relationship, for purposes ofproperty) paid or incurred to carry the pense. this rule, is determined as of the end of the taxpersonal property. Enter the total amount of your other invest- year for which the interest or expense would
ment expenses (other than interest expenses) otherwise be deductible. If a deduction is denied2. Subtract from the amount in (1): on Schedule A, line 23. List the type and amount under this rule, this rule will continue to apply
of each expense on the dotted lines next to line even if your relationship with the person ceasesa. Interest (including OID) includible in
23. (If necessary, you can show the required to exist before the amount is includible in thegross income for the year on the per-
information on an attached statement.) gross income of that person.sonal property,
For information on how to report amortizable This rule generally applies to those relation-
b. Any income from the personal property bond premium, see Bond Premium Amortiza- ships listed in chapter 4 under Related Party
treated as ordinary income on the dis- tion, earlier in this chapter. Transactions. It also applies to accruals by part-
position of short-term government obli- nerships to partners, partners to partnerships,
gations or as ordinary income under the shareholders to S corporations, and S corpora-
market discount and short-term bond tions to shareholders.
provisions — see Discount on Debt In- The postponement of deductions for unpaidWhen To Reportstruments in chapter 1, expenses and interest under the related party
rule does not apply to original issue discountInvestment Expensesc. The dividends includible in gross in-
(OID), regardless of when payment is made.come for the year from the personal
This rule also does not apply to loans with be-If you use the cash method to report income andproperty, and
low-market interest rates or to certain paymentsexpenses, you generally deduct your expenses,
d. Any payment on a loan of the personal for the use of property and services when theexcept for certain prepaid interest, in the year
property for use in a short sale that is lender or recipient has to include payments peri-you pay them.
includible in gross income. odically in income, even if a payment has notIf you use an accrual method, you generally
been made.deduct your expenses when you incur a liability
for them, rather than when you pay them.Basis adjustment. Add the nondeductible
Also see When To Deduct Investment Inter-amount to the basis of your straddle property.
est, earlier in this chapter.
How To Report
Investment Expenses
To deduct your investment expenses, you must
itemize deductions on Schedule A (Form 1040).
Chapter 3 Investment Expenses Page 37

Page 38 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Redemption of stock. A redemption of stockTopics
is treated as a sale or trade and is subject to theThis chapter discusses:
capital gain or loss provisions unless the re-
4. demption is a dividend or other distribution on• What a sale or trade is,
stock.
• Basis,
Dividend versus sale or trade. Whether a
• Adjusted basis, redemption is treated as a sale, trade, dividend,Sales and
or other distribution depends on the circum-• Figuring gain or loss,
stances in each case. Both direct and indirect• Nontaxable trades,Trades of ownership of stock will be considered. The re-
demption is treated as a sale or trade of stock if:• Capital gains and losses, and
• The redemption is not essentiallyInvestment • How to report your gain or loss.
equivalent to a dividend — see Dividends
and Other Corporate Distributions in chap-
Useful ItemsProperty ter 1,
You may want to see: • There is a substantially disproportionate
redemption of stock,Publication
Introduction • There is a complete redemption of all the❏ 551 Basis of Assets stock of the corporation owned by theThis chapter explains the tax treatment of sales
shareholder, or❏ 564 Mutual Fund Distributionsand trades of investment property.
• The redemption is a distribution in partialForm (and Instructions)Investment property. This is property that liquidation of a corporation.
produces investment income. Examples include ❏ Schedule D (Form 1040) Capital Gainsstocks, bonds, and Treasury bills and notes. and Losses Redemption or retirement of bonds. A re-Property used in a trade or business is not in- demption or retirement of bonds or notes at their❏ 6781 Gains and Losses From Sectionvestment property. maturity generally is treated as a sale or trade.1256 Contracts and Straddles See Stocks, stock rights, and bonds and Dis-Form 1099-B. If you sold property such as ❏ 8582 Passive Activity Loss Limitations counted Debt Instruments under Capital or Ordi-stocks, bonds, or certain commodities through a nary Gain or Loss, later.❏ 8824 Like-Kind Exchangesbroker during the year, you should receive, for In addition, a significant modification of aeach sale, a Form 1099-B, Proceeds From Bro- bond is treated as a trade of the original bond forSee chapter 5 for information about gettingker and Barter Exchange Transactions, or an a new bond. For details, see Regulations sec-these publications and forms.equivalent statement from the broker. You tion 1.1001-3.should receive the statement by January 31 of
the next year. It will show the gross proceeds Surrender of stock. A surrender of stock by a
from the sale. The IRS will also get a copy of dominant shareholder who retains control of theWhat Is aForm 1099-B from the broker. corporation is treated as a contribution to capital
Use Form 1099-B (or an equivalent state- rather than as an immediate loss deductibleSale or Trade?ment received from your broker) to complete from taxable income. The surrendering share-
Schedule D of Form 1040. For more information, holder must reallocate his or her basis in theTerms you may need to knowsee Form 1099-B transactions under Reporting surrendered shares to the shares he or she(see Glossary):Capital Gains and Losses, later. retains.
Equity optionNominees. If someone receives gross pro- Trade of investment property for an annuity.ceeds as a nominee for you, that person will give Futures contract The transfer of investment property to a corpora-you a Form 1099-B, which will show gross pro- tion, trust, fund, foundation, or other organiza-Marked to marketceeds received on your behalf. tion, in exchange for a fixed annuity contract that
If you receive Form 1099-B that includes Nonequity option will make guaranteed annual payments to you
gross proceeds belonging to another person, for life, is a taxable trade. If the present value ofOptions dealersee Nominees later under Reporting Capital the annuity is more than your basis in the prop-
Regulated futures contractGains and Losses for more information. erty traded, you have a taxable gain in the year
of the trade. Figure the present value of theSection 1256 contract
Other property transactions. Certain trans- annuity according to factors used by commercial
Short sale insurance companies issuing annuities.fers of property are discussed in other IRS publi-
cations. These include:
Transfer by inheritance. The transfer of• Sale of your main home, discussed in This section explains what is a sale or trade. It property of a decedent to the executor or admin-
Publication 523, Selling Your Home, also explains certain transactions and events istrator of the estate, or to the heirs or beneficia-
that are treated as sales or trades. ries, is not a sale or other disposition. No taxable• Installment sales, covered in Publication
A sale is generally a transfer of property for gain or deductible loss results from the transfer.537, Installment Sales,
money or a mortgage, note, or other promise to
• Various types of transactions involving Termination of certain rights and obliga-pay money.
business property, discussed in Publica- tions. The cancellation, lapse, expiration, orA trade is a transfer of property for other
tion 544, Sales and Other Dispositions of other termination of a right or obligation (otherproperty or services, and may be taxed in the
Assets, than a securities futures contract) with respect tosame way as a sale.
property that is a capital asset (or that would be• Transfers of property at death, covered in a capital asset if you acquired it) is treated as aSale and purchase. Ordinarily, a transactionPublication 559, Survivors, Executors, and sale. Any gain or loss is treated as a capital gainis not a trade when you voluntarily sell propertyAdministrators, and or loss.for cash and immediately buy similar property to
• Disposition of an interest in a passive ac- This rule does not apply to the retirement of areplace it. The sale and purchase are two sepa-
tivity, discussed in Publication 925, Pas- debt instrument. See Redemption or retirementrate transactions. But see Like-Kind Exchanges
sive Activity and At-Risk Rules. of bonds, earlier.under Nontaxable Trades, later.
Page 38 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 39 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
principal contract, or a futures or forward 3. Any hedge with respect to a position de-Worthless Securities
contract). scribed in (2).
Stocks, stock rights, and bonds (other than
Certain trust instruments treated as stock.You are also treated as having made a con-those held for sale by a securities dealer) that
structive sale of an appreciated financial posi- For the constructive sale rules, an interest in anbecame worthless during the tax year are
tion if a person related to you enters into a actively traded trust is treated as stock unlesstreated as though they were sold on the last day
transaction described above with a view towardof the tax year. This affects whether your capital substantially all of the value of the property held
avoiding the constructive sale treatment. Forloss is long-term or short-term. See Holding Pe- by the trust is debt that qualifies for the excep-
this purpose, a related person is any relatedriod, later. tion to the definition of an appreciated financial
party described under Related Party Transac-If you are a cash basis taxpayer and make position (explained in (2) above).
tions, later in this chapter.payments on a negotiable promissory note that
you issued for stock that became worthless, you Sale of appreciated financial position. AException for nonmarketable securities.can deduct these payments as losses in the transaction treated as a constructive sale of anYou are not treated as having made a construc-years you actually make the payments. Do not appreciated financial position is not treated as ative sale solely because you entered into a con-deduct them in the year the stock became worth- tract for sale of any stock, debt instrument, or constructive sale of any other appreciated finan-less. partnership interest that is not a marketable se- cial position, as long as you continue to hold the
curity if it settles within 1 year of the date you original position. However, if you hold anotherHow to report loss. Report worthless securi- enter into it. appreciated financial position and dispose of theties on Schedule D (Form 1040), line 1 or line 8,
original position before closing the transactionwhichever applies. In columns (c) and (d), enter Exception for certain closed transactions.
that resulted in the constructive sale, you are“Worthless.” Enter the amount of your loss in Do not treat a transaction as a constructive sale
treated as if, at the same time, you construc-parentheses in column (f). if all of the following are true.
tively sold the other appreciated financial posi-
1. You closed the transaction on or beforeFiling a claim for refund. If you do not claim a tion.
the 30th day after the end of your tax year.loss for a worthless security on your original
return for the year it becomes worthless, you can Section 1256 Contracts2. You held the appreciated financial positionfile a claim for a credit or refund due to the loss. throughout the 60-day period beginning on Marked to MarketYou must use Form 1040X, Amended U.S. Indi- the date you closed the transaction.vidual Income Tax Return, to amend your return If you hold a section 1256 contract at the end of3. Your risk of loss was not reduced at anyfor the year the security became worthless. You the tax year, you generally must treat it as soldtime during that 60-day period by holdingmust file it within 7 years from the date your at its fair market value on the last business daycertain other positions.original return for that year had to be filed, or 2 of the tax year.years from the date you paid the tax, whichever If a closed transaction is reestablished in ais later. (Claims not due to worthless securities substantially similar position during the 60-dayor bad debts generally must be filed within 3 period beginning on the date the first transaction Section 1256 Contractyears from the date a return is filed, or 2 years was closed, this exception still applies if thefrom the date the tax is paid, whichever is later.) A section 1256 contract is any:reestablished position is closed before the 30thFor more information about filing a claim, see day after the end of your tax year in which the • Regulated futures contract,Publication 556, Examination of Returns, Ap- first transaction was closed and, after that clos-peal Rights, and Claims for Refund. • Foreign currency contract,ing, (2) and (3) above are true.
This exception also applies to successive • Nonequity option,Constructive Sales short sales of an entire appreciated financial • Dealer equity option, orof Appreciated position. For more information, see Revenue
Ruling 2003-1 in Internal Revenue BulletinFinancial Positions • Dealer securities futures contract.
2003-3. This bulletin is available at www.irs.gov/
You are treated as having made a constructive pub/irs-irbs/irb03-03.pdf. Regulated futures contract. This is a con-sale when you enter into certain transactions
tract that:involving an appreciated financial position (de- Appreciated financial position. This is anyfined later) in stock, a partnership interest, or • Provides that amounts that must be de-interest in stock, a partnership interest, or a debtcertain debt instruments. You must recognize posited to, or can be withdrawn from, yourinstrument (including a futures or forward con-gain as if the position were disposed of at its fair margin account depend on daily markettract, a short sale, or an option) if disposing ofmarket value on the date of the constructive conditions (a system of marking to mar-the interest would result in a gain.
sale. This gives you a new holding period for the ket), andExceptions. An appreciated financial posi-position that begins on the date of the construc-
tion does not include the following. • Is traded on, or subject to the rules of, ative sale. Then, when you close the transaction,
qualified board of exchange. A qualifiedyou reduce your gain (or increase your loss) by 1. Any position from which all of the apprecia- board of exchange is a domestic board ofthe gain recognized on the constructive sale. tion is accounted for under marked to mar- trade designated as a contract market byket rules, including section 1256 contractsConstructive sale. You are treated as having the Commodity Futures Trading Commis-(described later under Section 1256 Con-made a constructive sale of an appreciated fi- sion, any board of trade or exchange ap-tracts Marked to Market).nancial position if you: proved by the Secretary of the Treasury,
2. Any position in a debt instrument if: or a national securities exchange regis-• Enter into a short sale of the same or
tered with the Securities and Exchangesubstantially identical property, a. The position unconditionally entitles the Commission.• Enter into an offsetting notional principal holder to receive a specified principal
contract relating to the same or substan- amount,
Foreign currency contract. This is a contracttially identical property, b. The interest payments (or other similar that:• Enter into a futures or forward contract to amounts) with respect to the position
• Requires delivery of a foreign currencydeliver the same or substantially identical are payable at a fixed rate or a variable
that has positions traded through regu-property (including a forward contract that rate described in Regulations section
lated futures contracts (or settlement ofprovides for cash settlement), or 1.860G-1(a)(3), and
which depends on the value of that type of• Acquire the same or substantially identical c. The position is not convertible, either foreign currency),property (if the appreciated financial posi- directly or indirectly, into stock of the
• Is traded in the interbank market, andtion is a short sale, an offsetting notional issuer (or any related person).
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 39

Page 40 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Is entered into at arm’s length at a price Dealer securities futures contract. For See How To Report, later, for information about
any dealer in securities futures contracts or op-determined by reference to the price in the reporting this election on your return.
tions on those contracts, this is a securities fu-interbank market. The loss carried back to any year under thistures contract (or option on such a contract) that: election cannot be more than the net sectionBank forward contracts with maturity dates • Is entered into by the dealer (or, in the 1256 contracts gain in that year. In addition, thethat are longer than the maturities ordinarily case of an option, is purchased or granted amount of loss carried back to an earlier tax yearavailable for regulated futures contracts are con- by the dealer) in the normal course of the cannot increase or produce a net operating losssidered to meet the definition of a foreign cur- dealer’s activity of dealing in this type of for that year.rency contract if the above three conditions are contract (or option), and
The loss is carried to the earliest carrybacksatisfied.
• Is traded on a qualified board or exchange year first, and any unabsorbed loss amount canSpecial rules apply to certain foreign cur- (as defined under Regulated futures con- then be carried to each of the next 2 tax years. Inrency transactions. These transactions may re- tract, earlier.)sult in ordinary gain or loss treatment. For each carryback year, treat 60% of the carryback
details, see Internal Revenue Code section 988 A securities futures contract that is not a dealer amount as a long-term capital loss and 40% as a
securities futures contract is treated as de-and Regulations sections 1.988-1(a)(7) and short-term capital loss from section 1256 con-
scribed later under Securities Futures Con-1.988-3. tracts.
tracts. If only a portion of the net section 1256 con-Nonequity option. This is any listed option tracts loss is absorbed by carrying the loss back,Marked to Market Rules(defined later) that is not an equity option. None- the unabsorbed portion can be carried forward,quity options include debt options, commodity A section 1256 contract that you hold at the end under the capital loss carryover rules, to the yearfutures options, currency options, and of the tax year will generally be treated as sold at following the loss. (See Capital Losses  underbroad-based stock index options. A its fair market value on the last business day of Reporting Capital Gains and Losses, later.) Fig-broad-based stock index is based upon the the tax year, and you must recognize any gain or ure your capital loss carryover as if, for the lossvalue of a group of diversified stocks or securi- loss that results. That gain or loss is taken into year, you had an additional short-term capitalties (such as the Standard and Poor’s 500 in- account in figuring your gain or loss when you gain of 40% of the amount of net section 1256dex). later dispose of the contract, as shown in the contracts loss absorbed in the carryback yearsWarrants based on a stock index that are example under 60/40 rule, below.
and an additional long-term capital gain of 60%economically, substantially identical in all mate-
Hedging exception. The marked to marketrial respects to options based on a stock index of the absorbed loss. In the carryover year, treat
rules do not apply to hedging transactions. Seeare treated as options based on a stock index. any capital loss carryover from losses on sectionHedging Transactions, later. 1256 contracts as if it were a loss from sectionCash-settled options. Cash-settled op-
1256 contracts for that year.60/40 rule. Under the marked to market sys-tions based on a stock index and either traded
tem, 60% of your capital gain or loss will beon or subject to the rules of a qualified board of Net section 1256 contracts loss. This losstreated as a long-term capital gain or loss, andexchange are nonequity options if the Securities is the lesser of:40% will be treated as a short-term capital gainand Exchange Commission (SEC) determines
or loss. This is true regardless of how long you • The net capital loss for your tax year de-that the stock index is broad based.
actually held the property. termined by taking into account only theThis rule does not apply to options estab-
gains and losses from section 1256 con-lished before the SEC determines that the stock Example. On June 23, 2006, you bought a tracts, orindex is broad based. regulated futures contract for $50,000. On De-
• The capital loss carryover to the next taxcember 31, 2006 (the last business day of yourListed option. This is any option that is
year determined without this election.tax year), the fair market value of the contracttraded on, or subject to the rules of, a qualified
was $57,000. You recognized a $7,000 gain onboard or exchange (as discussed earlier under
Net section 1256 contracts gain. This gainyour 2006 tax return, treated as 60% long-termRegulated futures contract ). A listed option,
and 40% short-term capital gain. is the lesser of:however, does not include an option that is a
On February 2, 2007, you sold the contractright to acquire stock from the issuer. • The capital gain net income for the car-for $56,000. Because you recognized a $7,000 ryback year determined by taking into ac-gain on your 2006 return, you recognize aDealer equity option. This is any listed option count only gains and losses from section$1,000 loss ($57,000 − $56,000) on your 2007that, for an options dealer: 1256 contracts, ortax return, treated as 60% long-term and 40%
• Is an equity option, short-term capital loss. • The capital gain net income for that year.
• Is bought or granted by that dealer in the Limited partners or entrepreneurs. The
normal course of the dealer’s business ac- 60/40 rule does not apply to dealer equity op- Figure your net section 1256 contracts gain fortivity of dealing in options, and tions or dealer securities futures contracts that any carryback year without regard to the netresult in capital gain or loss allocable to limited• Is listed on the qualified board of ex- section 1256 contracts loss for the loss year orpartners or limited entrepreneurs (defined laterchange where that dealer is registered. any later tax year.under Hedging Transactions ). Instead, these
gains or losses are treated as short term.An “options dealer” is any person registered Traders in section 1256 contracts. Gain or
with an appropriate national securities ex- Terminations and transfers. The marked to loss from the trading of section 1256 contracts is
change as a market maker or specialist in listed market rules also apply if your obligation or capital gain or loss subject to the marked tooptions. rights under section 1256 contracts are termi- market rules. However, this does not apply to
nated or transferred during the tax year. In this contracts held for purposes of hedging propertyEquity option. This is any option: case, use the fair market value of each section if any loss from the property would be an ordi-1256 contract at the time of termination or trans-• To buy or sell stock, or nary loss.fer to determine the gain or loss. Terminations or
• That is valued directly or indirectly by ref- transfers may result from any offsetting, deliv- Treatment of underlying property. The
erence to any stock or narrow-based se- ery, exercise, assignment, or lapse of your obli- determination of whether an individual’s gain or
curity index. gation or rights under section 1256 contracts. loss from any property is ordinary or capital gain
or loss is made without regard to the fact that theLoss carryback election. An individual hav-
individual is actively engaged in dealing in orEquity options include options on a group of ing a net section 1256 contracts loss (defined
trading section 1256 contracts related to thatstocks only if the group is a narrow-based stock later) for 2007 can elect to carry this loss back 3
index. property.years, instead of carrying it over to the next year.
Page 40 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 41 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Hedging loss limit. If you are a limited partner or inheritance, its fair market value may be im-How To Report
or entrepreneur in a syndicate, the amount of a portant in figuring the basis.
If you disposed of regulated futures or foreign hedging loss you can claim is limited. A “hedging
currency contracts in 2007 (or had unrealized loss” is the amount by which the allowable de- Cost Basisprofit or loss on these contracts that were open ductions in a tax year that resulted from a hedg-
at the end of 2006 or 2007), you should receive ing transaction (determined without regard to The basis of property you buy is usually its cost.
Form 1099-B, or an equivalent statement, from the limit) are more than the income received or The cost is the amount you pay in cash, debt
your broker. accrued during the tax year from this transac- obligations, or other property or services.
tion.Form 6781. Use Part I of Form 6781, Gains Unstated interest. If you buy property on aAny hedging loss that is allocated to you forand Losses From Section 1256 Contracts and time-payment plan that charges little or no inter-the tax year is limited to your taxable income forStraddles, to report your gains and losses from est, the basis of your property is your statedthat year from the trade or business in which theall section 1256 contracts that are open at the purchase price, minus the amount considered tohedging transaction occurred. Ignore any hedg-end of the year or that were closed out during be unstated interest. You generally have un-ing transaction items in determining this taxablethe year. This includes the amount shown in box stated interest if your interest rate is less thanincome. If you have a hedging loss that is disal-11 of Form 1099-B. Then enter the net amount the applicable federal rate. For more informa-lowed because of this limit, you can carry it overof these gains and losses on Schedule D (Form tion, see Unstated Interest and Original Issueto the next tax year as a deduction resulting from1040). Include a copy of Form 6781 with your Discount (OID) in Publication 537.a hedging transaction.income tax return.
If the hedging transaction relates to propertyIf the Form 1099-B you receive includes a Basis Other Than Costother than stock or securities, the limit on hedg-straddle or hedging transaction, defined later, it
ing losses applies if the limited partner or entre-may be necessary to show certain adjustments There are times when you must use a basispreneur is an individual.on Form 6781. Follow the Form 6781 instruc- other than cost. In these cases, you may need totions for completing Part I. The limit on hedging losses does not apply to know the property’s fair market value or the
any hedging loss to the extent that it is more adjusted basis of the previous owner.Loss carryback election. To carry back your than all your unrecognized gains from hedgingloss under the election procedures described Fair market value. This is the price at whichtransactions at the end of the tax year that areearlier, file Form 1040X or Form 1045, Applica- the property would change hands between afrom the trade or business in which the hedgingtion for Tentative Refund, for the year to which buyer and a seller, neither being forced to buy ortransaction occurred. The term “unrecognizedyou are carrying the loss with an amended Form sell and both having reasonable knowledge ofgain” has the same meaning as defined under6781 and an amended Schedule D attached. all the relevant facts. Sales of similar property,Straddles, later.Follow the instructions for completing Form around the same date, may be helpful in figuring6781 for the loss year to make this election. Sale of property used in a hedge. Once you fair market value.
identify personal property as being part of a
hedging transaction, you must treat gain from itsHedging Transactions Property Received for Servicessale or exchange as ordinary income, not capital
gain.The marked to market rules, described earlier, If you receive investment property for services,do not apply to hedging transactions. A transac- you must include the property’s fair market valuetion is a hedging transaction if both of the follow- in income. The amount you include in incomeSelf-Employment Incomeing conditions are met. then becomes your basis in the property. If the
Gains and losses derived in the ordinary course services were performed for a price that was1. You entered into the transaction in the nor-
of a commodity or option dealer’s trading in agreed to beforehand, this price will be acceptedmal course of your trade or business pri-
section 1256 contracts and property related to as the fair market value of the property if there ismarily to manage the risk of:
these contracts are included in net earnings no evidence to the contrary.
a. Price changes or currency fluctuations from self-employment. In addition, the rules re- Restricted property. If you receive, as pay-on ordinary property you hold (or will lating to contributions to self-employment retire- ment for services, property that is subject tohold), or ment plans apply. For information on retirement certain restrictions, your basis in the propertyplan contributions, see Publication 560, Retire-b. Interest rate or price changes, or cur- generally is its fair market value when it be-ment Plans for Small Business, and Publicationrency fluctuations, on your current or comes substantially vested. Property becomes590, Individual Retirement Arrangementsfuture borrowings or ordinary obliga- substantially vested when it is transferable or is(IRAs).tions. no longer subject to substantial risk of forfeiture,
whichever happens first. See Restricted Prop-
2. You clearly identified the transaction as erty in Publication 525 for more information.
being a hedging transaction before the
Bargain purchases. If you buy investmentBasis ofclose of the day on which you entered
property at less than fair market value, as pay-into it.
Investment Property ment for services, you must include the differ-
This hedging transaction exception does not ence in income. Your basis in the property is the
apply to transactions entered into by or for any Terms you may need to know price you pay plus the amount you include in
syndicate. A syndicate is a partnership, S cor- income.(see Glossary):
poration, or other entity (other than a regular
corporation) that allocates more than 35% of its Basis
losses to limited partners or limited entrepre- Property ReceivedFair market valueneurs. A limited entrepreneur is a person who in Taxable Trades
has an interest in an enterprise (but not as a Original issue discount (OID)
limited partner) and who does not actively par- If you received investment property in trade for
ticipate in its management. However, an inter- other property, the basis of the new property is
Basis is a way of measuring your investment inest is not considered held by a limited partner its fair market value at the time of the trade
property for tax purposes. You must know theor entrepreneur if the interest holder actively unless you received the property in a nontaxable
basis of your property to determine whether youparticipates (or did so for at least 5 full years) trade.
have a gain or loss on its sale or other disposi-in the management of the entity, or is the
tion.spouse, child (including a legally adopted Example. You trade A Company stock for B
child), grandchild, or parent of an individual Investment property you buy normally has an Company stock having a fair market val ue of
who actively participates in the management of original basis equal to its cost. If you get property $1,200. If the adjusted basi s of the A Company
the entity. in some way other than buying it, such as by gift stock is less than $1,200, you have a taxable
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 41

Page 42 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
gain on the trade. If the adjusted basis of the A Your basis for figuring loss is $9,000, and basis is the larger of the amount y ou paid for the
$9,500 minus $9,000 results in a $500 gain.Company stock is more than $1,200, you have a property or the transferor’s adjusted basis in the
deductible loss on the trade. The basis of your B property at the time of the transfer. Add to thatFair market value equal to or more than do-Company stock is $1,200. If you later sell the B amount the amount of any gift tax paid on thenor’s adjusted basis. If the fair market valueCompany stock for $1,300, you will have a gain gift, as described in the preceding discussion.of the property at the time of the gift was equal toof $100. For figuring loss, your basis is limited to theor more than the donor’s adjusted basis just property’s fair market value at the time of thebefore the gift, your basis for gain or loss on its transfer.sale or other disposition is the donor’s adjustedProperty Received basis plus or minus any required adjustments toin Nontaxable Trades Gift tax information. For information on giftbasis during the period you hold the property.
tax, see Publication 950, Introduction to EstateAlso, you may be allowed to add to the donor’sIf you have a nontaxable trade, you do not rec- and Gift Taxes.adjusted basis all or part of any gift tax paid,ognize gain or loss until you dispose of the
depending on the date of the gift.property you received in the trade. See Nontax-
able Trades, later. Gift received before 1977. If you received Property Received as InheritanceThe basis of property you received in a non- property as a gift before 1977, your basis in the
taxable or partly nontaxable trade is generally If you inherited property, your basis in that prop-property is the donor’s adjusted basis increased
the same as the adjusted basis of the property by the total gift tax paid on the gift. However, erty generally is its fair market value (its ap-
you gave up. Increase this amount by any cash your basis cannot be more than the fair market praised value on the federal estate tax return)
you paid, additional costs you had, and any gain value of the gift at the time it was given to you. on:
recognized. Reduce this amount by any cash or • The date of the decedent’s death, orExample 1. You were given XYZ Companyunlike property you received, any loss recog-
stock in 1976. At the time of the gift, the stocknized, and any liability of yours that was as- • The later alternate valuation date if the
had a fair market value of $21,000. The donor’ssumed or treated as assumed. estate qualifies for, and elects to use, al-
adjusted basis was $20,000. The donor paid a ternate valuation.
gift tax of $500 on the gift. Your basis for gain or If no federal estate tax return was filed, use theProperty Received loss is $20,500, the donor’s adjusted basis plus
appraised value on the date of death for statethe amount of gift tax paid.From Your Spouse
inheritance or transmission taxes.
If property is transferred to you from your spouse Example 2. The facts are the same as in
Appreciated property you gave the dece-(or former spouse, if the transfer is incident to Example 1 except that the gift tax paid was
dent. Your basis in certain appreciated prop-your divorce), your basis is the same as your $1,500. Your basis is $21,000, the donor’s ad-
erty that you inherited is the decedent’s adjustedspouse’s or former spouse’s adjusted basis just justed basis plus the gift tax paid, but limited to
basis in the property immediately before deathbefore the transfer. See Transfers Between the fair market value of the stock at the time of
rather than its fair market value. This applies toSpouses, later. the gift.
appreciated property that you or your spouseRecordkeeping. The transferor must Gift received after 1976. If you received gave the decedent as a gift during the one-yeargive you the records necessary to de- property as a gift after 1976, your basis is the period ending on the date of death. Appreciatedtermine the adjusted basis and holding donor’s adjusted basis increased by the part ofRECORDS
property is any property whose fair market valueperiod of the property as of the date of the the gift tax paid that was for the net increase in on the day you gave it to the decedent was moretransfer. value of the gift. You figure this part by multiply- than its adjusted basis.ing the gift tax paid on the gift by a fraction. The
numerator (top part) is the net increase in value More information. See Publication 551, Ba-of the gift and the denominator (bottom part) isProperty Received as a Gift sis of Assets, for more information on the basisthe amount of the gift. of inherited property, including community prop-To figure your basis in property that you re- The net increase in value of the gift is the fair
erty, property held by a surviving tenant in a jointceived as a gift, you must know its adjusted market value of the gift minus the donor’s ad-
tenancy or tenancy by the entirety, a qualifiedbasis to the donor just before it was given to you, justed basis. The amount of the gift is its value
joint interest, and a farm or closely held busi-its fair market value at the time it was given to for gift tax purposes after reduction by any an-
ness.you, the amount of any gift tax paid on it, and the nual exclusion and marital or charitable deduc-
date it was given to you. tion that applies to the gift.
Adjusted Basis
Example. In 2007, you received a gift ofFair market value less than donor’s adjusted
Before you can figure any gain or loss on a sale,property from your mother. At the time of the gift,basis. If the fair market value of the property at
exchange, or other disposition of property orthe property had a fair market value of $101,000the time of the gift was less than the donor’s
figure allowable depreciation, depletion, orand an adjusted basis to her of $40,000. Theadjusted basis just before the gift, your basis for
amount of the gift for gift tax purposes was amortization, you usually must make certain ad-gain on its sale or other disposition is the same
$89,000 ($101,000 minus the $12,000 annual justments (increases and decreases) to the ba-as the donor’s adjusted basis plus or minus any
exclusion), and your mother paid a gift tax ofrequired adjustments to basis during the period sis of the property. The result of these
$21,000. You figure your basis in the followingyou hold the property. Your basis for loss is its adjustments to the basis is the adjusted basis.
way:fair market value at the time of the gift plus or Adjustments to the basis of stocks and
minus any required adjustments to basis during bonds are explained in the following discussion.Fair market value ............. $101,000the period you hold the property. For information about other adjustments to ba-Minus: Adjusted basis ..........  40,000 sis, see Publication 551.No gain or loss. If you use the basis for Net increase in value of gift ...... $ 61,000
figuring a gain and the result is a loss, and then
Stocks and Bondsuse the basis for figuring a loss and the result is Gift tax paid ................ $ 21,000
a gain, you will have neither a gain nor a loss. Multiplied by .685 ($61,000 ÷
The basis of stocks or bonds you own generally$89,000) .................. .685
is the purchase price plus the costs of purchase,Example. You receive a gift of investment Gift tax due to net increase in value $ 14,385
such as commissions and recording or transferPlus: Adjusted basis of property toproperty having an adjusted basis of $10,000 at
fees. If you acquired stock or bonds other thanyour mother ................ 40,000the time of the gift. The fair market value at the
Your basis in the property $ 54,385 by purchase, your basis is usually determinedtime of the gift is $9,000. You later sell the
by fair market value or the previous owner’sproperty for $9,500. You have neither gain nor
adjusted basis as discussed earlier under Basisloss. Your basis for figuring gain is $10,000, and Part sale, part gift. If you get property in a
Other Than Cost.$9,500 minus $10,000 results in a $500 loss. transfer that is partly a sale and partly a gift, your
Page 42 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 43 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The basis of stock must be adjusted for cer- Example. You bought 100 shares of stock New and old stock identical. If the new
tain events that occur after purchase. For exam- of XYZ Corporation in 1994 for $10 a share. In stock you received as a nontaxabl e dividend is
ple, if you receive more stock from nontaxable January 1995 you bought another 200 shares identical to the old stock on which the  dividend
stock dividends or stock splits, you must reduce for $11 a share. In July 1995 you gave your son was declared, divide the adjuste d basis of the
the basis of your original stock. You must also 50 shares. In December 1997 you bought 100 old stock by the number of shares of o ld and
reduce your basis when you receive nondivi- shares for $9 a share. In April 2007 you sold 130 new stock. The result is your basis  for each
dend distributions (discussed in chapter 1). shares. You cannot identify the shares you dis- share of stock.
These distributions, up to the amount of your posed of, so you must use the stock you ac-
Example 1. You owned one share of com-basis, are a nontaxable return of capital. quired first to figure the basis. The shares of
mon stock that you bought for $45. The corpora-stock you gave your son had a basis of $500 (50The IRS partners with companies that tion distributed two new shares of common× $10). You figure the basis of the 130 shares ofoffer Schedule D software that can im- stock for each share held. You then had threestock you sold in 2007 as follows:port trades from many brokerage firms
TIP
shares of common stock. Your basis in eachand accounting software to help you keep track 50 shares (50 × $10) balance of share is $15 ($45 ÷ 3).of your adjusted basis in securities. To find out stock bought in 1994 .......... $  5 0 0more, go to http://www.irs.gov/efile. 80 shares (80 × $11) stock bought in Example 2. You owned two shares of com-
January 1995 ............... 8 8 0 mon stock. You had bought one for $30 and the
Total basis of stock sold in 2007 $1,380 other for $45. The corporation distributed twoIdentifying stock or bonds sold. If you can
new shares of common stock for each shareadequately identify the shares of stock or the
held. You had six shares after the distribution—Shares in a mutual fund or REIT. The basisbonds you sold, their basis is the cost or other
three with a basis of $10 each ($30 ÷ 3) andof shares in a mutual fund (or other regulatedbasis of the particular shares of stock or bonds.
three with a basis of $15 each ($45 ÷ 3).investment company) or a real estate invest-Adequate identification. You will make an ment trust (REIT) is generally figured in the New and old stock not identical. If theadequate identification if you show that certifi- same way as the basis of other stock. new stock you received as a nontaxable divi-cates representing shares of stock from a lot that
dend is not identical to the old stock on which itMutual fund load charges. Your cost basisyou bought on a certain date or for a certain
was declared, the basis of the new stock isin a mutual fund often includes a sales fee, alsoprice were delivered to your broker or other
calculated differently. Divide the adjusted basisknown as a load charge. But, in certain cases,agent.
of the old stock between the old and the newyou cannot include the entire amount of a loadBroker holds stock. If you have left the stock in the ratio of the fair market value of eachcharge in your basis if the charge gives you astock certificates with your broker or other lot of stock to the total fair market value of bothreinvestment right. For more information, seeagent, you will make an adequate identification if lots on the date of distribution of the new stock.Publication 564.you:
Choosing average basis for mutual fund Example. You bought a share of common• Tell your broker or other agent the particu- shares. You can choose to use the average stock for $100. Later, the corporation distributedlar stock to be sold or transferred at the basis of mutual fund shares if you acquired the a share of preferred stock for each share oftime of the sale or transfer, and shares at various times and prices and left them common stock held. At the date of distribution,on deposit in an account kept by a custodian or• Receive a written confirmation of this from your common stock had a fair market value ofagent. The methods you can use to figure aver-your broker or other agent within a reason- $150 and the preferred stock had a fair marketage basis are explained in Publication 564.able time. value of $50. You figure the basis of the old and
new stock by dividing your $100 basis betweenUndistributed capital gains. If you had to
them. The basis of your common stock is $75include in your income any undistributed capitalStock identified this way is the stock sold or
($150/$200 × $100), and the basis of the newgains of the mutual fund or REIT, increase yourtransferred even if stock certificates from a dif-
preferred stock is $25 ($50/$200 × $100).basis in the stock by the difference between theferent lot are delivered to the broker or other
amount you included and the amount of tax paidagent. Stock bought at various times. Figure thefor you by the fund or REIT. See Undistributed basis of stock dividends received on stock youSingle stock certificate. If you bought capital gains of mutual funds and REITs  under bought at various times and at different prices bystock in different lots at different times and you Capital Gain Distributions in chapter 1. allocating to each lot of stock the share of thehold a single stock certificate for this stock, you
stock dividends due to it.will make an adequate identification if you: Automatic investment service. If you partici-
pate in an automatic investment service, your Taxable stock dividends. If your stock divi-• Tell your broker or other agent the particu- basis for each share of stock, including frac- dend is taxable when you receive it, the basis oflar stock to be sold or transferred when tional shares, bought by the bank or other agent your new stock is its fair market value on theyou deliver the certificate to your broker or is the purchase price plus a share of the broker’s date of distribution. The basis of your old stockother agent, and commission. does not change.
• Receive a written confirmation of this from
Dividend reinvestment plans. If you partici-your broker or other agent within a reason- Stock splits. Figure the basis of stock splits inpate in a dividend reinvestment plan and receiveable time. the same way as stock dividends if identicalstock from the corporation at a discount, your
stock is distributed on the stock held.basis is the full fair market value of the stock onIf you sell part of the stock represented by a
the dividend payment date. You must includesingle certificate directly to the buyer instead of
the amount of the discount in your income.through a broker, you will make an adequate Stock rights. A stock right is a right to acquire
identification if you keep a written record of the a corporation’s stock. It may be exercised, it mayPublic utilities. If, before 1986, you ex-
particular stock that you intend to sell. be sold if it has a market value, or it may expire.cluded from income the value of stock you had
Stock rights are rarely taxable when you receivereceived under a qualified public utility reinvest-Bonds. These methods of identification them. See Distributions of Stock and Stockment plan, your basis in that stock is zero.also apply to bonds sold or transferred. Rights under Nondividend Distributions in chap-
Identification not possible. If you buy and Stock dividends. Stock dividends are distri- ter 1.
sell securities at various times in varying quanti- butions made by a corporation of its own stock. Taxable stock rights. If you receive stockties and you cannot adequately identify the Generally, stock dividends are not taxable to rights that are taxable, the basis of the rights isshares you sell, the basis of the securities you you. However, see Distributions of Stock and their fair market value at the time of distribution.sell is the basis of the securities you acquired Stock Rights under Nondividend Distributions in The basis of the old stock does not change.first. Except for certain mutual fund shares, dis- chapter 1 for some exceptions. If the stock divi-
cussed later, you cannot use the average price dends are not taxable, you must divide your Nontaxable stock rights. If you receive
per share to figure gain or loss on the sale of the basis for the old stock between the old and new nontaxable stock rights and a llow them to ex-
shares. stock. pire, they have no basis.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 43

Page 44 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you exercise or sell the nontaxable stock • The amount of the deduction for depletion increase the basis of your bond by the amount of
rights and if, at the time of distribution, the stock (other than oil and gas depletion) that is market discount you include in your income. See
rights had a fair market value of 15% or more of more than the basis of the property being Market Discount Bonds  in chapter 1 for more
the fair market value of the old stock, you must depleted. information.
divide the adjusted basis of the old stock be-
You must decrease your basis in stock of an Stween the old stock and the stock rights. Use a Bonds purchased at par value. A bond pur-corporation by your pro rata share of the follow-ratio of the fair market value of each to the total chased at par value (face amount) has no pre-ing items.fair market value of both at the time of distribu-
mium or discount. When you sell or otherwisetion. • Distributions by the S corporation that dispose of the bond, you figure the gain or lossIf the fair market value of the stock rights was were not included in your income. by comparing the bond proceeds to theless than 15%, their basis is zero. However, you purchase price of the bond.• All loss and deduction items of the S cor-can choose to divide the basis of the old stock
poration that are separately stated andbetween the old stock and the stock rights. To Example. You purchased a bond severalpassed through to you.make the choice, attach a statement to your years ago for its par value of $10,000. You soldreturn for the year in which you received the • Any nonseparately stated loss of the S the bond this year for $10,100. You have a gainrights, stating that you choose to divide the basis corporation. of $100. However, if you had sold the bond forof the stock. $9,900, you would have a loss of $100.• Any expense of the S corporation that is
Basis of new stock. If you exercise the not deductible in figuring its taxable in-
stock rights, the basis of the new stock is its cost come and not properly chargeable to a Acquisition discount on short-term obliga-plus the basis of the stock rights exercised. capital account. tions. If you include acquisition discount on a
short-term obligation in your income currently,• The amount of your deduction for deple-Example. You own 100 shares of ABC
increase the basis of the obligation by thetion of oil and gas wells to the extent theCompany stock, which cost you $22 per share.
amount of acquisition discount you include indeduction is not more than your share ofThe ABC Company gave you 10 nontaxable
the adjusted basis of the wells. your income. See Discount on Short-Term Obli-stock rights that would allow you to buy 10 more
gations in chapter 1 for more information.shares at $26 per share. At the time the stock However, your basis in the stock cannot be
rights were distributed, the stock had a market reduced below zero.
value of $30, not including the stock rights. Each Original issue discount (OID) on debt instru-stock right had a market value of $3. The market Specialized small business investment com- ments. Increase the basis of a debt instrumentvalue of the stock rights was less than 15% of pany stock or partnership interest. If you by the amount of OID that you include in yourthe market value of the stock, but you chose to bought this stock or interest as replacement income. See Original Issue Discount (OID)  individe the basis of your stock between the stock property for publicly traded securities you sold at chapter 1.and the rights. You figure the basis of the rights a gain, you must reduce the basis of the stock or
Discounted tax-exempt obligations. OIDand the basis of the old stock as follows: interest by the amount of any postponed gain on
on tax-exempt obligations is generally not tax-that sale. See Rollover of Gain From Publicly
100 shares × $22 = $2,200, basis of old able. However, when you dispose of aTraded Securities, later.stock tax-exempt obligation issued after September 3,
1982, that you acquired after March 1, 1984, youQualified small business stock. If you100 shares × $30 = $3,000, market value of must accrue OID on the obligation to determinebought this stock as replacement property forold stock its adjusted basis. The accrued OID is added toother qualified small business stock you sold at
the basis of the obligation to determine your gaina gain, you must reduce the basis of this re-10 rights × $3 = $30, market value of rights or loss.placement stock by the amount of any post-
poned gain on the earlier sale. See Gains on($3,000 ÷ $3,030) × $2,200 = $2,178.22, For information on determining OID on a
Qualified Small Business Stock, later.new basis of old stock long-term obligation, see Debt Instruments Is-
sued After July 1, 1982, and Before 1985  or
($30 ÷ $3,030) × $2,200 = $21.78, basis of Debt Instruments Issued After 1984 , whicheverShort sales. If you cannot deduct payments
rights you make to a lender in lieu of dividends on applies, in Publication 1212 under Figuring OID
stock used in a short sale, the amount you pay to on Long-Term Debt Instruments.If you sell the rights, the basis for figuring the lender is a capital expense, and you must If the tax-exempt obligation has a maturity ofgain or loss is $2.18 ($21.78 ÷ 10) per right. If add it to the basis of the stock used to close theyou exercise the rights, the basis of the stock 1 year or less, accrue OID under the rules forshort sale.you acquire is the price you pay ($26) plus the acquisition discount on short-term obligations.
See Payments in lieu of dividends , later, forbasis of the right exercised ($2.18), or $28.18 See Discount on Short-Term Obligations  ininformation about deducting payments in lieu ofper share. The remaining basis of the old stock chapter 1.dividends.is $21.78 per share. Stripped tax-exempt obligation. If you ac-
quired a stripped tax-exempt bond or couponPremiums on bonds. If you buy a bond at aInvestment property received in liquidation. after October 22, 1986, you must accrue OID onpremium, the premium is treated as part of yourIn general, if you receive investment property as it to determine its adjusted basis when you dis-basis in the bond. If you choose to amortize thea distribution in partial or complete liquidation of pose of it. For stripped tax-exempt bonds orpremium paid on a taxable bond, you must re-a corporation and if you recognize gain or loss coupons acquired after June 10, 1987, part ofduce the basis of the bond by the amortized partwhen you acquire the property, your basis in the this OID may be taxable. You accrue the OID onof the premium each year over the life of theproperty is its fair market value at the time of the these obligations in the manner described inbond.distribution. chapter 1 under Stripped Bonds and Coupons.Although you cannot deduct the premium on
a tax-exempt bond, you must amortize it to de- Increase your basis in the strippedS corporation stock. You must increase your termine your adjusted basis in the bond. You tax-exempt bond or coupon by the taxable andbasis in stock of an S corporation by your pro must reduce the basis of the bond by the pre- nontaxable accrued OID. Also increase your ba-rata share of the following items. mium you amortized for the period you held the sis by the interest that accrued (but was not
• All income items of the S corporation, in- bond. paid, and was not previously reflected in yourcluding tax-exempt income, that are sepa- See Bond Premium Amortization in chapter basis) before the date you sold the bond orrately stated and passed through to you as 3 for more information. coupon. In addition, for bonds acquired aftera shareholder. June 10, 1987, add to your basis any accrued
market discount not previously reflected in ba-• The nonseparately stated income of the S Market discount on bonds. If you include
sis.corporation. market discount on a bond in income currently,
Page 44 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 45 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
is the fair market value of the property you re- trade. If you received the replacement
property before the end of the 45-day pe-ceive. Determine your gain or loss by sub-How To Figure
riod, you automatically are treated as hav-tracting the cash you pay and the adjusted basis
ing met the 45-day written noticeof the property you trade in from the amount youGain or Loss
requirement.realize. If the result is a positive number, it is a
gain. If the result is a negative number, it is aYou figure gain or loss on a sale or trade of 6. The property to be received must be re-loss.property by comparing the amount you realize ceived by the earlier of:with the adjusted basis of the property.
No gain or loss. You may have to use a basis a. The 180th day after the date on which
for figuring gain that is different from the basisGain. If the amount you realize from a sale or you transfer the property given up in the
trade is more than the adjusted basis of the used for figuring loss. In this case, you may have trade, or
property you transfer, the difference is a gain. neither a gain nor a loss. See No gain or loss in
b. The due date, including extensions, forthe discussion on the basis of property you re-
your tax return for the year in which theLoss. If the adjusted basis of the property you ceived as a gift under Basis Other Than Cost ,
transfer of the property given up occurs.transfer is more than the amount you realize, the earlier.
difference is a loss.
If you trade property with a related party in a
Amount realized. The amount you realize like-kind exchange, a special rule may apply.
from a sale or trade of property is everything you See Related Party Transactions , later in thisNontaxable Tradesreceive for the property. This includes the chapter. Also, see chapter 1 of Publication 544
money you receive plus the fair market value of for more information on exchanges of businessThis section discusses trades that generally doany property or services you receive. property and special rules for exchanges usingnot result in a taxable gain or a deductible loss.If you finance the buyer’s purchase of your qualified intermediaries or involving multipleFor more information on nontaxable trades, seeproperty and the debt instrument does not pro- properties.chapter 1 of Publication 544.vide for adequate stated interest, the unstated Partly nontaxable exchange. If you receiveinterest that you must report as ordinary income money or unlike property in addition to the likeLike-Kind Exchangeswill reduce the amount realized from the sale. property, and the preceding six conditions areFor more information, see Publication 537. met, you have a partly nontaxable trade. You areIf you trade business or investment property forIf a buyer of property issues a debt instru- taxed on any gain you realize, but only up to theother business or investment property of a likement to the seller of the property, the amount amount of the money and the fair market valuekind, you do not pay tax on any gain or deductrealized is determined by reference to the issue of the unlike property you receive. You cannotany loss until you sell or dispose of the propertyprice of the debt instrument, which may or may deduct a loss.you receive. To be nontaxable, a trade mustnot be the fair market value of the debt instru- meet all six of the following conditions. ment. See Regulations section 1.1001-1(g). Like property and unlike property trans-
However, if the debt instrument was previously ferred. If you give up unlike property in addi-1. The property must be business or invest-issued by a third party (one not part of the sale tion to the like property, you must recognize gainment property. You must hold both thetransaction), the fair market value of the debt or loss on the unlike property you give up. Theproperty you trade and the property youinstrument is used to determine the amount real- gain or loss is the difference between the ad-receive for productive use in your trade orized. justed basis of the unlike property and its fairbusiness or for investment. Neither prop- market value.erty may be property used for personalFair market value. Fair market value is the
purposes, such as your home or familyprice at which property would change hands Like property and money transferred. If
car.between a buyer and a seller, neither being conditions (1) – (6) are met, you have a nontax-
forced to buy or sell and both having reasonable able trade even if you pay money in addition to2. The property must not be held primarily forknowledge of all the relevant facts. the like property.sale. The property you trade and the prop-
erty you receive must not be property you Basis of property received. You figure yourExample. You trade A Company stock with sell to customers, such as merchandise. basis in property received in a nontaxable oran adjusted basis of $7,000 for B Company
partly nontaxable trade as explained under Ba-3. The property must not be stocks, bonds,stock with a fair market value of $10,000, which
sis Other Than Cost, earlier.notes, choses in action, certificates of trustis your amount realized. Your gain is $3,000
or beneficial interest, or other securities or($10,000 minus $7,000). If you also receive a How to report. You must report the trade ofevidences of indebtedness or interest, in-note for $6,000 that has an issue price of like property on Form 8824. If you figure a recog-cluding partnership interests. However,$6,000, your gain is $9,000 ($10,000 plus nized gain or loss on Form 8824, report it onyou can have a nontaxable trade of corpo-$6,000 minus $7,000). Schedule D (Form 1040) or on Form 4797,rate stocks under a different rule, as dis- Sales of Business Property, whichever applies.Debt paid off. A debt against the property, cussed later under Corporate Stocks. For information on using Form 4797, seeor against you, that is paid off as a part of the
chapter 4 of Publication 544.4. There must be a trade of like property. Thetransaction or that is assumed by the buyer must
trade of real estate for real estate, or per-be included in the amount realized. This is true
sonal property for similar personal prop-even if neither you nor the buyer is personally Corporate Stocks
erty, is a trade of like property. The tradeliable for the debt. For example, if you sell or
The following trades of corporate stocks gener-of an apartment house for a store building,trade property that is subject to a nonrecourse
ally do not result in a taxable gain or a deductibleor a panel truck for a pickup truck, is aloan, the amount you realize generally includes
loss.trade of like property. The trade of a piecethe full amount of the note assumed by the buyer
of machinery for a store building is not aeven if the amount of the note is more than the Corporate reorganizations. In some in-trade of like property. Real property lo-fair market value of the property. stances, a company will give you common stockcated in the United States and real prop- for preferred stock, preferred stock for commonerty located outside the United States areExample. You sell stock that you had stock, or stock in one corporation for stock innot like property. Also, personal propertypledged as security for a bank loan of $8,000. another corporation. If this is a result of aused predominantly within the UnitedYour basis in the stock is $6,000. The buyer merger, recapitalization, transfer to a controlledStates and personal property usedpays off your bank loan and pays you $20,000 in corporation, bankruptcy, corporate division, cor-predominantly outside the United Statescash. The amount realized is $28,000 ($20,000 porate acquisition, or other corporate reorgani-are not like property.plus $8,000). Your gain is $22,000 ($28,000 zation, you do not recognize gain or loss.minus $6,000). 5. The property to be received must be identi-
fied in writing within 45 days after the datePayment of cash. If you trade property and Example 1. On April 19, 2007, KP1 Corpo-
you transfer the property given up in thecash for other property, the amount you realize ration was acquired by KP2 Corporation. You
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 45

Page 46 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
held 100 shares of KP1 stock with a basis of convert bonds into stock or preferred stock into Money or other property received. If, in an
$3,500. As a result of the acquisition, you re- common stock of the same corporation accord- otherwise nontaxable trade of proper ty for cor-
ceived 70 shares of KP2 stock in exchange for ing to a conversion privilege in the terms of the porate stock, you also receive mo ney or prop-
your KP1 stock. You do not recognize gain or bond or the preferred stock certificate. erty other than stock, you may have a taxab le
loss on the transaction. Your basis in the 70 gain. However, you are taxed only up to the
Example. In November, you bought for $1 ashares of the new stock is still $3,500. amount of money plus the fair market value of
right issued by XYZ Corporation entitling you, on the other property you receive. The rules for
Example 2. On July 27, 2007, RGB Corpo- payment of $99, to subscribe to a bond issued figuring taxable gain in this situation generally
ration divests itself of SFH Corporation. You by that corporation. follow those for a partly nontaxable exchange
hold 75 shares of RGB stock with a basis of discussed earlier under Like-Kind Exchanges. IfOn December 2, you subscribed to the bond,
$5,400. You receive 25 shares of SFH stock as the property you give up includes depreciablewhich was issued on December 9. The bond
a result of the spin-off. You do not recognize any property, the taxable gain may have to be re-contained a clause stating that you would re-
gain or loss on the transaction. You receive ported as ordinary income because of deprecia-ceive one share of XYZ Corporation common
information from RGB Corporation that your ba- tion. (See chapter 3 of Publication 544.) No lossstock on surrender of one bond and the payment
sis in SFH stock is equal to 10.9624% of your is recognized.of $50.
basis in RGB stock ($5,400). Thus, your basis in Nonqualified preferred stock (described ear-Later, you presented the bond and $50 and
SFH stock is $592.00. Your basis in RGB stock lier under Stock for stock of the same corpora-received one share of XYZ Corporation common
(after the spin-off) is $4,808 ($5,400 – $592). tion) received is generally treated as propertystock. You did not have a recognized gain or
other than stock.loss. This is true whether the fair market value of
Note. In the case of a spin-off, the divesting the stock was more or less than $150 on the Basis of stock or other property received.corporation should send you information that date of the conversion. The basis of the stock you receive is generallyincludes details on how to allocate basis be- The basis of your share of stock is $150 ($1 + the adjusted basis of the property you transfer.tween the old and new stock. Keep this informa- $99 + $50). Your holding period is split. Your Increase this amount by any amount that wastion until the period of limitations expires for the holding period for the part based on your owner- treated as a dividend, plus any gain recognizedyear in which you dispose of the stock in a ship of the bond ($100 basis) begins on Decem- on the trade. Decrease this amount by any cashtaxable disposition. Usually, this is 3 years from ber 2. Your holding period for the part based on you received and the fair market value of anythe date the return was due or filed, or 2 years your cash investment ($50 basis) begins on the other property you received.from the date the tax was paid, whichever is day after you acquired the share of stock. The basis of any other property you receivelater. is its fair market value on the date of the trade.Bonds for stock of another corporation.Stock for stock of the same corporation. Generally, if you convert the bonds of one corpo-You can exchange common stock for common Insurance Policiesration into common stock of another corporation,stock or preferred stock for preferred stock in the and Annuitiesaccording to the terms of the bond issue, yousame corporation without having a recognized must recognize gain or loss up to the differencegain or loss. This is true for a trade between two You will not have a recognized gain or loss if thebetween the fair market value of the stock re-stockholders as well as a trade between a stock- insured or annuitant is the same under bothceived and the adjusted basis of the bonds ex-holder and the corporation. contracts and you trade:changed. In some instances, however, such asIf you receive cash for fractional shares, see trades that are part of mergers or other corpo- • A life insurance contract for another lifeFractional shares  under Distributions of stock rate reorganizations, you will have no recog- insurance contract or for an endowment orand stock rights in chapter 1. nized gain or loss if certain requirements are annuity contract,
met. For more information about the tax conse-Money or other property received. If in an • An endowment contract for an annuityquences of converting securities of one corpora-otherwise nontaxable trade you receive money contract or for another endowment con-tion into common stock of another corporation,or other property in addition to stock, then your tract that provides for regular paymentsunder circumstances such as those just de-gain on the trade, if any, is taxed, but only up to beginning at a date not later than the be-scribed, consult the respective corporations andthe amount of the money or other property. Any ginning date under the old contract, orthe terms of the bond issue. This information isloss is not recognized.
also available on the prospectus of the bondIf you received cash for fractional shares, • An annuity contract for another annuity
issue.see Fractional shares  under Distributions of contract.
Stock and Stock Rights in chapter 1.
Property for stock of a controlled corpora-
Nonqualified preferred stock. Nonquali- You also may not have to recognize gain or losstion. If you transfer property to a corporation
fied preferred stock is generally treated as prop- from an exchange of a portion of an annuitysolely in exchange for stock in that corporation,
erty other than stock. Generally, this applies to contract for another annuity contract. See Reve-and immediately after the trade you are in con-
preferred stock with one or more of the following nue Ruling 2003-76 and Notice 2003-51 in Inter-trol of the corporation, you ordinarily will not
features. nal Revenue Bulletin 2003-33. This bulletin isrecognize a gain or loss. This rule applies both
available at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb03-33.to individuals and to groups who transfer prop-• The holder has the right to require the pdf.erty to a corporation. It does not apply if theissuer or a related person to redeem or
corporation is an investment company.purchase the stock. Exchanges of contracts not included in thisIf you are in a bankruptcy or a similar pro- list, such as an annuity contract for an endow-• The issuer or a related person is required ceeding and you transfer property to a controlled ment contract, or an annuity or endowment con-to redeem or purchase the stock. corporation under a plan, other than a reorgani- tract for a life insurance contract, are taxable.zation, you must recognize gain to the extent the• The issuer or a related person has the
stock you receive in the exchange is used to payright to redeem the stock, and on the issue
off your debts.date, it is more likely than not that the right Demutualization of Life
For this purpose, to be in control of a corpo-will be exercised. Insurance Companies
ration, you or your group of transferors must• The dividend rate on the stock varies with own, immediately after the exchange, at least A life insurance company may change from areference to interest rates, commodity 80% of the total combined voting power of all mutual company to a stock company. This isprices, or similar indices. classes of stock entitled to vote and at least 80% commonly called demutualization. If you were a
of the outstanding shares of each class of non- policyholder or annuitant of the mutual com-For a detailed definition of nonqualified pre-
voting stock of the corporation. pany, you may have received either stock in theferred stock, see section 351(g)(2) of the Inter-
stock company or cash in exchange for yourIf this provision applies to you, you may havenal Revenue Code.
equity interest in the mutual company.to attach to your return a complete statement of
Convertible stocks and bonds. You gener- all facts pertinent to the exchange. For details, If the demutualization transaction qualifies
ally will not have a recognized gain or loss if you see Regulations section 1.351-3. as a tax-free reorganization under section
Page 46 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 47 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
368(a)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code, no gain on which the marriage ends, or if the transfer is and half-sisters, spouse, ances tors (par-
or loss is recognized on the exchange. Your related to the ending of the marriage. For more ents, grandparents, etc.), and lineal de-
holding period for the new stock includes the information, see Property Settlements in Publi- scendants (children, grandchildren, etc.).
period you held an equity interest in the mutual cation 504, Divorced or Separated Individuals. • A partnership in which you directly or indi-company as a policyholder or annuitant. rectly own more than 50% of the capitalIf the demutualization transaction does not interest or the profits interest.qualify as a tax-free reorganization under sec-
tion 368(a)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code, you • A corporation in which you directly or indi-Related Partymust recognize a capital gain or loss. Your hold- rectly own more than 50% in value of the
ing period for the stock does not include the outstanding stock (see Constructive own-Transactions
period you held an equity interest in the mutual ership of stock, later).
company. Special rules apply to the sale or trade of prop- • A tax-exempt charitable or educational or-If you received cash in exchange for your erty between related parties. ganization that is directly or indirectly con-equity interest, you must recognize a capital trolled, in any manner or by any method,gain. If you held an equity interest for more than Gain on Sale or Trade by you or by a member of your family,1 year, your gain is long term.
of Depreciable Property whether or not this control is legally en-
forceable.U.S. Treasury Your gain from the sale or trade of property to a
Notes or Bonds related party may be ordinary income, rather
In addition, a loss on the sale or trade of propertythan capital gain, if the property can be depreci-
You can trade certain issues of U.S. Treasury is not deductible if the transaction is directly orated by the party receiving it. See chapter 3 inobligations for other issues, designated by the indirectly between the following related parties.Publication 544 for more information.Secretary of the Treasury, with no gain or loss • A grantor and fiduciary, or the fiduciaryrecognized on the trade. and beneficiary, of any trust.See the discussion in chapter 1 under U.S. Like-Kind Exchanges • Fiduciaries of two different trusts, or theTreasury Bills, Notes, and Bonds for information
Generally, if you trade business or investment fiduciary and beneficiary of two differentabout income from these investments.
property for other business or investment prop- trusts, if the same person is the grantor of
erty of a like kind, no gain or loss is recognized. both trusts.
See Like-Kind Exchanges, earlier, under Non- • A trust fiduciary and a corporation of whichtaxable Trades.Transfers Between more than 50% in value of the outstanding
This rule also applies to trades of property stock is directly or indirectly owned by orSpouses between related parties, defined next under for the trust, or by or for the grantor of the
Losses on Sales or Trades of Property . How- trust.Generally, no gain or loss is recognized on a ever, if either you or the related party disposes of
transfer of property from an individual to (or in • A corporation and a partnership if thethe like property within 2 years after the trade,
trust for the benefit of) a spouse or, if incident to same persons own more than 50% inyou both must report any gain or loss not recog-a divorce, a former spouse. This nonrecognition value of the outstanding stock of the cor-nized on the original trade on your return for therule does not apply in the following situations. poration and more than 50% of the capitalyear in which the later disposition occurs.
interest, or the profits interest, in the part-• The recipient spouse or former spouse is This rule generally does not apply to: nership.a nonresident alien. • Dispositions due to the death of either re- • Two S corporations if the same persons• Property is transferred in trust. Gain must lated party, own more than 50% in value of the out-be recognized to the extent the amount of • Involuntary conversions (see chapter 1 of standing stock of each corporation.the liabilities assumed by the trust, plus
Publication 544), orany liabilities on the property, exceed the • Two corporations, one of which is an Sadjusted basis of the property. • Trades and later dispositions whose main corporation, if the same persons own
purpose is not the avoidance of federal more than 50% in value of the outstanding• An installment obligation is transferred in
income tax. stock of each corporation.trust. For information on the disposition of
an installment obligation, see Publication • An executor and a beneficiary of an estateIf a property holder’s risk of loss on the prop-537, Installment Sales. (except in the case of a sale or trade toerty is substantially diminished during any pe-
• Certain stock redemptions, which are tax- satisfy a pecuniary bequest).riod, that period is not counted in determiningable to a spouse under the tax law, a di- whether the property was disposed of within 2 • Two corporations that are members of thevorce or separation instrument, or a valid years. The property holder’s risk of loss is sub- same controlled group (under certain con-written agreement, discussed in Regula- stantially diminished by: ditions, however, these losses are not dis-tions section 1.1041-2.
allowed but must be deferred).• The holding of a put on the property,
Any transfer of property to a spouse or former • Two partnerships if the same persons• The holding by another person of a right tospouse on which gain or loss is not recognized is own, directly or indirectly, more than 50%acquire the property, ortreated by the recipient as a gift and is not of the capital interests or the profit inter-
considered a sale or exchange. The recipient’s • A short sale or any other transaction. ests in both partnerships.
basis in the property will be the same as the
adjusted basis of the giver immediately before Losses on Sales or Multiple property sales or trades. If you sellthe transfer. This carryover basis rule applies Trades of Property or trade to a related party a number of blocks ofwhether the adjusted basis of the transferred
stock or pieces of property in a lump sum, youproperty is less than, equal to, or greater than You cannot deduct a loss on the sale or trade of must figure the gain or loss separately for eacheither its fair market value at the time of transfer property, other than a distribution in complete block of stock or piece of property. The gain onor any consideration paid by the recipient. This liquidation of a corporation, if the transaction is each item may be taxable. However, you cannotrule applies for purposes of determining loss as directly or indirectly between you and the follow-well as gain. Any gain recognized on a transfer deduct the loss on any item. Also, you cannoting related parties.in trust increases the basis. reduce gains from the sales of any of these
• Members of your family. This includes only items by losses on the sales of any of the otherA transfer of property is incident to a divorce
your brothers and sisters, half-brothersif the transfer occurs within 1 year after the date items.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 47

Page 48 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Indirect transactions. You cannot deduct Commodity future • Coin or stamp collections,
your loss on the sale of stock through your Conversion transaction • Gems and jewelry, andbroker if, under a prearranged plan, a related
Forward contract • Gold, silver, or any other metal.party buys the same stock you had owned. This
does not apply to a trade between related par- Limited partner Any property you own is a capital asset, ex-ties through an exchange that is purely coinci-
Listed option cept the following noncapital assets. dental and is not prearranged.
Nonequity option 1. Property held mainly for sale to customersConstructive ownership of stock. In deter-
or property that will physically become amining whether a person directly or indirectly Options dealer
part of the merchandise that is for sale toowns any of the outstanding stock of a corpora-
Put customers.tion, the following rules apply.
Regulated futures contract 2. Depreciable property used in your trade orRule 1. Stock directly or indirectly owned by
business, even if fully depreciated.or for a corporation, partnership, estate, or trust Section 1256 contract
is considered owned proportionately by or for its 3. Real property used in your trade or busi-Straddleshareholders, partners, or beneficiaries. ness.
Wash saleRule 2. An individual is considered to own 4. A copyright, a literary, musical, or artisticthe stock that is directly or indirectly owned by or composition, a letter or memorandum, orfor his or her family. Family includes only broth- similar property —This section discusses the tax treatment ofers and sisters, half-brothers and half-sisters, gains and losses from different types of invest-spouse, ancestors, and lineal descendants. a. Created by your personal efforts,ment transactions.
Rule 3. An individual owning, other than by b. Prepared or produced for you (in theCharacter of gain or loss. You need to clas-applying rule 2, any stock in a corporation is case of a letter, memorandum, or simi-sify your gains and losses as either ordinary orconsidered to own the stock that is directly or lar property), orcapital gains or losses. You then need to classifyindirectly owned by or for his or her partner.
c. Acquired under circumstances (for ex-your capital gains and losses as either short
Rule 4. When applying rule 1, 2, or 3, stock ample, by gift) entitling you to the basisterm or long term. If you have long-term gains
constructively owned by a person under rule 1 is of the person who created the propertyand losses, you must identify your 28% rate
treated as actually owned by that person. But or for whom it was prepared or pro-gains and losses. If you have a net capital gain,
stock constructively owned by an individual duced.you must also identify any unrecaptured section
under rule 2 or rule 3 is not treated as owned by 1250 gain. For an exception to this rule, see Capitalthat individual for again applying either rule 2 or The correct classification and identification asset treatment for self-created musicalrule 3 to make another person the constructive helps you figure the limit on capital losses and works later.owner of the stock. the correct tax on capital gains. For information
5. Accounts or notes receivable acquired inabout determining whether your capital gain orProperty received from a related party. If the ordinary course of a trade or businessloss is short term or long term, see Holdingyou sell or trade at a gain property that you for services rendered or from the sale ofPeriod, later. For information about 28% rateacquired from a related party, you recognize the property described in (1).gain or loss and unrecaptured section 1250gain only to the extent that it is more than the gain, see Capital Gain Tax Rates under Report- 6. U.S. Government publications that you re-loss previously disallowed to the related party. ing Capital Gains and Losses, later. ceived from the government for free or forThis rule applies only if you are the original
less than the normal sales price, or thattransferee and you acquired the property by
Capital or Ordinary you acquired under circumstances entitlingpurchase or exchange. This rule does not apply
you to the basis of someone who receivedif the related party’s loss was disallowed be- Gain or Loss
the publications for free or for less than thecause of the wash sale rules, described later
If you have a taxable gain or a deductible loss normal sales price.under Wash Sales.
from a transaction, it may be either a capital gainIf you sell or trade at a loss property that you 7. Certain commodities derivative financial in-or loss or an ordinary gain or loss, depending onacquired from a related party, you cannot recog- struments held by commodities derivativesthe circumstances. Generally, a sale or trade ofnize the loss that was not allowed to the related dealers. For more information, see sectiona capital asset (defined next) results in a capitalparty. 1221 of the Internal Revenue Code.gain or loss. A sale or trade of a noncapital asset
generally results in ordinary gain or loss. De- 8. Hedging transactions, but only if the trans-Example 1. Your brother sells you stock for
pending on the circumstances, a gain or loss on action is clearly identified as a hedging$7,600. His cost basis is $10,000. Your brother
a sale or trade of property used in a trade or transaction before the close of the day oncannot deduct the loss of $2,400. Later, you sell
business may be treated as either capital or which it was acquired, originated, or en-the same stock to an unrelated party for
ordinary, as explained in Publication 544. In tered into. For more information, see the$10,500, realizing a gain of $2,900. Your report-
some situations, part of your gain or loss may be definition of hedging transaction earlier,able gain is $500 — the $2,900 gain minus the
a capital gain or loss, and part may be an ordi- and the discussion of hedging transactions$2,400 loss not allowed to your brother.
nary gain or loss. under Commodity Futures, later.
Example 2. If, in Example 1, you sold the 9. Supplies of a type you regularly use orstock for $6,900 instead of $10,500, your recog- consume in the ordinary course of yourCapital Assets andnized loss is only $700 — your $7,600 basis trade or business.Noncapital Assetsminus $6,900. You cannot deduct the loss that
was not allowed to your brother.
For the most part, everything you own and use Investment property. Investment property is
for personal purposes, pleasure, or investment a capital asset. Any gain or loss from its sale or
is a capital asset. Some examples are: trade generally is a capital gain or loss.
Capital Gains Gold, silver, stamps, coins, gems, etc.• Stocks or bonds held in your personal ac-
These are capital assets except when they arecount,
and Losses held for sale by a dealer. Any gain or loss from• A house owned and used by you and your their sale or trade generally is a capital gain orfamily,Terms you may need to know loss.
(see Glossary): • Household furnishings, Stocks, stock rights, and bonds. All of
Call • A car used for pleasure or commuting, these, including stock received as a dividend,
Page 48 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 49 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
are capital assets except when they are held for Any gain from market discount is usually part of the gain up to $250 as ordinary  income.
sale by a securities dealer. However, see taxable on disposition or redemption of As a result, the entire $200 gain is treated as
Losses on Section 1244 (Small Business) Stock tax-exempt bonds. If you bought the bonds ordinary income.
and Losses on Small Business Investment before May 1, 1993, the gain from market dis-
Long-term debt instruments issued afterCompany Stock, later. count is capital gain. If you bought the bonds
May 27, 1969 (or after July 1, 1982, if a gov-after April 30, 1993, the gain from market dis-Personal use property. Property held for per- ernment instrument). If you hold one of thesecount is ordinary income.sonal use only, rather than for investment, is a debt instruments, you must include a part of theYou figure market discount by subtractingcapital asset, and you must report a gain from its OID in your gross income each year that youthe price you paid for the bond from the sum ofsale as a capital gain. However, you cannot own the instrument. Your basis in that debt in-the original issue price of the bond and thededuct a loss from selling personal use property. strument is increased by the amount of OID thatamount of accumulated OID from the date of
you have included in your gross income. SeeCapital asset treatment for self-created mu- issue that represented interest to any earlier
Original Issue Discount (OID) in chapter 1.sical works. You can elect to treat musical holders. For more information, see Market Dis-
If you sell or trade the debt instrument beforecompositions and copyrights in musical works count Bonds in chapter 1.
maturity, your gain is a capital gain. However, ifas capital assets if you sell or exchange them in A loss on the sale or other disposition of a
at the time the instrument was originally issuedtax years beginning after May 17, 2006, and: tax-exempt state or local government bond is
there was an intention to call it before its matur-deductible as a capital loss.• Your personal efforts created the property, ity, your gain generally is ordinary income to theor Redeemed before maturity. If a state or extent of the entire OID reduced by any amountslocal bond that was issued before June 9, 1980, of OID previously includible in your income. In• You acquired the property under circum- is redeemed before it matures, the OID is not this case, the rest of the gain is a capital gain.stances (for example, by gift) entitling you taxable to you. An intention to call a debt instrument beforeto the basis of the person who created the If a state or local bond issued after June 8, maturity means there is a written or oral agree-property or for whom it was prepared or 1980, is redeemed before it matures, the part of ment or understanding not provided for in theproduced. the OID that is earned while you hold the bond is debt instrument between the issuer and originalnot taxable to you. However, you must report the holder that the issuer will redeem the debt instru-unearned part of the OID as a capital gain. ment before maturity. In the case of debt instru-
Discounted Debt Instruments ments that are part of an issue, the agreement orExample. On July 1, 1996, the date of is- understanding must be between the issuer andsue, you bought a 20-year, 6% municipal bondTreat your gain or loss on the sale, redemption, the original holders of a substantial amount offor $800. The face amount of the bond wasor retirement of a bond or other debt instrument the debt instruments in the issue.$1,000. The $200 discount was OID. At the timeoriginally issued at a discount or bought at a
the bond was issued, the issuer had no intentiondiscount as capital gain or loss, except as ex- Example 1. On February 4, 2005, youof redeeming it before it matured. The bond wasplained in the following discussions. bought at original issue for $7,600, Jones Cor-callable at its face amount beginning 10 years poration’s 10-year, 5% bond which has a statedShort-term government obligations. Treat after the issue date. redemption price at maturity of $10,000. Ongains on short-term federal, state, or local gov- The issuer redeemed the bond at the end of February 3, 2007, you sold the bond for $9,040.ernment obligations (other than tax-exempt obli- 11 years (July 1, 2007) for its face amount of Assume you have included $334 of the OID ingations) as ordinary income up to your ratable $1,000 plus accrued annual interest of $60. The your gross income (including the amount ac-share of the acquisition discount. This treatment OID earned during the time you held the bond, crued for 2007) and increased your basis in theapplies to obligations that have a fixed maturity $73, is not taxable. The $60 accrued annual bond by that amount. Your basis is now $7,934.date not more than 1 year from the date of issue. interest also is not taxable. However, you must If at the time of the original issue there was noAcquisition discount is the stated redemption report the unearned part of the OID ($127) as a intention to call the bond before maturity, yourprice at maturity minus your basis in the obliga- capital gain. gain of $1,106 ($9,040 amount realized minustion.
$7,934 adjusted basis) is capital gain.However, do not treat these gains as income Long-term debt instruments issued after
1954 and before May 28, 1969 (or before Julyto the extent you previously included the dis-
Example 2. If, in Example 1, at the time of2, 1982, if a government instrument). If youcount in income. See Discount on Short-Term
original issue there was an intention to call thesell, trade, or redeem for a gain one of theseObligations in chapter 1 for more information.
bond before maturity, your entire gain is ordinarydebt instruments, the part of your gain that is notShort-term nongovernment obligations. income. You figure this as follows:more than your ratable share of the OID at theTreat gains on short-term nongovernment obli- time of sale or redemption is ordinary income.gations as ordinary income up to your ratable 1) Entire OID ($10,000 statedThe rest of the gain is capital gain. If, however,share of OID. This treatment applies to obliga- redemption price at maturity minusthere was an intention to call the debt instrumenttions that have a fixed maturity date of not more $7,600 issue price) .......... $2,400before maturity, all of your gain that is not morethan 1 year from the date of issue. 2) Minus: Amount previously includedthan the entire OID is treated as ordinary income in income ................ 3 3 4However, to the extent you previously in- at the time of the sale. This treatment of taxable 3) Maximum amount of ordinarycluded the discount in income, you do not have gain also applies to corporate instruments is- income .................. $2,066to include it in income again. See Discount on sued after May 27, 1969, under a written com-Short-Term Obligations, in chapter 1, for more Because the amount in (3) is more than yourmitment that was binding on May 27, 1969, andinformation. gain of $1,106, your entire gain is ordinary in-at all times thereafter.
Tax-exempt state and local government come.
bonds. If these bonds were originally issued Example. You bought a 30-year, 6% gov-
Market discount bonds. If the debt instru-at a discount before September 4, 1982, or you ernment bond for $700 at original issue on April
ment has market discount and you chose toacquired them before March 2, 1984, treat your 1, 1982, and sold it for $900 on April 21, 2007,
include the discount in income as it accrued,part of the OID as tax-exempt interest. To figure for a $200 gain. The redemption price is $1,000.
increase your basis in the debt instrument by theyour gain or loss on the sale or trade of these At the time of original issue, there was no inten-
accrued discount to figure capital gain or loss onbonds, reduce the amount realized by your part tion to call the bond before maturity. You have
its disposition. If you did not choose to includeof the OID. held the bond for 300 full months. Do not count
the discount in income as it accrued, you mustIf the bonds were issued after September 3, the additional days that are less than a full
report gain as ordinary interest income up to the1982, and acquired after March 1, 1984, in- month. The number of complete months from
instrument’s accrued market discount. See Mar-crease the adjusted basis by your part of the date of issue to date of maturity is 360 (30
ket Discount Bonds in chapter 1. The rest of theOID to figure gain or loss. For more information years). The fraction 300/360 multiplied by the
gain is capital gain.on the basis of these bonds, see Discounted discount of $300 ($1,000 − $700) is equal to
tax-exempt obligations  under Stocks and $250. This is your ratable share of OID for the However, a different rule applies if you dis-
Bonds, earlier in this chapter. period you owned the bond. You must treat any pose of a market discount bond that was:
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 49

Page 50 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
• Issued before July 19, 1984, and Deposit in Insolvent or Conversion Transactions
Bankrupt Financial Institution• Purchased by you before May 1, 1993. Generally, all or part of a gain on a conversion
transaction is treated as ordinary income. ThisIf you lose money you have on deposit in a
applies to gain on the disposition or other termi-qualified financial institution that becomes insol-In that case, any gain is treated as interest
nation of any position you held as part of avent or bankrupt, you may be able to deductincome up to the amount of your deferred inter-
conversion transaction that you entered into af-est deduction for the year you dispose of the your loss in one of three ways.
ter April 30, 1993.bond. The rest of the gain is capital gain. (The • Ordinary loss,limit on the interest deduction for market dis- A conversion transaction is any transaction
• Casualty loss, orcount bonds is discussed in chapter 3 under that meets both of these tests.
When To Deduct Investment Interest.) • Nonbusiness bad debt (short-term capital 1. Substantially all of your expected return
Report the sale or trade of a market discount loss). from the transaction is due to the time
bond on Schedule D (Form 1040), line 1 or line value of your net investment. In other8. If the sale or trade results in a gain and you did words, the return on your investment is, inOrdinary loss or casualty loss. If you cannot choose to include market discount in income substance, like interest on a loan.reasonably estimate your loss, you can choosecurrently, enter “Accrued Market Discount” on to treat the estimated loss as either an ordinary 2. The transaction is one of the following.the next line in column (a) and the amount of the loss or a casualty loss in the current year. Eitheraccrued market discount as a loss in column (f). a. A straddle as defined under Straddles,way, you claim the loss as an itemized deduc-Also report the amount of accrued market dis- later, but including any set of offsettingtion.count in column (f) as interest income on Sched- positions on stock established beforeIf you claim an ordinary loss, report it as aule B (Form 1040), line 1, and identify it as October 22, 2004.miscellaneous itemized deduction on Schedule“Accrued Market Discount.”
A (Form 1040), line 23. The maximum amount b. Any transaction in which you acquireRetirement of debt instrument. Any amount you can claim is $20,000 ($10,000 if you are property (whether or not actively traded)that you receive on the retirement of a debt married filing separately) reduced by any ex- at substantially the same time that youinstrument is treated in the same way as if you pected state insurance proceeds. Your loss is contract to sell the same property, orhad sold or traded that instrument. subject to the 2%-of-adjusted-gross-income substantially identical property, at a
Notes of individuals. If you hold an obligation limit. You cannot choose to claim an ordinary price set in the contract.
of an individual that was issued with OID after loss if any part of the deposit is federally insured. c. Any other transaction that is marketedMarch 1, 1984, you generally must include the If you claim a casualty loss, attach Form or sold as producing capital gains fromOID in your income currently, and your gain or 4684, Casualties and Thefts, to your return. a transaction described in (1).loss on its sale or retirement is generally capital Each loss must be reduced by $100. Your total
gain or loss. An exception to this treatment ap- casualty losses for the year are reduced by 10%
plies if the obligation is a loan between individu- of your adjusted gross income. Amount treated as ordinary income. Theals and all of the following requirements are met. You cannot choose either of these methods amount of gain treated as ordinary income is the
• The lender is not in the business of lend- if: smaller of:
ing money. • You own at least 1% of the financial insti- • The gain recognized on the disposition or
• The amount of the loan, plus the amount tution, other termination of the position, orof any outstanding prior loans, is $10,000 • You are an officer of the institution, or • The “applicable imputed income amount.”or less.
• You are related to such an owner or of-• Avoiding federal tax is not one of the prin- ficer. You are related if you and the owner Applicable imputed income amount. Figurecipal purposes of the loan. or officer are “related parties,” as defined this amount as follows.
earlier under Related Party Transactions,If the exception applies, or the obligation was 1. Figure the amount of interest that wouldor if you are the aunt, uncle, nephew, orissued before March 2, 1984, you do not include have accrued on your net investment inniece of the owner or officer.the OID in your income currently. When you sell the conversion transaction for the periodor redeem the obligation, the part of your gain ending on the earlier of:If the actual loss that is finally determined isthat is not more than your accrued share of the
more than the amount you deducted as an esti-OID at that time is ordinary income. The rest of a. The date when you dispose of the posi-mated loss, you can claim the excess loss as athe gain, if any, is capital gain. Any loss on the tion, orbad debt. If the actual loss is less than thesale or redemption is capital loss.
b. The date when the transaction stopsamount deducted as an estimated loss, you
being a conversion transaction.must include in income (in the final determina-
tion year) the excess loss claimed. See Recov-Bearer Obligations To figure this amount, use an interest rateeries  in Publication 525, Taxable and equal to 120% of the “applicable rate,” de-You cannot deduct any loss on an obligation Nontaxable Income. fined later.required to be in registered form that is instead
held in bearer form. In addition, any gain on the 2. Subtract from (1) the amount treated asNonbusiness bad debt. If you do not choosesale or other disposition of the obligation is ordi- ordinary income from any earlier disposi-to deduct your estimated loss as a casualty lossnary income. However, if the issuer was subject tion or other termination of a position heldor an ordinary loss, you wait until the year theto a tax when the obligation was issued, then as part of the same conversion transac-amount of the actual loss is determined andyou can deduct any loss, and any gain may tion.deduct it as a nonbusiness bad debt in that year.qualify for capital gain treatment. Report it as a short-term capital loss on Sched- Applicable rate. If the term of the conver-Obligations required to be in registered ule D (Form 1040), as explained under Nonbusi- sion transaction is indefinite, the applicable rateform. Any obligation must be in registered ness Bad Debts, later. is the federal short-term rate in effect underform unless:
section 6621(b) of the Internal Revenue Code
• It is issued by a natural person, during the period of the conversion transaction,Sale of Annuity compounded daily.• It is not of a type offered to the public,
The part of any gain on the sale of an annuity In all other cases, the applicable rate is the• It has a maturity at the date of issue of not contract before its maturity date that is based on “applicable federal rate” determined as if themore than 1 year, or interest accumulated on the contract is ordinary conversion transaction were a debt instrument
and compounded semi-annually.• It was issued before 1983. income.
Page 50 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 51 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The rates discussed above are published by Hedging transaction.  A futures contract that Amount of ordinary income. Long-term cap-
the IRS in the Internal Revenue Bulletin. Or, you is a hedging transaction generally produces or- ital gain is treated as ordinar y income to the
can contact the IRS to get these rates. See dinary gain or loss. A futures contract is a hedg- extent it is more than the net underlying
chapter 5 for information on contacting the IRS. ing transaction if you enter into the contract in long-term capital gain. The net underlying
the ordinary course of your business primarily to long-term capital gain is the amount of net capi-
manage the risk of interest rate or price changes tal gain you would have realized if you acquiredNet investment. To determine your net in-
or currency fluctuations on borrowings, ordinary the asset for its fair market value on the date thevestment in a conversion transaction, include
property, or ordinary obligations. (Generally, or- constructive ownership transaction was opened,the fair market value of any position at the time it
dinary property or obligations are those that can- and sold the asset for its fair market value on thebecomes part of the transaction. This means
not produce capital gain or loss under any date the transaction was closed. If you do notthat your net investment generally will be the
circumstances.) For example, the offset or exer- establish the amount of net underlying long-termtotal amount you invested, less any amount you
cise of a futures contract that protects against capital gain by clear and convincing evidence, itreceived for entering into the position (for exam-
price changes in your business inventory results is treated as zero.ple, a premium you received for writing a call).
in an ordinary gain or loss.
More information. For more informationPosition with built-in loss. A special rule ap- For more information about hedging transac-
about constructive ownership transactions, seeplies when a position with a built-in loss be- tions, see Regulations section 1.1221-2. Also,
section 1260 of the Internal Revenue Code.comes part of a conversion transaction. A see Hedging Transactions under Section 1256
built-in loss is any loss that you would have Contracts Marked to Market, earlier.
realized if you had disposed of or otherwise If you have numerous transactions in
Losses on Section 1244terminated the position at its fair market value at the commodity futures market during (Small Business) Stockthe time it became part of the conversion trans- the year, the burden of proof is on youRECORDS
action. to show which transactions are hedging transac- You can deduct as an ordinary loss, rather thanWhen applying the conversion transaction tions. Clearly identify any hedging transactions as a capital loss, a loss on the sale, trade, orrules to a position with a built-in loss, use the on your books and records before the end of the worthlessness of section 1244 stock. Report theposition’s fair market value at the time it became day you entered into the transaction. It may be loss on Form 4797, Sales of Business Property,part of the transaction. But, when you dispose of helpful to have separate brokerage accounts for line 10.or otherwise terminate the position in a transac- your hedging and nonhedging transactions. For Any gain on section 1244 stock is a capitaltion in which you recognize gain or loss, you specific requirements concerning identification gain if the stock is a capital asset in your hands.must recognize the built-in loss. The conversion of hedging transactions and the underlying item, Do not offset gains against losses that are withintransaction rules do not affect whether the items, or aggregate risk that is being hedged, the ordinary loss limit, explained later in thisbuilt-in loss is treated as an ordinary or capital see Regulations section 1.1221-2(f). discussion, even if the transactions are in stockloss.
of the same company. Report the gain on
Schedule D (Form 1040).Netting rule for certain conversion transac-
Gains From Certain Constructive If you must figure a net operating loss, anytions. Before determining the amount of gain
Ownership Transactions ordinary loss from the sale of section 1244 stocktreated as ordinary income, you can net certain
is a business loss.gains and losses from positions of the same If you have a gain from a constructive ownershipconversion transaction. To do this, you have to transaction entered into after July 11, 1999, in-dispose of all the positions within a 14-day pe- Ordinary loss limit. The amount that you canvolving a financial asset (discussed later) andriod that is within a single tax year. You cannot deduct as an ordinary loss is limited to $50,000the gain normally would be treated as long-termnet the built-in loss against the gain. each year. On a joint return the limit is $100,000,capital gain, all or part of the gain may be treated even if only one spouse has this type of loss. Ifinstead as ordinary income. In addition, if anyYou can net gains and losses only if your loss is $110,000 and your spouse has nogain is treated as ordinary income, your tax isyou identify the conversion transaction loss, you can deduct $100,000 as an ordinaryincreased by an interest charge.as an identified netting transaction onRECORDS
loss on a joint return. The remaining $10,000 is ayour books and records. Each position of the capital loss.conversion transaction must be identified before Constructive ownership transactions. The
the end of the day on which the position be- following are constructive ownership transac- Section 1244 (small business) stock. This iscomes part of the conversion transaction. For tions. stock that was issued for money or propertyconversion transactions entered into before
• A notional principal contract in which you (other than stock and securities) in a domesticFebruary 20, 1996, this requirement is met if the
have the right to receive all or substantially small business corporation. During its 5 mostidentification was made by that date.
all of the investment yield on a financial recent tax years before the loss, this corporation
asset and you are obligated to reimburse must have derived more than 50% of its grossOptions dealers and commodities traders. all or substantially all of any decline in receipts from other than royalties, rents, divi-These rules do not apply to options dealers and value of the financial asset. dends, interest, annuities, and gains from salescommodities traders. and trades of stocks or securities. If the corpora-• A forward or futures contract to acquire a tion was in existence for at least 1 year, but lessfinancial asset.How to report. Use Form 6781, Gains and than 5 years, the 50% test applies to the taxLosses From Section 1256 Contracts and Strad- • The holding of a call option and writing of years ending before the loss. If the corporationdles, to report conversion transactions. See the a put option on a financial asset at sub- was in existence less than 1 year, the 50% testinstructions for lines 11 and 13 of Form 6781. stantially the same strike price and matur- applies to the entire period the corporation was
ity date. in existence before the day of the loss. However,
if the corporation’s deductions (other than theCommodity Futures This provision does not apply if all the posi- net operating loss and dividends received de-
tions are marked to market. Marked to market ductions) were more than its gross income dur-A commodity futures contract is a standardized, rules for section 1256 contracts are discussed in ing this period, this 50% test does not apply.exchange-traded contract for the sale or detail under Section 1256 Contracts Marked to The corporation must have been largely anpurchase of a fixed amount of a commodity at a Market, earlier. operating company for ordinary loss treatmentfuture date for a fixed price.
to apply.If the contract is a regulated futures contract, Financial asset. A financial asset, for this
the rules described earlier under Section 1256 purpose, is any equity interest in a pass-through If the stock was issued before July 19, 1984,
Contracts Marked to Market apply to it. entity. Pass-through entities include partner- the stock must be common stock. If issued after
The termination of a commodity futures con- ships, S corporations, trusts, regulated invest- July 18, 1984, the stock may be eith er common
tract generally results in capital gain or loss ment companies, and real estate investment or preferred. For more information abo ut the
unless the contract is a hedging transaction. trusts. requirements of a small business corporation or
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 51

Page 52 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the qualifications of section 1244 stock, see sec- Do not reduce the basis of the stock for any Long-term or short-term. If you hold invest-
tion 1244 of the Internal Revenue Code and its ment property more than 1 year, any capital gainother purpose.
regulations. or loss is a long-term capital gain or loss. If you
Example. You transfer property with an ad- hold the property 1 year or less, any capital gainThe stock must be issued to the person tak- justed basis of $1,000 and a fair market value of or loss is a short-term capital gain or loss.ing the loss. You must be the original owner $250 to a corporation for its section 1244 stock. To determine how long you held the invest-of the stock to be allowed ordinary loss treat- The basis of your stock is $1,000, but to figure ment property, begin counting on the date afterment. To claim a deductible loss on stock issued the ordinary loss under these rules, the basis of the day you acquired the property. The day youto your partnership, you must have been a part- disposed of the property is part of your holdingyour stock is $250 ($1,000 minus $750). If youner when the stock was issued and have re- period.later sell the section 1244 stock for $200, yourmained so until the time of the loss. You add $800 loss is an ordinary loss of $50 and a capitalyour distributive share of the partnership loss to Example. If you bought investment propertyloss of $750.any individual section 1244 stock loss you may on February 5, 2006, and sold it on February 5,have before applying the ordinary loss limit. 2007, your holding period is not more than 1Contributions to capital. If the basis of your
year and you have a short-term capital gain orStock distributed by partnership. If your section 1244 stock has increased, through con-
loss. If you sold it on February 6, 2007, yourpartnership distributes the stock to you, you can- tributions to capital or otherwise, you must treat
holding period is more than 1 year and you havenot treat any later loss on that stock as an this increase as applying to stock that is not
a long-term capital gain or loss.ordinary loss. section 1244 stock when you figure an ordinary
loss on its sale. Securities traded on an established market.Stock sold through underwriter. Stock
For securities traded on an established securi-sold through an underwriter is not section 1244 Example. You buy 100 shares of section ties market, your holding period begins the daystock unless the underwriter only acted as a 1244 stock for $10,000. You are the original after the trade date you bought the securities,selling agent for the corporation. owner. You later make a $2,000 contribution to and ends on the trade date you sold them.
Stock dividends and reorganizations. Stock capital that increases the total basis of the 100
Do not confuse the trade date with theyou receive as a stock dividend qualifies as shares to $12,000. You then sell the 100 shares
settlement date, which is the date bysection 1244 stock if: for $9,000 and have a loss of $3,000. You can
which the stock must be delivered anddeduct only $2,500 ($3,000 × $10,000/$12,000)
CAUTION
!
• You receive it from a small business cor- payment must be made.as an ordinary loss under these rules. The re-poration in which you own stock, and maining $500 is a capital loss.
• The stock you own meets the require- Example. You are a cash method, calendarRecordkeeping. You must keep rec-ments when the stock dividend is distrib- year taxpayer. You sold stock at a gain on De-ords sufficient to show your stock quali-uted. cember 29, 2007. According to the rules of thefies as section 1244 stock. YourRECORDS
stock exchange, the sale was closed by deliveryrecords must also distinguish your section 1244If you trade your section 1244 stock for new of the stock 3 trading days after the sale, onstock from any other stock you own in the corpo-stock in the same corporation in a reorganiza- January 4, 2008. You received payment of theration.tion that qualifies as a recapitalization or that is sale price on that same day. Report your gain on
only a change in identity, form, or place of organ- your 2007 return, even though you received the
ization, the new stock is section 1244 stock if the payment in 2008. The gain is long term or short
Losses on Small Businessstock you trade meets the requirements when term depending on whether you held the stock
Investment Company Stockthe trade occurs. more than 1 year. Your holding period ended on
If you hold section 1244 stock and other December 29. If you had sold the stock at a loss,A small business investment company (SBIC) isstock in the same corporation, not all of the stock you would also report it on your 2007 return.one that is licensed and operated under theyou receive as a stock dividend or in a reorgani- Small Business Investment Act of 1958. U.S. Treasury notes and bonds. The holdingzation will qualify as section 1244 stock. Only period of U.S. Treasury notes and bonds sold atIf you are an investor in SBIC stock, you canthat part based on the section 1244 stock you auction on the basis of yield starts the day afterdeduct as an ordinary loss, rather than a capitalhold will qualify. the Secretary of the Treasury, through newsloss, a loss from the sale, trade, or worthless-
releases, gives notification of acceptance toness of that stock. A gain from the sale or tradeExample. Your basis for 100 shares of X successful bidders. The holding period of U.S.of that stock is a capital gain. Do not offset yourcommon stock is $1,000. These shares qualify Treasury notes and bonds sold through an offer-gains and losses, even if they are on stock of theas section 1244 stock. If, as a nontaxable stock ing on a subscription basis at a specified yieldsame company.dividend, you receive 50 more shares of com- starts the day after the subscription is submitted.mon stock, the basis of which is determined from
How to report. You report this type of ordinarythe 100 shares you own, the 50 shares are also Automatic investment service.  In determin-
loss on Form 4797, Part II, line 10. In addition tosection 1244 stock. ing your holding period for shares bought by the
the information required by the form, you mustIf you also own stock in the corporation that bank or other agent, full shares are considered
include the name and address of the companyis not section 1244 stock when you receive the bought first and any fractional shares are con-
that issued the stock. If applicable, also includestock dividend, you must divide the shares you sidered bought last. Your holding period starts
the reason the stock is worthless and the ap-receive as a dividend between the section 1244 on the day after the bank’s purchase date. If a
proximate date it became worthless. Report astock and the other stock. Only the shares from share was bought over more than one purchase
capital gain from the sale of SBIC stock onthe former can be section 1244 stock. date, your holding period for that share is a split
Schedule D of Form 1040. holding period. A part of the share is consideredContributed property. To determine ordinary to have been bought on each date that stockloss on section 1244 stock you receive in a trade Short sale. If you close a short sale of SBIC was bought by the bank with the proceeds offor property, you have to reduce the basis of the stock with other SBIC stock that you bought only available funds.stock if: for that purpose, any loss you have on the sale is Nontaxable trades. If you acquire investmenta capital loss. See Short Sales , later in this• The adjusted basis (for figuring loss) of the property in a trade for other investment propertychapter, for more information.property, immediately before the trade, and your basis for the new property is deter-was more than its fair market value, and mined, in whole or in part, by your basis in theHolding Period• The basis of the stock is determined by old property, your holding period for the new
the basis of the property. property begins on the day following the dateIf you sold or traded investment property, you you acquired the old property.must determine your holding period for the prop-Reduce the basis of the stock by the difference
erty. Your holding period determines whetherbetween the adjusted basis of the property and Property received as a gift. If you receive a
any capital gain or loss was a short-term or aits fair market value at the time of the trade. You gift of property and your basis is determined by
long-term capital gain or loss.reduce the basis only to figure the ordinary loss. the donor’s adjusted basis, your holding period
Page 52 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 53 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
is considered to have started on the same day Commodity futures. Futures transactions in because the architect was not in the business of
the donor’s holding period started. any commodity subject to the rules of a board of lending money and the loans do not have any
If your basis is determined by the fair market trade or commodity exchange are long term if relationship to her business.
value of the property, your holding period starts the contract was held for more than 6 months.
Business bad debts. For information on busi-on the day after the date of the gift. Your holding period for a commodity re-
ness bad debts of an employee, see Publicationceived in satisfaction of a commodity futuresInherited property. If you inherit investment 529. For information on other business badcontract, other than a regulated futures contractproperty, your capital gain or loss on any later debts, see chapter 10 of Publication 535.subject to Internal Revenue Code section 1256,disposition of that property is treated as a includes your holding period for the futures con- Deductible nonbusiness bad debts. To belong-term capital gain or loss. This is true re- tract if you held the contract as a capital asset. deductible, nonbusiness bad debts must be to-gardless of how long you actually held the prop-
tally worthless. You cannot deduct a partlyerty. Securities futures contract. Your holding pe- worthless nonbusiness debt.riod for a security received in satisfaction of aReal property bought. To figure how long securities futures contract, other than one that is Genuine debt required. A debt must beyou have held real property bought under an a section 1256 contract, includes your holding genuine for you to deduct a loss. A debt isunconditional contract, begin counting on the period for the futures contract if you held the genuine if it arises from a debtor-creditor rela-day after you received title to it or on the day contract as a capital asset. tionship based on a valid and enforceable obli-after you took possession of it and assumed the Your holding period for a security received in gation to repay a fixed or determinable sum ofburdens and privileges of ownership, whichever satisfaction of a securities futures contract to money.happened first. However, taking delivery or pos- sell, other than one that is a section 1256 con-session of real property under an option agree- Loan or gift. For a bad debt, you must showtract, is determined by the rules that apply toment is not enough to start the holding period. that there was an intention at the time of theshort sales, discussed later under Short Sales.The holding period cannot start until there is an transaction to make a loan and not a gift. If you
actual contract of sale. The holding period of the lend money to a relative or friend with the under-Loss on mutual fund or REIT stock held 6
seller cannot end before that time. standing that it may not be repaid, it is consid-months or less. If you hold stock in a mutual
ered a gift and not a loan. You cannot take a badfund (or other regulated investment company) orReal property repossessed. If you sell real debt deduction for a gift. There cannot be a badreal estate investment trust (REIT) for 6 monthsproperty but keep a security interest in it, and debt unless there is a true creditor-debtor rela-or less and then sell it at a loss (other than underthen later repossess the property under the tionship between you and the person or organi-a periodic liquidation plan), special rules mayterms of the sales contract, your holding period zation that owes you the money.apply.for a later sale includes the period you held the When minor children borrow from their par-Capital gain distributions received. Theproperty before the original sale and the period ents to pay for their basic needs, there is noloss (after reduction for any exempt-interest divi-after the repossession. Your holding period genuine debt. A bad debt cannot be deducteddends you received, as explained next) isdoes not include the time between the original for such a loan.treated as a long-term capital loss up to the totalsale and the repossession. That is, it does not
Basis in bad debt required. To deduct aof any capital gain distributions you receivedinclude the period during which the first buyer
bad debt, you must have a basis in it—that is,and your share of any undistributed capitalheld the property.
you must have already included the amount ingains. Any remaining loss is short-term capital
Stock dividends. The holding period for stock your income or loaned out your cash. For exam-loss.
you received as a taxable stock dividend begins ple, you cannot claim a bad debt deduction forExempt-interest dividends on mutual fundon the date of distribution. court-ordered child support not paid to you bystock. If you received exempt-interest divi-The holding period for new stock you re- your former spouse. If you are a cash methoddends on the stock, at least part of your loss isceived as a nontaxable stock dividend begins on taxpayer (most individuals are), you generallydisallowed. You can deduct only the amount ofthe same day as the holding period of the old cannot take a bad debt deduction for unpaidloss that is more than the exempt-interest divi-stock. This rule also applies to stock acquired in salaries, wages, rents, fees, interest, dividends,dends.a spin-off, which is a distribution of stock or and similar items.
securities in a controlled corporation. Loss on stock that paid qualified dividends. When deductible. You can take a bad debtAny loss on the sale or trade of stock must beNontaxable stock rights. Your holding period deduction only in the year the debt becomestreated as a long-term capital loss to the extentfor nontaxable stock rights begins on the same worthless. You do not have to wait until a debt isyou received, from that stock, qualified divi-day as the holding period of the underlying due to determine whether it is worthless. A debtdends (defined in chapter 1) that are extraordi-stock. The holding period for stock acquired becomes worthless when there is no longer anynary dividends. This is true regardless of howthrough the exercise of stock rights begins on chance that the amount owed will be paid.long you actually held the stock. Generally, anthe date the right was exercised. It is not necessary to go to court if you canextraordinary dividend is a dividend that equals show that a judgment from the court would beor exceeds 10% (5% in the case of preferredSection 1256 contracts. Gains or losses on uncollectible. You must only show that you havestock) of your adjusted basis in the stock.section 1256 contracts open at the end of the taken reasonable steps to collect the debt.year, or terminated during the year, are treated Bankruptcy of your debtor is generally good evi-as 60% long term and 40% short term, regard- Nonbusiness Bad Debts dence of the worthlessness of at least a part ofless of how long the contracts were held. See an unsecured and unpreferred debt.Section 1256 Contracts Marked to Market , ear- If someone owes you money that you cannot If your bad debt is the loss of a deposit in alier. collect, you have a bad debt. You may be able to financial institution, see Deposit in Insolvent ordeduct the amount owed to you when you figure Bankrupt Financial Institution, earlier.Option exercised. Your holding period for your tax for the year the debt becomes worth-property you acquire when you exercise an op- Filing a claim for refund. If you do notless.tion begins the day after you exercise the option. deduct a bad debt on your original return for theThere are two kinds of bad debts — busi-
year it becomes worthless, you can file a claimness and nonbusiness. A business bad debt,Wash sales. Your holding period for substan- for a credit or refund due to the bad debt. To dogenerally, is one that comes from operating yourtially identical stock or securities you acquire in a this, use Form 1040X to amend your return fortrade or business and is deductible as a busi-wash sale includes the period you held the old the year the debt became worthless. You mustness loss. All other bad debts are nonbusinessstock or securities. file it within 7 years from the date your originalbad debts and are deductible as short-term capi-
Qualified small business stock. Your hold- return for that year had to be filed, or 2 yearstal losses.
ing period for stock you acquired in a tax-free from the date you paid the tax, whichever is
rollover of gain from a sale of qualified small Example. An architect made personal loans later. (Claims not due to bad debts or worthless
business stock, described later under Gains on to several friends who were not clients. She securities generally must be filed within 3 years
Qualified Small Business Stock , includes the could not collect on some of these loans. They from the date a return is filed, or 2 years from the
period you held the old stock. are deductible only as nonbusiness bad debts date the tax is paid, whichever is later.) For more
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 53

Page 54 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
information about filing a claim, see Publication Secondary liability on home mortgage. If you must recognize gain as if the short sale were
the buyer of your home assumes your mort- closed when the property became substantially556, Examination of Returns, Appeal Rights,
gage, you may remain secondarily liable for re- worthless.and Claims for Refund.
payment of the mortgage loan. If the buyer Exception for constructive sales. EnteringLoan guarantees. If you guarantee a debt defaults on the loan and the house is then sold into a short sale may cause you to be treated asthat becomes worthless, you cannot take a bad for less than the amount outstanding on the having made a constructive sale of property. Indebt deduction for your payments on the debt mortgage, you may have to make up the differ- that case, you will have to recognize gain on theunless you can show either that your reason for ence. You can take a bad debt deduction for the date of the constructive sale. For details, seemaking the guarantee was to protect your in- amount you pay to satisfy the mortgage, if you Constructive Sales of Appreciated Financial Po-vestment or that you entered the guarantee cannot collect it from the buyer. sitions, earlier.transaction with a profit motive. If you make the
Worthless securities. If you own securitiesguarantee as a favor to friends and do not re- Example. On May 3, 2007, you bought 100that become totally worthless, you can take aceive any consideration in return, your pay- shares of Baker Corporation stock for $1,000.deduction for a loss, but not for a bad debt. Seements are considered a gift and you cannot take On September 3, 2007, you sold short 100Worthless Securities  under What Is a Sale ora deduction. shares of similar Baker stock for $1,600. YouTrade, earlier in this chapter.
made no other transactions involving BakerExample 1. Henry Lloyd, an officer and prin- Recovery of a bad debt. If you deducted a stock for the rest of 2007 and the first 30 days ofcipal shareholder of the Spruce Corporation, bad debt and in a later tax year you recover 2008. Your short sale is treated as a construc-guaranteed payment of a bank loan the corpora- (collect) all or part of it, you may have to include tive sale of an appreciated financial positiontion received. The corporation defaulted on the the amount you recover in your gross income. because a sale of your Baker stock on the dateloan and Henry made full payment. Because he However, you can exclude from gross income of the short sale would have resulted in a gain.guaranteed the loan to protect his investment in the amount recovered up to the amount of the You recognize a $600 short-term capital gainthe corporation, Henry can take a nonbusiness deduction that did not reduce your tax in the year from the constructive sale and your new holdingbad debt deduction. deducted. See Recoveries in Publication 525. period in the Baker stock begins on September
3.Example 2. Milt and John are co-workers. How to report bad debts. Deduct nonbusi-
Milt, as a favor to John, guarantees a note at ness bad debts as short-term capital losses on
their local credit union. John does not pay the Schedule D (Form 1040). Short-Term or Long-Termnote and declares bankruptcy. Milt pays off the On Schedule D, Part I, line 1, enter the name Capital Gain or Lossnote. However, since he did not enter into the of the debtor and “statement attached” in col-
guarantee agreement to protect an investment umn (a). Enter the amount of the bad debt in As a general rule, you determine whether you
or to make a profit, Milt cannot take a bad debt parentheses in column (f). Use a separate line have short-term or long-term capital gain or loss
deduction. for each bad debt. on a short sale by the amount of time you actu-
For each bad debt, attach a statement to ally hold the property eventually delivered to theDeductible in year paid. Unless you have your return that contains: lender to close the short sale.rights against the borrower, discussed next, a
payment you make on a loan you guaranteed is • A description of the debt, including the Example. Even though you do not own anydeductible in the year you make the payment. amount, and the date it became due, stock of the Ace Corporation, you contract to sell
Rights against the borrower. When you • The name of the debtor, and any business 100 shares of it, which you borrow from your
make payment on a loan that you guaranteed, or family relationship between you and the broker. After 13 months, when the price of the
you may have the right to take the place of the debtor, stock has risen, you buy 100 shares of Ace
lender (the right of subrogation). The debt is Corporation stock and immediately deliver them• The efforts you made to collect the debt,then owed to you. If you have this right, or some to your broker to close out the short sale. Yourandother right to demand payment from the bor- loss is a short-term capital loss because your
• Why you decided the debt was worthless.rower, you cannot take a bad debt deduction holding period for the delivered property is less
For example, you could show that the bor-until these rights become totally worthless. than 1 day.
rower has declared bankruptcy, or that le-
Special rules. Special rules may apply toDebts owed by political parties. You cannot gal action to collect would probably not
gains and losses from short sales of stocks,take a nonbusiness bad debt deduction for any result in payment of any part of the debt.
securities, and commodity and securities futuresworthless debt owed to you by:
(other than certain straddles) if you held or ac-
• A political party, quired property substantially identical to prop-Short Sales
erty that sold short. But if the amount of property• A national, state, or local committee of a A short sale occurs when you agree to sell you sold short is more than the amount of thatpolitical party, or property you do not own (or own but do not wish substantially identical property, the special rules
• A committee, association, or organization to sell). You make this type of sale in two steps. do not apply to the gain or loss on the excess.
that either accepts contributions or spends • You sell short. You borrow property and Gains and holding period. If you held themoney to influence elections. deliver it to a buyer. substantially identical property for 1 year or less
on the date of the short sale, or if you acquired• You close the sale. At a later date, youMechanics’ and suppliers’ liens. Workers the substantially identical property after theeither buy substantially identical propertyand material suppliers may file liens against short sale and by the date of closing the shortand deliver it to the lender or make deliv-property because of debts owed by a builder or sale, then:ery out of property that you held at thecontractor. If you pay off the lien to avoid foreclo- time of the sale. Delivery of property bor- Rule 1. Your gain, if any, when you closesure and loss of your property, you are entitled rowed from another lender does not sat- the short sale is a short-term capital gain,to repayment from the builder or contractor. If isfy this requirement. andthe debt is uncollectible, you can take a bad debt
deduction. Rule 2. The holding period of the substan-You do not realize gain or loss until delivery of tially identical property begins on the dateInsolvency of contractor. You can take a property to close the short sale. You will have a of the closing of the short sale or on thebad debt deduction for the amount you deposit capital gain or loss if the property used to close date of the sale of this property, whicheverwith a contractor if the contractor becomes insol- the short sale is a capital asset. comes first.vent and you are unable to recover your deposit.
If the deposit is for work unrelated to your trade Exception if property becomes worthless.
or business, it is a nonbusiness bad debt deduc- A different rule applies if the property sold short Losses. If, on the date of the short sale, you
tion. becomes substantially worthless. In that case, held substantially identical property for more
Page 54 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 55 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
than 1 year, any loss you realize on the short must add the payment to the cost of the stock Straddles, later, for information about the tax
sale is a long-term capital loss, even if you held sold short. treatment of losses on the disposition of posi-
the property used to close the sale for 1 year or tions in a straddle.Exception. If you close the short sale withinless. Certain losses on short sales of stock or 45 days, the deduction for amounts you pay in Securities futures contract to sell. Lossessecurities are also subject to wash sale treat- lieu of dividends will be disallowed only to the from the sale, exchange, or termination of ament. For information, see Wash Sales, later. extent the payments are more than the amount securities futures contract to sell generally are
Mixed straddles. Under certain elections, that you receive as ordinary income from the treated in the same manner as losses from the
you can avoid the treatment of loss from a short lender of the stock for the use of collateral with closing of a short sale, discussed later in this
sale as long term under the special rule. These the short sale. This exception does not apply to section under Short sales.
elections are for positions that are part of a payments in place of extraordinary dividends. Warrants. The wash sale rules apply if youmixed straddle. See Other elections  under Extraordinary dividends. If the amount of sell common stock at a loss and, at the sameMixed Straddle Elections , later, for more infor- any dividend you receive on a share of preferred time, buy warrants for common stock of themation about these elections. stock equals or exceeds 5% (10% in the case of same corporation. But if you sell warrants at a
other stock) of the amount realized on the short loss and, at the same time, buy common stock in
sale, the dividend you receive is an extraordi- the same corporation, the wash sale rules applyReporting Substitute Payments nary dividend. only if the warrants and stock are considered
substantially identical, as discussed next.If any broker transferred your securities for use
in a short sale, or similar transaction, and re- Wash Sales
Substantially identical. In determiningceived certain substitute dividend payments on
whether stock or securities are substantiallyYou cannot deduct losses from sales or tradesyour behalf while the short sale was open, that
identical, you must consider all the facts andof stock or securities in a wash sale.broker must give you a Form 1099-MISC or a
circumstances in your particular case. Ordinar-A wash sale occurs when you sell or tradesimilar statement, reporting the amount of these
ily, stocks or securities of one corporation arestock or securities at a loss and within 30 dayspayments. Form 1099-MISC must be used for
not considered substantially identical to stocksbefore or after the sale you:those substitute payments totaling $10 or more
or securities of another corporation. However,that are known on the payment’s record date to • Buy substantially identical stock or securi- they may be substantially identical in somebe in lieu of an exempt-interest dividend, a capi- ties, cases. For example, in a reorganization, thetal gain dividend, a return of capital distribution,
stocks and securities of the predecessor and• Acquire substantially identical stock or se-or a dividend subject to a foreign tax credit, or
successor corporations may be substantiallycurities in a fully taxable trade, orthat are in lieu of tax-exempt interest. Do not
identical.treat these substitute payments as dividends or • Acquire a contract or option to buy sub- Similarly, bonds or preferred stock of a cor-interest. Instead, report the substitute payments stantially identical stock or securities. poration are not ordinarily considered substan-shown on Form 1099-MISC as “Other income”
tially identical to the common stock of the sameon line 21 of Form 1040.
If you sell stock and your spouse or a corpora- corporation. However, where the bonds or pre-
Substitute payment. A substitute payment tion you control buys substantially identical ferred stock are convertible into common stock
means a payment in lieu of: stock, you also have a wash sale. of the same corporation, the relative values,
price changes, and other circumstances may• Tax-exempt interest (including OID) that If your loss was disallowed because of the make these bonds or preferred stock and thehas accrued while the short sale was wash sale rules, add the disallowed loss to the common stock substantially identical. For exam-open, and cost of the new stock or securities. The result is ple, preferred stock is substantially identical toyour basis in the new stock or securities. This• A dividend, if the ex-dividend date is after the common stock if the preferred stock:adjustment postpones the loss deduction untilthe transfer of stock for use in a short sale the disposition of the new stock or securities. • Is convertible into common stock,and before the closing of the short sale. Your holding period for the new stock or securi- • Has the same voting rights as the com-ties begins on the same day as the holding mon stock,Payments in lieu of dividends. If you borrow period of the stock or securities sold.
stock to make a short sale, you may have to • Is subject to the same dividend restric-
remit to the lender payments in lieu of the divi- Example 1. You buy 100 shares of X stock tions,
dends distributed while you maintain your short for $1,000. You sell these shares for $750 and • Trades at prices that do not vary signifi-position. You can deduct these payments only if within 30 days from the sale you buy 100 shares cantly from the conversion ratio, andyou hold the short sale open at least 46 days of the same stock for $800. Because you bought
(more than 1 year in the case of an extraordinary substantially identical stock, you cannot deduct • Is unrestricted as to convertibility.
dividend as defined below) and you itemize your your loss of $250 on the sale. However, you add
deductions. the disallowed loss of $250 to the cost of the More or less stock bought than sold. If thenew stock, $800, to obtain your basis in the newYou deduct these payments as investment number of shares of substantially identical stockstock, which is $1,050.interest on Schedule A (Form 1040). See Inter- or securities you buy within 30 days before orest Expenses in chapter 3 for more information. after the sale is either more or less than theExample 2. You are an employee of a cor-If you close the short sale by the 45th day number of shares you sold, you must determineporation that has an incentive pay plan. Underafter the date of the short sale (1 year or less in the particular shares to which the wash salethis plan, you are given 10 shares of the corpo-the case of an extraordinary dividend), you can- rules apply. You do this by matching the sharesration’s stock as a bonus award. You include thenot deduct the payment in lieu of the dividend bought with an equal number of the shares sold.fair market value of the stock in your grossthat you make to the lender. Instead, you must Match the shares bought in the same order thatincome as additional pay. You later sell theseincrease the basis of the stock used to close the you bought them, beginning with the first sharesshares at a loss. If you receive another bonusshort sale by that amount. bought. The shares or securities so matched areaward of substantially identical stock within 30To determine how long a short sale is kept subject to the wash sale rules.days of the sale, you cannot deduct your loss onopen, do not include any period during which the sale.you hold, have an option to buy, or are under a Example 1. You bought 100 shares of M
contractual obligation to buy substantially identi- stock on September 24, 2006, for $5,000. OnOptions and futures contracts. The wash
cal stock or securities. December 18, 2006, you bought 50 shares ofsale rules apply to losses from sales or trades of
If your payment is made for a liquidating substantially identical stock for $2,750. On De-contracts and options to acquire or sell stock or
distribution or nontaxable stock distribution, or if cember 26, 2006, you bought 25 shares of sub-securities. They do not apply to losses from
you buy more shares equal to a stock distribu- stantially identical stock for $1,125. On Januarysales or trades of commodity futures contracts
tion issued on the borrowed stock during your 6, 2007, you sold for $4,000 the 100 shares youand foreign currencies. See Coordination of
short position, you have a capital expense. You bought in September. You have a $1,000 lossLoss Deferral Rules and Wash Sale Rules under
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 55

Page 56 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
on the sale. However, because you bought 75 You close the short sale on November 17 by Option not exercised. If you have a loss be-
shares of substantially identical stock within 30 cause you did not exercise an option to buy ordelivering the shares bought on June 2. You
days before the sale, you cannot deduct the loss sell, you are considered to have sold or tradedcannot deduct the $250 loss ($1,000 − $750)
($750) on 75 shares. You can deduct the loss the option on the date that it expired.because the date of entering into the short sale
($250) on the other 25 shares. The basis of the (October 6) is considered the date the sale is
Writer of option. If you write (grant) an option,50 shares bought on December 18, 2006, is complete for wash sale purposes and you
how you report your gain or loss depends onincreased by two-thirds (50 ÷ 75) of the $750 bought substantially identical stock within 30
whether it was exercised.disallowed loss. The new basis of those shares days from that date.
If you are not in the business of writing op-is $3,250 ($2,750 + $500). The basis of the 25
tions and an option you write on stocks, securi-Residual interests in a REMIC. The washshares bought on December 26, 2006, is in-
ties, commodities, or commodity futures is notsale rules generally will apply to the sale of yourcreased by the rest of the loss to $1,375 ($1,125
exercised (or repurchased), the amount you re-residual interest in a real estate mortgage in-+ $250).
ceive is a short-term capital gain.vestment conduit (REMIC) if, during the period
If an option requiring you to buy or sell prop-Example 2. You bought 100 shares of M beginning 6 months before the sale of the inter-
erty is exercised, see Writers of calls and puts ,stock on September 24, 2006. On February 3, est and ending 6 months after that sale, you
later.2007, you sold those shares at a $1,000 loss. acquire any residual interest in any REMIC or
On each of the 4 days from February 10-13, any interest in a taxable mortgage pool that is
Section 1256 contract options. Gain or loss2007, you bought 50 shares of substantially comparable to a residual interest. REMICs are
is recognized on the exercise of an option on aidentical stock. You cannot deduct your $1,000 discussed in chapter 1.
section 1256 contract. Section 1256 contractsloss. You must add half the disallowed loss
are defined under Section 1256 Contracts($500) to the basis of the 50 shares bought on How to report. Report a wash sale or trade on
Marked to Market, earlier.February 10. Add the other half ($500) to the line 1 or line 8 of Schedule D (Form 1040),
basis of the shares bought on February 11. whichever is appropriate. Show the full amount Cash settlement option. A cash settlementof the loss in parentheses in column (f). On the option is treated as an option to buy or sellLoss and gain on same day. Loss from a next line, enter “Wash Sale” in column (a) and property. A cash settlement option is any optionwash sale of one block of stock or securities the amount of the loss not allowed as a positive that on exercise is settled in, or could be settledcannot be used to reduce any gains on identical amount in column (f). in, cash or property other than the underlyingblocks sold the same day.
property.
Example. During 2002, you bought 100 Securities Futures Contracts How to report. Gain or loss from the closing orshares of X stock on each of three occasions.
expiration of an option that is not a section 1256You paid $158 a share for the first block of 100 A securities futures contract is a contract of sale
contract, but that is a capital asset in your hands,shares, $100 a share for the second block, and for future delivery of a single security or of a
is reported on Schedule D (Form 1040).$95 a share for the third block. On December 23, narrow-based security index.
If an option you purchased expired, enter the2007, you sold 300 shares of X stock for $125 a Gain or loss from the contract generally will expiration date in column (c) and enter “Expired”share. On January 6, 2008, you bought 250 be treated in a manner similar to gain or loss in column (d).shares of identical X stock. You cannot deduct from transactions in the underlying security. This If an option that you wrote expired, enter thethe loss of $33 a share on the first block because means gain or loss from the sale, exchange, or expiration date in column (b) and enter “Expired”within 30 days after the date of sale you bought termination of the contract will generally have in column (e).250 identical shares of X stock. In addition, you the same character as gain or loss from transac-
cannot reduce the gain realized on the sale of tions in the property to which the contract re-
the second and third blocks of stock by this loss. lates. Any capital gain or loss on a sale, Calls and Putsexchange, or termination of a contract to sellDealers. The wash sale rules do not apply to a property will be considered short term, regard- Calls and puts are options on securities and aredealer in stock or securities if the loss is from a less of how long you hold the contract. These covered by the rules just discussed for options.transaction made in the ordinary course of busi- contracts are not section 1256 contracts (unless The following are specific applications of theseness. they are dealer securities futures contracts). rules to holders and writers of options that are
Short sales. The wash sale rules apply to a bought, sold, or “closed out” in transactions on a
loss realized on a short sale if you sell, or enter national securities exchange, such as the Chi-Options
into another short sale of, substantially identical cago Board Options Exchange. (But see Section
Options are generally subject to the rules de-stock or securities within a period beginning 30 1256 Contracts Marked to Market , earlier, for
scribed in this section. If the option is part of adays before the date the short sale is complete special rules that may apply to nonequity op-
straddle, the loss deferral rules covered laterand ending 30 days after that date. tions and dealer equity options.) These rules are
under Straddles may also apply. For specialFor purposes of the wash sale rules, a short also presented in Table 4-1.
rules that apply to nonequity options and dealersale is considered complete on the date the Calls and puts are issued by writers (grant-
equity options, see Section 1256 Contractsshort sale is entered into, if: ors) to holders for cash premiums. They are
Marked to Market, earlier. ended by exercise, closing transaction, or lapse.• On that date, you own stock or securities Gain or loss from the sale or trade of an A “call option” is the right to buy from theidentical to those sold short (or by that option to buy or sell property that is a capital writer of the option, at any time before a speci-date you enter into a contract or option to asset in your hands, or would be if you acquired fied future date, a stated number of shares ofacquire that stock or those securities), and it, is capital gain or loss. If the property is not, or stock at a specified price. Conversely, a “put
• You later deliver the stock or securities to would not be, a capital asset, the gain or loss is option” is the right to sell to the writer, at any time
close the short sale. ordinary gain or loss. before a specified future date, a stated number
of shares at a specified price.
Example 1. You purchased an option to buyOtherwise, a short sale is not considered
Holders of calls and puts. If you buy a call or100 shares of XYZ Company stock. The stockcomplete until the property is delivered to close
a put, you may not deduct its cost. It is a capitalincreases in value and you sell the option forthe sale.
expenditure.more than you paid for it. Your gain is capitalThis treatment also applies to losses from
If you sell the call or the put before yougain because the stock underlying the optionthe sale, exchange, or termination of a securities
exercise it, the difference between its cost andwould have been a capital asset in your hands.futures contract to sell.
the amount you receive for it is either a
Example 2. The facts are the same as inExample. On June 2, you buy 100 shares of long-term or short-term capital gain or loss, de-
Example 1, except that the stock decreases instock for $1,000. You sell short 100 shares of pending on how long you held it.
value and you sell the option for less than youthe stock for $750 on October 6. On October 7, If the option expires, its cost is either a
paid for it. Your loss is a capital loss.you buy 100 shares of the same stock for $750. long-term or short-term capital loss, depending
Page 56 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 57 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
on your holding period, which ends on the expi- receive for writing it in your income at the time of 1. Expiration. Ten JJJ call options were is-
sued on April 8, 2007, for $4,000. Thesereceipt. Carry it in a deferred account until:ration date.
equity options expired in December 2007,If you exercise a call, add its cost to the basis • Your obligation expires, without being exercised. If you were aof the stock you bought. If you exercise a put, holder (buyer) of the options, you would• You sell, in the case of a call, or buy, inreduce your amount realized on the sale of the recognize a short-term capital loss ofthe case of a put, the underlying stockunderlying stock by the cost of the put when $4,000. If you were a writer of the options,when the option is exercised, orfiguring your gain or loss. Any gain or loss on the you would recognize a short-term capital• You engage in a closing transaction.sale of the underlying stock is long term or short gain of $4,000.
term depending on your holding period for the 2. Closing transaction. The facts are theIf your obligation expires, the amount you re-underlying stock. same as in (1), except that on May 10,ceived for writing the call or put is short-term
Put option as short sale. Buying a put op- 2007, the options were sold for $6,000. Ifcapital gain.
you were the holder of the options whotion is generally treated as a short sale, and the If a call you write is exercised and you sell sold them, you would recognize aexercise, sale, or expiration of the put is a clos- the underlying stock, increase your amount real- short-term capital gain of $2,000. If youing of the short sale. See Short Sales, earlier. If ized on the sale of the stock by the amount you were the writer of the options and youyou have held the underlying stock for 1 year or received for the call when figuring your gain or bought them back, you would recognize aless at the time you buy the put, any gain on the loss. The gain or loss is long term or short term short-term capital loss of $2,000.exercise, sale, or expiration of the put is a depending on your holding period of the stock.
3. Exercise. The facts are the same as in (1),short-term capital gain. The same is true if you If a put you write is exercised and you buy
except that the options were exercised onbuy the underlying stock after you buy the put the underlying stock, decrease your basis in the
May 27, 2007. The buyer adds the cost ofbut before its exercise, sale, or expiration. Your stock by the amount you received for the put.
the options to the basis of the stock boughtholding period for the underlying stock begins on Your holding period for the stock begins on the through the exercise of the options. Thedate you buy it, not on the date you wrote thethe earliest of: writer adds the amount received from writ-put.• The date you dispose of the stock, ing the options to the amount realized fromIf you enter into a closing transaction by selling the stock to figure gain or loss. The• The date you exercise the put, paying an amount equal to the value of the call gain or loss is short term or long term de-or put at the time of the payment, the difference• The date you sell the put, or pending upon the holding period of the
between the amount you pay and the amount stock.• The date the put expires. you receive for the call or put is a short-term
4. Section 1256 contracts. The facts are thecapital gain or loss.
same as in (1), except the options wereWriters of calls and puts. If you write (grant) nonequity options, subject to the rules fora call or a put, do not include the amount you Examples of non-dealer transactions. section 1256 contracts. If you were a buyer
of the options, you would recognize aTable 4-1. Puts and Calls short-term capital loss of $1,600, and a
long-term capital loss of $2,400. If you
Puts were a writer of the options, you would
recognize a short-term capital gain of
When a put: If you are the holder: If you are the writer: $1,600, and a long-term capital gain of
$2,400. See Section 1256 Contracts
Is exercised Reduce your amount realized from Reduce your basis in the stock you Marked to Market, earlier, for more infor-
sale of the underlying stock by the buy by the amount you received for mation.cost of the put. the put.
Expires Report the cost of the put as a capital Report the amount you received for Straddles
loss on the date it expires.* the put as a short-term capital gain.
This section discusses the loss deferral rules
Is sold by the holder Report the difference between the This does not affect you. (But if you that apply to the sale or other disposition of
cost of the put and the amount you buy back the put, report the positions in a straddle. These rules do not apply
receive for it as a capital gain or loss.* difference between the amount you to the straddles described under Exceptions,pay and the amount you received for later.the put as a short-term capital gain
A straddle is any set of offsetting positions onor loss.)
personal property. For example, a straddle may
consist of a purchased option to buy and a
Calls purchased option to sell on the same number of
shares of the security, with the same exercise
When a call: If you are the holder: If you are the writer: price and period.
Is exercised Add the cost of the call to your basis Increase your amount realized on Personal property. This is any property of a
in the stock purchased. sale of the stock by the amount you type that is actively traded. It includes stock
received for the call. options and contracts to buy stock, but generally
does not include stock.
Expires Report the cost of the call as a capital Report the amount you received for
Straddle rules for stock. Although stock isloss on the date it expires.* the call as a short-term capital gain.
generally excluded from the definition of per-
sonal property when applying the straddle rules,Is sold by the holder Report the difference between the This does not affect you. (But if you
cost of the call and the amount you buy back the call, report the it is included in the following two situations. 
receive for it as a capital gain or loss.* difference between the amount you
pay and the amount you received for 1. The stock is of a type which is actively
the call as a short-term capital gain traded and at least one of the offsetting
or loss.) positions is a position on that stock or sub-
stantially similar or related property.
*See Holders of calls and puts and Writers of calls and puts in the accompanying text to find whether your gain or loss
is short term or long term. 2. The stock is in a corporation formed or
availed of to take positions in personal
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 57

Page 58 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
property that offset positions taken by any • The straddle is not part of a larger strad-Loss Deferral Rules
shareholder. dle.
Generally, you can deduct a loss on the disposi-
tion of one or more positions only to the extent If there is a loss from any position in an identi-Note. For positions established before Oc- that the loss is more than any unrecognized gain fied straddle, you must increase the basis oftober 22, 2004, condition (1) above does not you have on offsetting positions. Unused losses each of the positions that offset the loss positionapply. Instead, personal property includes stock are treated as sustained in the next tax year. in the identified straddle. The increase is the lossif condition (2) above applies or the stock was multiplied by a fraction. The numerator of thepart of a straddle in which at least one of the Unrecognized gain. This is: fraction is the unrecognized gain (if any) on theoffsetting positions was: offsetting position and the denominator of the• The amount of gain you would have had
• An option to buy or sell the stock or sub- fraction is the total unrecognized gain on allon an open position if you had sold it on
stantially identical stock or securities, positions that offset the loss position in the iden-the last business day of the tax year at its
tified straddle. For this purpose, your unrecog-fair market value, and• A securities futures contract on the stock nized gain is the excess of the fair market valueor substantially identical stock or securi- • The amount of gain realized on a position of the position that is part of an identified strad-ties, or if, as of the end of the tax year, gain has dle at the time you incur a loss on anotherbeen realized, but not recognized.• A position on substantially similar or re- position in the identified straddle, over the fair
lated property (other than stock). market value of that position when you identified
Example. On July 1, 2007, you entered into it as a position in the straddle.
a straddle. On December 16, 2007, you closed If the application of the above rule does notPosition. A position is an interest in personal
one position of the straddle at a loss of $15,000. result in the increase in basis of any offsettingproperty. A position can be a forward or futures
On December 31, 2007, the end of your tax position in the identified straddle, you must in-contract, or an option.
year, you have an unrecognized gain of $12,750 crease the basis of each of the offsetting posi-An interest in a loan that is denominated in a
in the offsetting open position. On your 2007 tions in the straddle in a manner that:foreign currency is treated as a position in that
return, your deductible loss on the position youcurrency. For the straddle rules, foreign cur- • Is reasonable,closed is limited to $2,250 ($15,000 − $12,750).rency for which there is an active interbank mar-
You must carry forward to 2008 the unused loss • Is consistently applied by you,ket is considered to be actively-traded personal
of $12,750.property. See also Foreign currency contract • Is consistent with the purposes of theunder Section 1256 Contracts Marked to Mar- identified straddle rules, andNote. If you physically settle a position es-ket, earlier.
tablished after October 21, 2004, that is part of a • Results in a total increase in the basis of
straddle by delivering property to which the posi-Offsetting position. This is a position that those offsetting positions that is equal to
tion relates (and you would realize a loss on thatsubstantially reduces any risk of loss you may the loss.
position if you terminated it), you are treated ashave from holding another position. However, if
having terminated the position for its fair marketa position is part of a straddle that is not an The identified straddle rules also apply to po-
value immediately before the settlement and asidentified straddle (described later), do not treat sitions that are or have been a liability or obliga-
having sold the property used to physically settleit as offsetting to a position that is part of an tion to you (for example, a debt obligation you
the position at its fair market value.identified straddle. issued, a written option, or a notional principal
contract you entered into).Presumed offsetting positions. Two or Exceptions. The loss deferral rules do not ap- Neither you nor anyone else can take intomore positions will be presumed to be offsetting ply to: account any loss on a position that is part of anif:
identified straddle to the extent that the loss1. Positions established after October 21,• The positions are established in the same increases the basis of any positions that offset2004, comprising an identified straddle,personal property (or in a contract for this the loss position in the identified straddle.property), and the value of one or more 2. Certain straddles consisting of qualified
positions varies inversely with the value of covered call options and the stock to be Note. For positions established before Oc-
one or more of the other positions, purchased under the options, tober 22, 2004, identified straddles have to meet
two additional conditions:• The positions are in the same personal 3. Hedging transactions, described earlier
property, even if this property is in a sub- under Section 1256 Contracts Marked to 1. All of the original positions that you identifystantially changed form, and the positions’ Market, and were acquired on the same day.values vary inversely as described in the 4. Straddles consisting entirely of sectionfirst condition, 2. All of the positions included in item (1)1256 contracts, as described earlier under were disposed of on the same day during• The positions are in debt instruments with Section 1256 Contracts Marked to Market the tax year, or none of the positions werea similar maturity, and the positions’ val- (but see Identified straddle, next). disposed of by the end of the tax year.ues vary inversely as described in the first
condition, Also, the losses from positions are deferred untilNote. For positions established before Oc- you dispose of all the positions in the straddle.• The positions are sold or marketed as off- tober 22, 2004, the loss deferral rules also do The rule discussed above for increasing thesetting positions, whether or not the posi- not apply to a straddle that is an identified strad- basis of each of the positions does not apply.tions are called a straddle, spread, dle at the end of the tax year.
Qualified covered call options and op-butterfly, or any similar name, or Identified straddle. Any straddle (other tioned stock. A straddle is not subject to the• The aggregate margin requirement for the than a straddle described in (2) or (3) above) is loss deferral rules for straddles if both of thepositions is lower than the sum of the mar- an identified straddle if all of the following condi- following are true.gin requirements for each position if held tions exist.
• All of the offsetting positions consist of oneseparately. • You clearly identified the straddle on your or more qualified covered call options andrecords before the close of the day onRelated persons. To determine if two or the stock to be purchased from you underwhich you acquired it.more positions are offsetting, you will be treated the options.
as holding any position that your spouse holds • For straddles acquired after December 29, • The straddle is not part of a larger strad-during the same period. If you take into account 2007, you identified the positions in the dle.part or all of the gain or loss for a position held by straddle that are offsetting with respect to
a flowthrough entity, such as a partnership or one another (for example, position A off-
But see Special year-end rule , later, for an ex-trust, you are also considered to hold that posi- sets position D, and position B offsets po-
ception.tion. sition C).
Page 58 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 59 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Capital loss on qualified covered call op-A qualified covered call option is any option eliminating all unrealized gain in the position. On
tions. If you hold stock and you write a quali-you grant to purchase stock you hold (or stock December 16, you bought a second XX stock
fied covered call option on that stock with ayou acquire in connection with granting the op- position that is substantially identical to the XX
strike price less than the applicable stock price,tion), but only if all of the following are true. stock you sold on December 13. At the end of
treat any loss from the option as long-term capi- the year there is no unrecognized gain in the put• The option is traded on a national securi- tal loss if, at the time the loss was realized, gain option or in the XX stock. Under these circum-ties exchange or other market approved on the sale or exchange of the stock would be stances, the $20 loss will be disallowed for 2007by the Secretary of the Treasury. treated as long-term capital gain. The holding under Rule 1 because, within a period beginning
period of the stock does not include any period• The option is granted more than 30 days 30 days before December 13, and ending 30
during which you are the writer of the option.before its expiration date. days after that date, you bought stock substan-
tially identical to the XX stock you sold.For covered call options entered into after Special year-end rule. The loss deferralJuly 28, 2002, the option is granted not rules for straddles apply if all of the following are Rule 2. You cannot deduct a loss on the dispo-more than 12 months before its expiration true. sition of less than all of the positions of a strad-date or satisfies term limitation and quali- dle (your loss position) to the extent that any• The qualified covered call options arefied benchmark requirements published in unrecognized gain at the close of the tax year inclosed or the stock is disposed of at a lossthe Internal Revenue Bulletin. one or more of the following positions is moreduring any tax year.• The option is not a deep-in-the-money op- than the amount of any loss disallowed under
• Gain on disposition of the stock or gain ontion. Rule 1.
the options is includible in gross income in• You are not an options dealer who granted • Successor positions.a later tax year.the option in connection with your activity • Offsetting positions to the loss position.• The stock or options were held less thanof dealing in options.
30 days after the closing of the options or • Offsetting positions to any successor posi-• Gain or loss on the option is capital gain or the disposition of the stock. tion.loss.
Successor position. A successor positionHow To Report Gains A deep-in-the-money option is an option with is a position that is or was at any time offsettingand Losses (Form 6781)a strike price lower than the lowest qualified to a second position, if both of the followingbenchmark (LQB). The strike price is the price at conditions are met.Report each position (whether or not it is part ofwhich the option is to be exercised. Strike prices
a straddle) on which you have unrecognizedare listed in the financial section of many news- • The second position was offsetting to the
gain at the end of the tax year and the amount ofpapers. The LQB is the highest available strike loss position that was sold.
this unrecognized gain in Part III of Form 6781.price that is less than the applicable stock price. • The successor position is entered into dur-Use Part II of Form 6781 to figure your gains andHowever, the LQB for an option with a term of ing a period beginning 30 days before,losses on straddles before entering thesemore than 90 days and a strike price of more and ending 30 days after, the sale of theamounts on Schedule D (Form 1040). Include athan $50 is the second highest available strike loss position.copy of Form 6781 with your income tax return.price that is less than the applicable stock price.
The availability of strike prices for equity op-
Example 1. On November 1, 2007, you en-tions with flexible terms does not affect the de- Coordination of Loss Deferral tered into offsetting long and short positions intermination of the LQB for an option that is not Rules and Wash Sale Rules non-section 1256 contracts. On November 12,an equity option with flexible terms.
2007, you disposed of the long position at a $10The applicable stock price for any stock for Rules similar to the wash sale rules apply to any loss. On November 14, you entered into a newwhich an option has been granted is: disposition of a position or positions of a strad- long position (successor position) that is offset-dle. First apply Rule 1, explained next, then ting to the retained short position, but that is not1. The closing price of the stock on the most apply Rule 2. However, Rule 1 applies only if substantially identical to the long position dis-recent day on which that stock was traded stocks or securities make up a position that is posed of on November 12. You held both posi-before the date on which the option was part of the straddle. If a position in the straddle tions through year end, at which time there wasgranted, or does not include stock or securities, use Rule 2. $10 of unrecognized gain in the successor long2. The opening price of the stock on the day position and no unrecognized gain in the offset-Rule 1. You cannot deduct a loss on the dispo-on which the option was granted, but only ting short position. Under these circumstances,sition of shares of stock or securities that makeif that price is greater than 110% of the the entire $10 loss will be disallowed for 2007up the positions of a straddle if, within a periodprice determined in (1). because there is $10 of unrecognized gain in thebeginning 30 days before the date of that dispo-
successor long position.If the applicable stock price is $25 or less, the sition and ending 30 days after that date, you
LQB will be treated as not less than 85% of the acquired substantially identical stock or securi-
Example 2. The facts are the same as inapplicable stock price. If the applicable stock ties. Instead, the loss will be carried over to the
Example 1, except that at year end you have $4price is $150 or less, the LQB will be treated as following tax year, subject to any further applica-
of unrecognized gain in the successor long posi-not less than an amount that is $10 below the tion of Rule 1 in that year. This rule will also
tion and $6 of unrecognized gain in the offsettingapplicable stock price. apply if you entered into a contract or option to
short position. Under these circumstances, theacquire the stock or securities within the timeExample. On May 13, 2007, you held XYZ entire $10 loss will be disallowed for 2007 be-period described above. See Loss carryover ,stock and you wrote an XYZ/September call cause there is a total of $10 of unrecognizedlater, for more information about how to treat theoption with a strike price of $120. The closing gain in the successor long position and offset-loss in the following tax year.price of one share of XYZ stock on May 12, ting short position.2007, was $130.25. The strike prices of all XYZ/ Dealers. If you are a dealer in stock or se-
September call options offered on May 13, curities, this loss treatment will not apply to any Example 3. The facts are the same as in2007, were as follows: $110, $115, $120, $125, losses you sustained in the ordinary course of Example 1, except that at year end you have $8$130, and $135. Because the option has a term your business. of unrecognized gain in the successor long posi-of more than 90 days, the LQB is $125, the tion and $8 of unrecognized loss in the offsettingsecond highest strike price that is less than Example. You are not a dealer in stock or short position. Under these circumstances, $8 of$130.25, the applicable stock price. The call securities. On December 2, 2007, you bought the total $10 realized loss will be disallowed foroption is a deep-in-the-money option because stock in XX Corporation (XX stock) and an off- 2007 because there is $8 of unrecognized gainits strike price is lower than the LQB. Therefore, setting put option. On December 13, 2007, there in the successor long position.the option is not a qualified covered call option, was $20 of unrealized gain in the put option and
and the loss deferral rules apply if you closed out you sold the XX stock at a $20 loss. By Decem- Loss carryover. If you have a disallowed loss
the option or the stock at a loss during the year. ber 16, the value of the put option had declined, that resulted from applying Rule 1 and Rule 2,
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 59

Page 60 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
you must carry it over to the next tax year and begins on April 1, 2007, the date the straddle • Are included in a mixed straddle account
apply Rule 1 and Rule 2 to that carryover loss. ended. Gain recognized on the sale of the gold (Election C), discussed later.
For example, a loss disallowed in 2006 under will be treated as short-term capital gain.
Rule 1 will not be allowed in 2007, unless the Mixed Straddle Electionssubstantially identical stock or securities (which Loss treatment. Treat the loss on the sale of
caused the loss to be disallowed in 2006) were one or more positions (the loss position) of a If you disposed of a position in a mixed straddle
disposed of during 2007. In addition, the carry- straddle as a long-term capital loss if both of the and make one of the elections described in theover loss will not be allowed in 2007 if Rule 1 or following are true. following discussions, report your gain or loss asRule 2 disallows it. indicated in those discussions. If you do not• You held (directly or indirectly) one or
make any of the elections, report your gain ormore offsetting positions to the loss posi-Example. The facts are the same as in the loss in Part II of Form 6781. If you disposed oftion on the date you entered into the lossexample under Rule 1 above. On December 30, the section 1256 component of the straddle,position.2008, you sell the second XX stock at a $20 loss enter the recognized loss (line 10, column (h)) orand there is $40 of unrecognized gain in the put • You would have treated all gain or loss on your gain (line 12, column (f)) in Part I of Formoption. Under these circumstances, you cannot one or more of the straddle positions as 6781, on line 1. Do not include it on line 11 or 13deduct in 2008 either the $20 loss disallowed in long-term capital gain or loss if you had (Part II).2007 or the $20 loss you incurred for the De- sold these positions on the day you en-
cember 30, 2008, sale of XX stock. Rule 1 does tered into the loss position. Mixed straddle election (Election A). Younot apply because the substantially identical XX can elect out of the marked to market rules,stock was sold during the year and no substan- Mixed straddles. Special rules apply to a discussed under Section 1256 Contractstially identical stock or securities were bought loss position that is part of a mixed straddle and Marked to Market , earlier, for all section 1256within the 61-day period. However, Rule 2 does that is a non-section 1256 position. A mixed contracts that are part of a mixed straddle. In-apply because there is $40 of unrecognized gain straddle is a straddle: stead, the gain and loss rules for straddles willin the put option, an offsetting position to the loss apply to these contracts. However, if you make• That is not part of a larger straddle,positions. this election for an option on a section 1256• In which all positions are held as capitalCapital loss carryover. If the sale of a loss contract, the gain or loss treatment discussedassets,position would have resulted in a capital loss, earlier under Options will apply, subject to the
you treat the carryover loss as a capital loss on gain and loss rules for straddles.• In which at least one (but not all) of the
the date it is allowed, even if you would treat the positions is a section 1256 contract, and You can make this election if:gain or loss on any successor positions as ordi-
• For which the mixed straddle election • At least one (but not all) of the positions isnary income or loss. Likewise, if the sale of a
(Election A, discussed later) has not been a section 1256 contract, andloss position (in the case of section 1256 con-
made.tracts) would have resulted in a 60% long-term • Each position forming part of the straddlecapital loss and a 40% short-term capital loss, is clearly identified as being part of thatyou treat the carryover loss under the 60/40 rule, Treat the loss as 60% long-term capital loss and straddle on the day the first section 1256even if you would treat any gain or loss on any 40% short-term capital loss, if all of the following contract forming part of the straddle is ac-successor positions as 100% long-term or conditions apply. quired.short-term capital gain or loss.
• Gain or loss from the sale of one or more If you make this election, it will apply for allExceptions. The rules for coordinating strad- of the straddle positions that are section later years as well. It cannot be revoked withoutdle losses and wash sales do not apply to the 1256 contracts would be considered gain the consent of the IRS. If you made this election,following loss situations. or loss from the sale or exchange of a check box A of Form 6781. Do not report thecapital asset.• Loss on the sale of one or more positions section 1256 component in Part I.
in a hedging transaction. (Hedging trans- • The sale of no position in the straddle,
actions are described under Section 1256 other than a section 1256 contract, would Other elections. You can avoid the 60%
Contracts Marked to Market, earlier.) result in a long-term capital gain or loss. long-term capital loss treatment required for a
non-section 1256 loss position that is part of a• Loss on the sale of a loss position in a • You have not made a straddle-by-straddle mixed straddle, described earlier, if you choosemixed straddle account. (See Mixed strad- identification election (Election B) or mixed either of the two following elections to offsetdle account (Election C), later.) straddle account election (Election C), gains and losses for these positions.both discussed later.• Loss on the sale of a position that is part
• Election B. Make a separate identificationof a straddle consisting only of section
of the positions of each mixed straddle for1256 contracts. Example. On March 1, 2007, you entered
which you are electing this treatment (theinto a long gold forward contract. On July 15,
straddle-by-straddle identification method).2007, you entered into an offsetting short goldHolding Period and regulated futures contract. You did not make an • Election C. Establish a mixed straddle ac-Loss Treatment Rules election to offset gains and losses from positions count for a class of activities for which
in a mixed straddle. On August 9, 2007, you gains and losses will be recognized andThe holding period of a position in a straddle
disposed of the long forward contract at a loss. offset on a periodic basis.generally begins no earlier than the date on
Because the gold forward contract was part of awhich the straddle ends (the date you no longer
mixed straddle and the disposition of thishold an offsetting position). This rule does not These two elections are alternatives to thenon-section 1256 position would not result inapply to any position you held more than 1 year mixed straddle election. You can choose onlylong-term capital loss, the loss recognized onbefore you established the straddle. But see one of the three elections. Use Form 6781 tothe termination of the gold forward contract willExceptions, later. indicate your election choice by checking box A,be treated as a 60% long-term and 40% B, or C, whichever applies.short-term capital loss.Example. On March 6, 2006, you acquired
Straddle-by-straddle identification elec-gold. On January 5, 2007, you entered into an
tion (Election B). Under this election, youExceptions. The special holding period andoffsetting short gold forward contract (nonregu-
must clearly identify each position that is part ofloss treatment for straddle positions does notlated futures contract). On April 1, 2007, you
the identified mixed straddle by the earlier of:apply to positions that:disposed of the short gold forward contract at no
gain or loss. On April 8, 2007, you sold the gold • The close of the day the identified mixed• Constitute part of a hedging transaction,at a gain. Because the gold had been held for 1 straddle is established, or• Are included in a straddle consisting onlyyear or less before the offsetting short position
• The time the position is disposed of.of section 1256 contracts, orwas entered into, the holding period for the gold
Page 60 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 61 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
treated as short-term capital loss. Any remaining How to make the election. You must make
If you dispose of a position in the mixed straddle loss is treated as long-term capital loss. the election no later than the due date (including
before the end of the day on which the straddle extensions) for filing your tax return for the yearThe election to establish one or more mixed
is established, this identification must be made straddle accounts for each tax year must be in which you sold the stock. If your original return
by the time you dispose of the position. You are made by the due date (without extensions) of was filed on time, you may make the election on
presumed to have properly identified a mixed your income tax return for the immediately pre- an amended return filed no later than 6 months
straddle if independent verification is used. ceding tax year. If you begin trading in a new after the due date of your return (excluding ex-
class of activities during a tax year, you must tensions). Enter “Filed pursuant to sectionThe basic tax treatment of gain or loss under make the election for the new class of activities 301.9100-2” at the top of the amended return,this election depends on which side of the strad- by the later of either: and file it at the same address you used for yourdle produced the total net gain or loss. If the net
original return.gain or loss from the straddle is due to the • The due date of your return for the imme-
section 1256 contracts, gain or loss is treated as diately preceding tax year (without exten- How to report and postpone gain. Report
60% long-term capital gain or loss and 40% sions), or the entire gain realized on line 8 of Schedule D.
short-term capital gain or loss. Enter the net gain To make the choice to postpone gain, enter• 60 days after you entered into the firstor loss in Part I of Form 6781 and identify the “Section 1042 election” in column (a) of the linemixed straddle in the new class of activi-election by checking box B. directly below the line on which you reported theties.If the net gain or loss is due to the gain. Enter in column (f) the amount of the gain
non-section 1256 positions, gain or loss is you are postponing or expecting to postpone.You make the election on Form 6781 byshort-term capital gain or loss. Enter the net gain Enter it as a loss (in parentheses). If the actualchecking box C. Attach Form 6781 to your in-or loss on Part I of Schedule D and identify the postponed gain is different from the amount youcome tax return for the immediately precedingelection. report, file an amended return.tax year, or file it within 60 days, if that applies.For the specific application of the rules of this Also attach the following statements.Report the annual account net gain or loss fromelection, see Regulations section 1.1092(b)-3T. a mixed straddle account in Part II of Form 6781.
1. A “statement of election” that indicates youIn addition, you must attach a statement to FormExample. On April 1, you entered into a are making an election under section6781 specifically designating the class of activi-non-section 1256 position and an offsetting sec- 1042(a) of the Internal Revenue Code andties for which a mixed straddle account is estab-tion 1256 contract. You also made a valid elec- that includes the following information.lished.tion to treat this straddle as an identified mixed For the specific application of the rules of thisstraddle. On April 8, you disposed of the a. A description of the securities sold, theelection, see Regulations section 1.1092(b)-4T.non-section 1256 position at a $600 loss and the date of the sale, the amount realized on
section 1256 contract at an $800 gain. Under the sale, and the adjusted basis of theInterest expense and carrying charges re-
these circumstances, the $600 loss on the lating to mixed straddle account positions. securities.
non-section 1256 position will be offset against You cannot deduct interest and carrying b. The name of the ESOP or cooperativethe $800 gain on the section 1256 contract. The charges that are allocable to any positions held to which the qualified securities werenet gain of $200 from the straddle will be treated in a mixed straddle account. Treat these sold.as 60% long-term capital gain and 40% charges as an adjustment to the annual account
short-term capital gain because it is due to the net gain or loss and allocate them proportion- c. For a sale that was part of a single,
section 1256 contract. ately between the net short-term and the net interrelated transaction under a prear-
long-term capital gains or losses. ranged agreement between taxpayersMixed straddle account (Election C). You To find the amount of interest and carrying involving other sales of qualified securi-may elect to establish one or more accounts for charges that is not deductible and that must be ties, the names and identifying numbersdetermining gains and losses from all positions added to the annual account net gain or loss, of the other taxpayers under the agree-in a mixed straddle. You must establish a sepa- apply the rules described earlier to the positions ment and the number of shares sold byrate mixed straddle account for each separate held in the mixed straddle account. See Interest the other taxpayers.designated class of activities. expense and carrying charges on straddles  inGenerally, you must determine gain or loss chapter 3 under Nondeductible Expense. 2. A notarized “statement of purchase”for each position in a mixed straddle account as describing the qualified replacement prop-of the close of each business day of the tax year.
erty, date of purchase, and the cost of theSales of Stock to ESOPsYou offset the net section 1256 contracts
property and declaring the property to beagainst the net non-section 1256 positions to or Certain Cooperatives qualified replacement property for the qual-determine the “daily account net gain or loss.”
ified stock you sold. The statement mustIf you sold qualified securities held for at least 3If the daily account amount is due to
have been notarized no later than 30 daysyears to an employee stock ownership plannon-section 1256 positions, the amount is
after the purchase. If you have not yet pur-(ESOP) or eligible worker-owned cooperative,treated as short-term capital gain or loss. If the
chased the qualified replacement property,you may be able to elect to postpone all or partdaily account amount is due to section 1256
you must attach the notarized “statementof the gain on the sale if you bought qualifiedcontracts, the amount is treated as 60%
of purchase” to your income tax return forreplacement property (certain securities) withinlong-term and 40% short-term capital gain or
the year following the election year (or thethe period that began 3 months before the saleloss.
election will not be valid).and ended 12 months after the sale. If you makeOn the last business day of the tax year, you
the election, you must recognize gain on thedetermine the “annual account net gain or loss” 3. A verified written statement of the domes-sale only to the extent the proceeds from thefor each account by netting the daily account tic corporation whose employees are cov-sale exceed the cost of the qualified replace-amounts for that account for the tax year. The ered by the ESOP acquiring the securities,ment property.“total annual account net gain or loss” is deter- or of any authorized officer of the coopera-You must reduce the basis of the replace-mined by netting the annual account amounts tive, consenting to the taxes under sec-ment property by any postponed gain. If youfor all mixed straddle accounts that you had tions 4978 and 4979A of the Internaldispose of any replacement property, you mayestablished. Revenue Code on certain dispositions, andhave to recognize all of the postponed gain.The net amounts keep their long-term or prohibited allocations of the stock pur-short-term classification. However, no more Generally, to qualify for the election the chased by the ESOP or cooperative.than 50% of the total annual account net gain for ESOP or cooperative must own at least 30% of
the tax year can be treated as long-term capital the outstanding stock of the corporation that
More information. For details, see sectiongain. Any remaining gain is treated as issued the qualified securities. Also, the quali-
1042 of the Internal Revenue Code and Regula-short-term capital gain. Also, no more than 40% fied replacement property must have been is-
tions section 1.1042-1T.of the total annual account net loss can be sued by a domestic operating corporation.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 61

Page 62 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
the gain. Enter the amount of gain postponed in 7. Within the period beginning 1 year beforeRollover of Gain
column (f). Enter it as a loss (in parentheses). and ending 1 year after the stock was is-From Publicly sued, the corporation cannot have boughtAlso, attach a schedule showing how youTraded Securities more than a de minimis amount of its stockfigured the postponed gain, the name of the
from anyone, unless the total value of theSSBIC in which you purchased common stockYou may qualify for a tax-free rollover of certain stock it bought is 5% or less of the totalor a partnership interest, the date of thatgains from the sale of publicly traded securities. value of all its stock.purchase, and your new basis in that SSBICThis means that if you buy certain replacement
stock or partnership interest. For more information about tests 6 and 7, seeproperty and make the choice described in this
the regulations under section 1202 of the Inter-section, you postpone part or all of your gain. You must make the choice to postpone gain
nal Revenue Code.You postpone the gain by adjusting the basis no later than the due date (including extensions)
of the replacement property as described in Ba- for filing your tax return for the year in which you
sis of replacement property , later. This sold the securities. If your original return was Active business test. A corporation meets
postpones your gain until the year you dispose filed on time, you may make the choice on an this test for any period of time if, during that
of the replacement property. amended return filed no later than 6 months period, both the following are true.
You qualify to make this choice if you meet after the due date of your return (excluding ex- • It was an eligible corporation, defined be-all the following tests. tensions). Enter “Filed pursuant to section low.301.9100-2” at the top of the amended return,• You sell publicly traded securities at a and file it at the same address you used for your • It used at least 80% (by value) of its as-gain. Publicly traded securities are securi- original return. sets in the active conduct of at least oneties traded on an established securities qualified trade or business, defined below.Your choice is revocable with the consent ofmarket.
the IRS.• Your gain from the sale is a capital gain. Exception for SSBIC. Any specialized
small business investment company (SSBIC) is• During the 60-day period beginning on the Gains on Qualified treated as meeting the active business test. Andate of the sale, you buy replacement Small Business Stock SSBIC is an eligible corporation that is licensedproperty. This replacement property must to operate under section 301(d) of the Smallbe either common stock or a partnership This section discusses two provisions of the law Business Investment Act of 1958 as in effect oninterest in a specialized small business in- that may apply to gain from the sale or trade of May 13, 1993.vestment company (SSBIC). This is any qualified small business stock. You may qualify
partnership or corporation licensed by the Eligible corporation. This is any U.S. cor-for a tax-free rollover of all or part of the gain.
Small Business Administration under sec- poration other than:You may be able to exclude part of the gain from
tion 301(d) of the Small Business Invest- your income. • A Domestic International Sales Corpora-ment Act of 1958, as in effect on May 13,
tion (DISC) or a former DISC,1993. Qualified small business stock. This is
• A corporation that has made, or whosestock that meets all the following tests.
subsidiary has made, an election underAmount of gain recognized. If you make the
1. It must be stock in a C corporation. section 936 of the Internal Revenue Code,choice described in this section, you must rec-
ognize gain only up to the following amount: 2. It must have been originally issued after • A regulated investment company,
August 10, 1993.• The amount realized on the sale, minus • A real estate investment trust (REIT),
3. The corporation must have total gross as-• The cost of any common stock or partner- • A real estate mortgage investment conduitsets of $50 million or less at all times aftership interest in an SSBIC that you bought (REMIC),August 9, 1993, and before it issued theduring the 60-day period beginning on the
stock. Its total gross assets immediately af- • A financial asset securitization investmentdate of sale (and did not previously take
ter it issued the stock must also be $50 trust (FASIT), orinto account on an earlier sale of publicly
million or less.traded securities). • A cooperative.
When figuring the corporation’s total
gross assets, you must also count the as- Qualified trade or business. This is anyIf this amount is less than the amount of your sets of any predecessor of the corporation. trade or business other than:gain, you can postpone the rest of your gain, In addition, you must treat all corporationssubject to the limit described next. If this amount • One involving services performed in thethat are members of the same par-is equal to or more than the amount of your gain, fields of health, law, engineering, architec-ent-subsidiary controlled group as one cor-you must recognize the full amount of your gain. ture, accounting, actuarial science, per-poration. 
forming arts, consulting, athletics, financialLimit on gain postponed. The amount of 4. You must have acquired the stock at its services, or brokerage services,gain you can postpone each year is limited to the original issue, directly or through an under-smaller of: • One whose principal asset is the reputa-writer, in exchange for money or other
tion or skill of one or more employees,• $50,000 ($25,000 if you are married and property (not including stock), or as pay for
file a separate return), or services provided to the corporation (other • Any banking, insurance, financing, leas-
than services performed as an underwriter ing, investing, or similar business,• $500,000 ($250,000 if you are married of the stock). In certain cases, your stockand file a separate return), minus the • Any farming business (including the busi-may also meet this test if you acquired itamount of gain you postponed for all ear- ness of raising or harvesting trees),from another person who met this test, orlier years. through a conversion or trade of qualified • Any business involving the production or
small business stock that you held. extraction of products for which percent-
Basis of replacement property. You must age depletion can be claimed, or5. The corporation must have met the activesubtract the amount of postponed gain from the business test, defined next, and must have • Any business of operating a hotel, motel,basis of your replacement property. been a C corporation during substantially restaurant, or similar business.
all the time you held the stock.How to report and postpone gain. Report
the entire gain realized from the sale on line 1 or 6. Within the period beginning 2 years before Rollover of Gain
line 8 of Schedule D (Form 1040), whichever is and ending 2 years after the stock was
You may qualify for a tax-free rollover of capitalappropriate. To make the choice to postpone issued, the corporation cannot have
gain from the sale of qualified small businessgain, enter “SSBIC Rollover” in column (a) of the bought more than a de minimis amount of
stock held more than 6 months. This means that,line directly below the line on which you reported its stock from you or a related party.
Page 62 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 63 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
if you buy certain replacement stock and make You must make the choice to postpone gain 2. You acquired the stock after December 2 1,
the choice described in this section, you post- 2000.no later than the due date (including extensions)
pone part or all of your gain. for filing your tax return for the year in which you
You postpone the gain by adjusting the basis sold the stock. If your original return was filed on Condition (1) will still be met if the corporationof the replacement stock as described in Basis time, you may make the choice on an amended ceased to qualify after the 5-year period thatof replacement stock, later. This postpones your return filed no later than 6 months after the due begins on the date you acquired the stock. How-gain until the year you dispose of the replace- date of your return (excluding extensions). Enter ever, the gain that qualifies for the 60% exclu-ment stock. “Filed pursuant to section 301.9100-2” at the top sion cannot be more than the gain you wouldYou can make this choice if you meet all the of the amended return, and file it at the same have had if you had sold the stock on the datefollowing tests. address you used for your original return. the corporation ceased to qualify.
• You buy replacement stock during the For more information about empowerment
60-day period beginning on the date of the zone businesses, see Publication 954, Tax In-Section 1202 Exclusionsale. centives for Distressed Communities.
You generally can exclude from your income up• The replacement stock is qualified small
Rollover of Gainto 50% of your gain from the sale or trade ofbusiness stock.
qualified small business stock held by you for From Sale of• The replacement stock continues to meet more than 5 years. The exclusion can be up to Empowerment Zone Assetsthe active business requirement for small 60% for certain empowerment zone businessbusiness stock for at least the first 6 stock. See Empowerment zone business stock, You may qualify for a tax-free rollover of certainmonths after you buy it. later. gains from the sale of qualified empowerment
The eligible gain minus your section 1202 zone assets. This means that if you buy certain
Amount of gain recognized. If you make the exclusion is a 28% rate gain. See Capital Gain replacement property and make the choice de-
choice described in this section, you must rec- Tax Rates, later. scribed in this section, you postpone part or all of
ognize the capital gain only up to the following the recognition of your gain.
SSBIC stock. If the stock is specialized smallamount: You qualify to make this choice if you meet
business investment company (SSBIC) stock all the following tests.• The amount realized on the sale, minus that you bought as replacement property for
• You hold a qualified empowerment zone• The cost of any qualified small business publicly traded securities you sold at a gain, you asset for more than 1 year and sell it at astock you bought during the 60-day period must reduce the basis of the stock by the gain.beginning on the date of sale (and did not amount of any postponed gain on that earlier
previously take into account on an earlier sale, as explained earlier under Rollover of Gain • Your gain from the sale is a capital gain.
sale of qualified small business stock). From Publicly Traded Securities. But do not re- • During the 60-day period beginning on theduce your basis by that amount when figuring date of the sale, you buy a replacementyour section 1202 exclusion.If this amount is less than the amount of your qualified empowerment zone asset in the
capital gain, you can postpone the rest of that same zone as the asset sold.Limit on eligible gain. The amount of yourgain. If this amount equals or is more than the gain from the stock of any one issuer that isamount of your capital gain, you must recognize eligible for the exclusion in 2007 is limited to the Any part of the gain that is ordinarythe full amount of your gain. greater of: income cannot be postponed and must
be recognized.CAUTION
!
Basis of replacement stock. You must sub- • Ten times your basis in all qualified stock
tract the amount of postponed gain from the of the issuer that you sold or exchanged
Qualified empowerment zone asset. Thisbasis of your replacement stock. during the year, or
means certain stock or partnership interests in• $10 million ($5 million for married individu-Holding period of replacement stock. Your an enterprise zone business. It also includesholding period for the replacement stock in- als filing separately) minus the amount of certain tangible property used in an enterprisecludes your holding period for the stock sold, gain from the stock of the same issuer that zone business. You must have acquired theexcept for the purpose of applying the 6-month you used to figure your exclusion in earlier asset after December 21, 2000.holding period requirement for choosing to roll years.
over the gain on its sale. Amount of gain recognized. If you make the
choice described in this section, you must rec-How to report gain. Report the entire gainPass-through entity. A pass-through entity (a ognize gain only up to the following amount:realized from the sale on Schedule D (Formpartnership, S corporation, or mutual fund or
1040), line 8, column (f). Directly below the line • The amount realized on the sale, minusother regulated investment company) also may
on which you report the gain, enter “Sectionmake the choice to postpone gain. The benefit of • The cost of any qualified empowerment1202 exclusion” in column (a) and enter thethe postponed gain applies to your share of the zone asset that you bought during theamount of the allowable exclusion in column (f).entity’s postponed gain if you held an interest in 60-day period beginning on the date ofEnter it as a loss (in parentheses). If you arethe entity for the entire period the entity held the sale (and did not previously take into ac-completing line 18 of Schedule D, enter as astock. count in rolling over gain on an earlier salepositive number the amount of the exclusion onIf a pass-through entity sold qualified small of qualified empowerment zone assets).line 2 of the 28% Rate Gain Worksheet in thebusiness stock held for more than 6 months and
Schedule D instructions. But if you excludedyou held an interest in the entity for the entire
If this amount is equal to or more than the60% of the gain, enter 2/3 of the exclusion.period the entity held the stock, you also may
amount of your gain, you must recognize the fullchoose to postpone gain if you, rather than the
More information. For information about ad- amount of your gain. If this amount is less thanpass-through entity, buy the replacement stock
ditional requirements that may apply, see sec- the amount of your gain, you can postpone thewithin the 60-day period.
tion 1202 of the Internal Revenue Code. rest of your gain by adjusting the basis of yourHow to report gain. Report the entire gain replacement property as described next.realized from the sale on line 1 or line 8 of Empowerment zone business stock. You
Schedule D (Form 1040), whichever is appropri- can exclude up to 60% of your gain if you meet Basis of replacement property. You mustate. To make the choice to postpone the gain, all of the following additional requirements. subtract the amount of postponed gain from theenter “Section 1045 Rollover” in column (a) of basis of the qualified empowerment zone assets1. You sell or trade stock in a corporation thatthe line directly below the line on which you you bought as replacement property.qualifies as an empowerment zone busi-reported the gain. Enter the amount of gain
ness during substantially all of the time youpostponed in column (f). Enter it as a loss (in How to report and postpone capital gain.
held the stock, andparentheses). Report the entire gain realized from the sale on
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 63

Page 64 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Schedule D (Form 1040), line 8, as you other- reporting capital gains and losses from a pas- Nominees. If you receive gross proceeds as a
wise would without regard to the choice to post- sive activity. nominee (that is, the gross proceeds are in your
pone gain. To make the choice to postpone gain, name but actually belong to someone else),Form 1099-B transactions. If you sold prop-enter “Section 1397B Rollover” in column (a) of report on Schedule D, lines 3 and 10, only theerty, such as stocks, bonds, or certain commodi-the line directly below the line on which you proceeds that belong to you. Then add the fol-ties, through a broker, you should receive Formreported the gain. Enter the amount of gain lowing amounts reported to you for 2007 on1099-B or an equivalent statement from the bro-postponed in column (f). Enter it as a loss (in Forms 1099-B and 1099-S (or substitute state-ker. Use the Form 1099-B or equivalent state-parentheses). ments) that you are not reporting on anotherment to complete Schedule D. form or schedule included with your return:Report the gross proceeds shown in box 2 ofMore information. For more information
Form 1099-B as the gross sales price in columnabout empowerment zones, see Publication 1. Proceeds from transactions involving(d) of either line 1 or line 8 of Schedule D,954, Tax Incentives for Distressed Communi- stocks, bonds, and other securities, andwhichever applies. However, if the broker ad-ties. For more information about this rollover of 2. Gross proceeds from real estate transac-vises you, in box 2 of Form 1099-B, that grossgain, see section 1397B of the Internal Revenue tions (other than the sale of your mainproceeds (gross sales price) less commissionsCode.
and option premiums were reported to the IRS, home if you are not required to report it).
enter that net sales price in column (d) of either
line 1 or line 8 of Schedule D, whichever applies. If the total of (1) and (2) is more than the total ofIf the net sales price is entered in column (d),Reporting Capital lines 3 and 10, attach a statement to your returndo not include the commissions and option pre- explaining the reason for the difference.miums in column (e).Gains and Losses File Form 1099-B or Form 1099-S with theSection 1256 contracts and straddles. IRS. If you received gross proceeds as a nomi-This section discusses how to report your capital Use Form 6781 to report gains and losses from nee in 2007, you must file a Form 1099-B orgains and losses on Schedule D (Form 1040). section 1256 contracts and straddles before en- Form 1099-S for those proceeds with the IRS.Enter your sales and trades of stocks, bonds, tering these amounts on Schedule D. Include a Send the Form 1099-B or Form 1099-S with aetc., and real estate (if not reported on Form copy of Form 6781 with your income tax return. Form 1096, Annual Summary and Transmittal of4684, 4797, 6252, 6781, or 8824) on line 1 of Market discount bonds. Report the sale or U.S. Information Returns, to your Internal Reve-Part I or line 8 of Part II, as appropriate. Include trade of a market discount bond on Schedule D nue Service Center by February 28, 2008all these transactions even if you did not receive (Form 1040), line 1 or line 8. If the sale or trade (March 31, 2008, if you file Form 1099-B or Forma Form 1099-B or 1099-S (or substitute state- results in a gain and you did not choose to 1099-S electronically). Give the actual owner ofment). You can use Schedule D-1 as a continua- include market discount in income currently, the proceeds Copy B of the Form 1099-B ortion schedule to report more transactions. enter “Accrued Market Discount” on the next line Form 1099-S by January 31, 2008. On FormBe sure to add all sales price entries in col- in column (a) and the amount of the accrued 1099-B, you should be listed as the “Payer.” Theumn (d) of lines 1 and 2 and enter the total on market discount as a loss in column (f). Also other owner should be listed as the “Recipient.”line 3. Also add all sales price entries in column report the amount of accrued market discount as On Form 1099-S, you should be listed as the(d) of lines 8 and 9 and enter the total on line 10. interest income on Schedule B (Form 1040), lineThen add the following amounts reported to you “Filer.” The other owner should be listed as the1, and identify it as “Accrued Market Discount.”for 2007 on Forms 1099-B and Forms 1099-S “Transferor.” You do not, however, have to file a
(or on substitute statements): Form 1099-B or Form 1099-S to show proceedsForm 1099-S transactions. If you sold or
for your spouse. For more information about thetraded reportable real estate, you generally• Proceeds from transactions involving reporting requirements and the penalties for fail-should receive from the real estate reportingstocks, bonds, and other securities, and ure to file (or furnish) certain information returns,person a Form 1099-S, Proceeds From Real
• Gross proceeds from real estate transac- see the General Instructions for Forms 1099,Estate Transactions, showing the gross pro-
tions (other than the sale of your main 1098, 5498, and W-2G.ceeds.
home if you had no taxable gain) not re- “Reportable real estate” is defined as any
ported on another form or schedule. present or future ownership interest in any of the Sale of property bought at various times. If
following: you sell a block of stock or other property that
you bought at various times, report theIf this total is more than the total of lines 3 and • Improved or unimproved land, including air short-term gain or loss from the sale on one line10, attach a statement to your return explaining space, in Part I of Schedule D and the long-term gain orthe difference.
• Inherently permanent structures, including loss on one line in Part II. Enter “Various” in
any residential, commercial, or industrial column (b) for the “Date acquired.” See theInstallment sales. You cannot use the install-
building, Comprehensive Example later in this chapter.ment method to report a gain from the sale of
stock or securities traded on an established se- • A condominium unit and its accessory fix-
curities market. You must report the entire gain Sale expenses. Add to your cost or other ba-tures and common elements, including
in the year of sale (the year in which the trade sis any expense of sale such as broker’s fees,land, and
date occurs). commissions, state and local transfer taxes, and• Stock in a cooperative housing corporation option premiums. Enter this adjusted amount in(as defined in section 216 of the InternalAt-risk rules. Special at-risk rules apply to column (e) of either Part I or Part II of ScheduleRevenue Code).most income-producing activities. These rules D, whichever applies, unless you reported the
limit the amount of loss you can deduct to the net sales price amount in column (d).A “real estate reporting person” could includeamount you risk losing in the activity. The at-risk
the buyer’s attorney, your attorney, the title orrules also apply to a loss from the sale or trade of Short-term gains and losses. Capital gain orescrow company, a mortgage lender, your bro-an asset used in an activity to which the at-risk loss on the sale or trade of investment propertyker, the buyer’s broker, or the person acquiringrules apply. For more information, see Publica- held 1 year or less is a short-term capital gain orthe biggest interest in the property.tion 925, Passive Activity and At-Risk Rules. loss. You report it in Part I of Schedule D. If theYour Form 1099-S will show the gross pro-Use Form 6198, At-Risk Limitations, to figure amount you report in column (f) is a loss, show itceeds from the sale or exchange in box 2. Fol-the amount of loss you can deduct. in parentheses.low the instructions for Schedule D to report
You combine your share of short-term capitalPassive activity gains and losses. If you these transactions, and include them on line 1 or
gain or loss from partnerships, S corporations,have gains or losses from a passive activity, you 8 as appropriate. However, report like-kind ex-
and fiduciaries, and any short-term capital lossmay also have to report them on Form 8582. In changes on Form 8824 instead.
carryover, with your other short-term capitalsome cases, the loss may be limited under the It is unlawful for any real estate reporting
gains and losses to figure your net short-termpassive activity rules. Refer to Form 8582 and its person to separately charge you for complying
capital gain or loss on line 7 of Schedule D.separate instructions for more information about with the requirement to file Form 1099-S.
Page 64 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 65 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Long-term gains and losses. A capital gain You can report your capital gain distributions the current year’s allowable deduction into ac-
on line 10 of Form 1040A, instead of on Form count, whether or not you claimed it and whetheror loss on the sale or trade of investment prop-
1040, if both of the following are true. or not you filed a return for the current year.erty held more than 1 year is a long-term capital
When you carry over a loss, it remains longgain or loss. You report it in Part II of Schedule • None of the Forms 1099-DIV (or substitute
term or short term. A long-term capital loss youD. If the amount you report in column (f) is a loss, statements) you received have an amount
carry over to the next tax year will reduce thatshow it in parentheses. in box 2b, 2c, or 2d.
year’s long-term capital gains before it reducesYou also report the following in Part II of • You do not have to file Form 1040 for any that year’s short-term capital gains.Schedule D: other capital gains or losses.
Figuring your carryover. The amount of• Undistributed long-term capital gains from your capital loss carryover is the amount of your
Total net gain or loss. To figure your total neta mutual fund (or other regulated invest- total net loss that is more than the lesser of:
gain or loss, combine your net short-term capitalment company) or real estate investment
gain or loss (line 7) with your net long-term 1. Your allowable capital loss deduction fortrust (REIT),
capital gain or loss (line 15). Enter the result on the year, or
• Your share of long-term capital gains or Schedule D, Part III, line 16. If your losses are 2. Your taxable income increased by your al-losses from partnerships, S corporations, more than your gains, see Capital Losses, next. lowable capital loss deduction for the yearand fiduciaries, If both lines 15 and 16 are gains and line 43 of and your deduction for personal exemp-Form 1040 is more than zero, see Capital Gain• All capital gain distributions from mutual tions.Tax Rates, later.funds and REITs not reported directly on If your deductions are more than your grossline 10 of Form 1040A or line 13 of Form income for the tax year, use your negative tax-Capital Losses1040, and able income in computing the amount in item (2).
If your capital losses are more than your capital• Long-term capital loss carryovers. Complete Worksheet 4-1 to determine the
gains, you can claim a capital loss deduction. part of your capital loss for 2007 that you can
Report the deduction on line 13 of Form 1040,The result after combining these items with carry over to 2008.
enclosed in parentheses.your other long-term capital gains and losses is
Example. Bob and Gloria sold securities inyour net long-term capital gain or loss (line 15 of Limit on deduction. Your allowable capital 2007. The sales resulted in a capital loss ofSchedule D). loss deduction, figured on Schedule D, is the $7,000. They had no other capital transactions.
Capital gain distributions only. You do lesser of: Their taxable income was $26,000. On their joint
not have to file Schedule D if both of the follow- 2007 return, they can deduct $3,000. The un-• $3,000 ($1,500 if you are married and file
ing are true. used part of the loss, $4,000 ($7,000 − $3,000),a separate return), or
can be carried over to 2008.• The only amounts you would have to re- • Your total net loss as shown on line 16 of If their capital loss had been $2,000, theirport on Schedule D are capital gain distri- Schedule D. capital loss deduction would have been $2,000.butions from box 2a of Form 1099-DIV (or They would have no carryover.You can use your total net loss to reduce yoursubstitute statement). income dollar for dollar, up to the $3,000 limit. Use short-term losses first. When you fig-• You do not have an amount in box 2b, 2c, ure your capital loss carryover, use yourCapital loss carryover. If you have a total netor 2d of any Form 1099-DIV (or substitute short-term capital losses first, even if you in-loss on line 16 of Schedule D that is more thanstatement). curred them after a long-term capital loss. If youthe yearly limit on capital loss deductions, you
have not reached the limit on the capital losscan carry over the unused part to the next year
deduction after using the short-term capitalIf both of the above statements are true, report and treat it as if you had incurred it in that next
losses, use the long-term capital losses until youyour capital gain distributions directly on line 13 year. If part of the loss is still unused, you can
reach the limit.of Form 1040 and check the box on line 13. Also, carry it over to later years until it is completely
used up.use the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Decedent’s capital loss. A capital loss
Tax Worksheet in the Form 1040 instructions to sustained by a decedent during his or her lastWhen you figure the amount of any capital
tax year (or carried over to that year from anfigure your tax. loss carryover to the next year, you must take
Worksheet 4-1. Capital Loss Carryover Worksheet Keep for Your Records
Use this worksheet to figure your capital loss carryovers from 2007 to 2008 if Schedule D, line 21, is a loss and (a) that loss is a
smaller loss than the loss on Schedule D, line 16, or (b) Form 1040, line 41, is less than zero. Otherwise, you do not have any
carryovers. 
1. Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 41. If a loss, enclose the amount in parentheses ............. 1.
2. Enter the loss from Schedule D, line 21, as a positive amount ................................ 2.
3. Combine lines 1 and 2. If zero or less, enter -0- .......................................... 3.
4. Enter the smaller of line 2 or line 3 ................................................... 4.
If line 7 of Schedule D is a loss, go to line 5; otherwise, enter -0- on line 5 and go to line 9.
5. Enter the loss from Schedule D, line 7, as a positive amount ................................. 5.
6. Enter any gain from Schedule D, line 15. If a loss, enter -0- .................... 6.
7. Add lines 4 and 6 ............................................................... 7.
8. Short-term capital loss carryover to 2008.  Subtract line 7 from line 5. If zero or less, enter -0- ....... 8.
If line 15 of Schedule D is a loss, go to line 9; otherwise, skip lines 9 through 13.
9. Enter the loss from Schedule D, line 15, as a positive amount ................................ 9.
10. Enter any gain from Schedule D, line 7 ................................... 10.
11. Subtract line 5 from line 4. If zero or less, enter -0- ........................... 11.
12. Add lines 10 and 11 ............................................................. 12.
13. Long-term capital loss carryover to 2008.  Subtract line 12 from line 9. If zero or less, enter -0- ...... 13.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 65

Page 66 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Taxearlier year) can be deducted only on the final from the sale of qualified small business stock
Worksheet. If you do not have to use thereturn filed for the decedent. The capital loss minus the section 1202 exclusion.
Schedule D Tax Worksheet (as explainedlimits discussed earlier still apply in this situa- Collectibles gain or loss. This is gain or above) and any of the following apply, use thetion. The decedent’s estate cannot deduct any loss from the sale or trade of a work of art, rug, Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Work-of the loss or carry it over to following years. antique, metal (such as gold, silver, and plati- sheet in the instructions for Form 1040 or FormJoint and separate returns. If you and your num bullion), gem, stamp, coin, or alcoholic bev- 1040A (whichever you file) to figure your tax.spouse once filed separate returns and are now erage held more than 1 year.
• You received qualified dividends. (Seefiling a joint return, combine your separate capi- Collectibles gain includes gain from the sale
Qualified Dividends in chapter 1.)tal loss carryovers. However, if you and your of an interest in a partnership, S corporation, or
spouse once filed a joint return and are now trust due to unrealized appreciation of col- • You do not have to file Schedule D andfiling separate returns, any capital loss carryover lectibles. you received capital gain distributions.from the joint return can be deducted only on the (See Capital gain distributions only, ear-Gain on qualified small business stock. Ifreturn of the spouse who actually had the loss. lier.)you realized a gain from qualified small business
stock that you held more than 5 years, you • Schedule D, lines 15 and 16, are bothCapital Gain Tax Rates generally can exclude up to 50% of your gain more than zero.
from your income. The exclusion can be up toThe tax rates that apply to a net capital gain are 60% for certain empowerment zone businessgenerally lower than the tax rates that apply to Alternative minimum tax. These capital gainstock. The eligible gain minus your section 1202other income. These lower rates are called the rates are also used in figuring alternative mini-exclusion is a 28% rate gain. See Gains onmaximum capital gain rates. mum tax.Qualified Small Business Stock , earlier in thisThe term “net capital gain” means the
chapter.amount by which your net long-term capital gain Comprehensive Examplefor the year is more than your net short-term Unrecaptured section 1250 gain. Generally,capital loss. Emily Jones is single and, in addition to wagesthis is any part of your capital gain from sellingFor 2007, the maximum capital gain rates from her job, she has income from stocks andsection 1250 property (real property) that is dueare 5%, 15%, 25%, and 28%. See Table 4-2 for other securities. For the 2007 tax year, she hadto depreciation (but not more than your net sec-details. the following capital gains and losses, which shetion 1231 gain), reduced by any net loss in the
reports on Schedule D. Her filled-in Schedule DIf you figure your tax using the maxi- 28% group. Use the Unrecaptured Section 1250
is shown at the end of this example.mum capital gain rate and the regular Gain Worksheet in the Schedule D instructions
tax computation results in a lower tax, to figure your unrecaptured section 1250 gain.
TIP
Capital gains and losses—Schedule D.the regular tax computation applies. For more information about section 1250 prop- Emily sold stock in two different companies thaterty and section 1231 gain, see chapter 3 of she held for less than a year. In June, she soldExample. All of your net capital gain is from Publication 544. 100 shares of Trucking Co. stock that she hadselling collectibles, so the capital gain rate would bought in February. She had an adjusted basisTax computation using maximum capitalbe 28%. Because you are single and your tax- of $1,150 in the stock and sold it for $400, for agains rates. Use the Qualified Dividends andable income is $25,000, none of your taxable loss of $750. In July, she sold 25 shares ofCapital Gain Tax Worksheet or the Schedule Dincome will be taxed above the 15% rate. The Computer Co. stock that she bought in June.28% rate does not apply. Tax Worksheet (whichever applies) to figure She had an adjusted basis in the stock of $2,000your tax if you have qualified dividends or netInvestment interest deducted. If you claim a and sold it for $2,500, for a gain of $500. Shecapital gain. You have net capital gain if Sched-deduction for investment interest, you may have reports these short-term transactions on line 1 inule D, lines 15 and 16, are both gains.to reduce the amount of your net capital gain Part I of Schedule D.
that is eligible for the capital gain tax rates. Schedule D Tax Worksheet. You must use Emily had three other stock sales that she
Reduce it by the amount of the net capital gain the Schedule D Tax Worksheet in the Schedule reports as long-term transactions on line 8 in
you choose to include in investment income D instructions to figure your tax if: Part II of Schedule D. In February, she sold 60
when figuring the limit on your investment inter- shares of Car Co. for $2,100. She had inherited• You have to file Schedule D, andest deduction. This is done on the Schedule D the Car stock from her father. Its fair market
• Schedule D, line 18 (28% rate gain) or lineTax Worksheet or the Qualified Dividends and value at the time of his death was $2,500, which
19 (unrecaptured section 1250 gain), isCapital Gain Tax Worksheet. For more informa- became her basis. Her loss on the sale is $400.
more than zero.tion about the limit on investment interest, see Because she had inherited the stock, her loss is
Interest Expenses in chapter 3. a long-term loss, regardless of how long she andSee the Comprehensive Example  later for an her father actually held the stock. She enters theexample of how to figure your tax using the28% rate gain. This gain includes gain or loss loss in column (f) of line 8.Schedule D Tax Worksheet.from the sale of collectibles and the eligible gain In June, she sold 500 shares of Furniture Co.
stock for $5,000. She had bought 100 of thoseTable 4-2. What Is Your Maximum Capital Gain Rate? shares in 1996, for $1,000. She had bought 100
more shares in 1998 for $2,200, and an addi-THEN your maximum tional 300 shares in 2001 for $1,500. Her totalIF your net capital gain is from ... capital gain rate is ... basis in the stock is $4,700. She has a $300
($5,000 − $4,700) gain on this sale, which she
collectibles gain 28%
enters in column (f) of line 8.
eligible gain on qualified small business stock minus the In December, she sold 20 shares of Toy Co.section 1202 exclusion 28% stock for $4,100. This was qualified small busi-
ness stock that she had bought in Septemberunrecaptured section 1250 gain 25%
2002. Her basis is $1,100, so she has a $3,000
other gain1 and the regular tax rate that would apply is 25% gain, which she enters in column (f) of line 8.
or higher 15% Because she held the stock more than 5 years,
she has a $1,500 section 1202 exclusion. Sheother gain1 and the regular tax rate that would apply is lower claims the exclusion on the line below by enter-than 25% 5% ing $1,500 as a loss in column (f). She also
enters the exclusion as a positive amount on line1“Other gain” means any gain that is not collectibles gain, gain on small business stock, or
unrecaptured section 1250 gain. 2 of the 28% Rate Gain Worksheet.
She received a Form 1099-B (not shown)
from her broker for each of these transactions.
Page 66 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 67 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
The entries shown in box 2 of these forms total from her broker for these transactions. Box 11 report her loss carryover for the 2007 tax year
$14,100. shows her combined profit of $15,000 ($27,000 without refiguring it.
− $1,000 − $11,000). She reports this gain inReconciliation of Forms 1099-B. Emily Part I of Form 6781 (not shown). She showsmakes sure that the total of the amounts re- Tax computation. Because Emily has gains40% ($6,000) as short-term gain on line 4 ofported in column (d) of lines 3 and 10 of Sched- on both lines 15 and 16 of Schedule D, sheSchedule D and 60% ($9,000) as long-term gainule D is not less than the total of the amounts checks the “Yes” box on line 17 and goes to lineon line 11 of Schedule D.shown on the Forms 1099-B she received from 18. On line 18 she enters $1,000 from line 7 ofThe Form 1099-B that Emily received fromher broker. For 2007, the total of lines 3 and 10 the 28% Rate Gain Worksheet. Because line 18her broker, XYZ Trading Co., is shown later.of Schedule D is $14,100, which is the same is greater than zero, she checks the “No” box on
amount reported by the broker on Forms 1099-B line 20 and uses the Schedule D Tax WorksheetCapital loss carryover from 2006. Emily
(not shown). to figure her tax.has a capital loss carryover to 2007 of $800, of
which $300 is short-term capital loss, and $500 After entering the gain from line 16 on line 13Form 6781. On June 2, 2007, Emily had a
is long-term capital loss. She enters these of her Form 1040, she completes the rest ofrealized loss from a regulated futures contract of
amounts on lines 6 and 14 of Schedule D. She Form 1040 through line 43. She enters the$11,000. She also had an unrealized marked to
also enters the $500 long-term capital loss car- amount from that line, $30,000, on line 1 of themarket gain on open contracts of $27,000 at the
ryover on line 5 of the 28% Rate Gain Work- Schedule D Tax Worksheet. After filling out theend of 2007. She had reported an unrealized
sheet.marked to market gain of $1,000 on her 2006 tax rest of that worksheet, she figures her tax is
She kept the completed Capital Loss Carry-return. (This $1,000 must be subtracted from her $3,223. This is less than the tax she would have
over Worksheet in her 2006 edition of Publica-2007 profit.) These amounts are shown in boxes figured without the capital gain tax rates, $4,113.
8, 9, and 10 of the Form 1099-B she received tion 550 (not shown), so she could properly
XYZ Trading Co.
203 Bond St.
Any City, PA 18605
10-1111111 111-00-1111
Emily Jones
8307 Daisy Lane
Hometown, AL 36309
RFC
(11,000)
27,000
1,000
15,000
Copy B
For Recipient
This is important tax
information and is
being furnished to the
Internal Revenue
Service. If you are
required to file a return,
a negligence penalty or
other sanction may be
imposed on you if this
income is taxable and
the IRS determines that
it has not been
reported.
OMB No. 1545-0715PAYER’S name, street address, city, state, ZIP code, and telephone no. Date of sale or exchange1a Proceeds From
Broker and
Barter Exchange
TransactionsCUSIP no.1b
Stocks, bonds, etc.2 Reported
to IRS
Gross proceeds
$
Gross proceeds less commissions and option premiums
PAYER’S federal identification number RECIPIENT’S identification number Bartering3 Federal income tax withheld4
$$
RECIPIENT’S name No. of shares exchanged 5
Street address (including apt. no.) Description 7
City, state, and ZIP code
Account number (see instructions)
Department of the Treasury - Internal Revenue ServiceForm 1099-B
/H20854
(keep for your records)
CORRECTED (if checked)
Form 1099-B
8
$
Profit or (loss) realized in
2007
9 Unrealized profit or (loss) on
open contracts—12/31/2006
10 Unrealized profit or (loss) on
open contracts–12/31/2007
11 Aggregate profit or (loss)
$
$$
Classes of stock
exchanged
6
CORPORATION’S name
12 If the box is checked, the recipient cannot take a loss on
their tax return based on the amount in box 2
2007
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 67

Page 68 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Emily Jones 111 00 1111
100 sh
Trucking Co.
25 sh
Computer Co.
2-12-07
6-29-07
6-12-07
7-30-07
400
2,500
1,150
2,000 500
2,900
6,000
300
60 sh
Car Co.
500 sh
Furniture Co.
20 sh
Toy Co.
INHERITED
VARIOUS
9-28-02
2-3-07
6-29-07
12-15-07
2,100
5,000
4,100
11,200
2,500
4,700
1,100
300
500
(750)
5,450
(400)
3,000
9,000
9,900
Section 1202
exclusion (1,500)
OMB No. 1545-0074
SCHEDULE D Capital Gains and Losses
(Form 1040)
/H17075Attach to Form 1040 or Form 1040NR. /H17075See Instructions for Schedule D (Form 1040).
Department of the Treasury
Internal Revenue Service
Attachment
Sequence No. 12/H17075Use Schedule D-1 to list additional transactions for lines 1 and 8.
Your social security numberName(s) shown on return
Short-Term Capital Gains and Losses—Assets Held One Year or Less
(f) Gain or (loss)
Subtract (e) from (d)
(e) Cost or other basis
(see page D-7 of
the instructions)
(a) Description of property
(Example: 100 sh. XYZ Co.)
(d) Sales price
(see page D-7 of
the instructions)
(c) Date sold
(Mo., day, yr.)
1
Enter your short-term totals, if any, from Schedule D-1,
line 2
2
Total short-term sales price amounts. Add lines 1 and 2 in
column (d)
3
3
5
Short-term gain from Form 6252 and short-term gain or (loss) from Forms 4684, 6781, and 8824
5
6
6
Net short-term gain or (loss) from partnerships, S corporations, estates, and trusts from
Schedule(s) K-1
7
Short-term capital loss carryover. Enter the amount, if any, from line 10 of your Capital Loss
Carryover Worksheet on page D-7 of the instructions
Net short-term capital gain or (loss). Combine lines 1 through 6 in column (f)
Long-Term Capital Gains and Losses—Assets Held More Than One Year
8
Enter your long-term totals, if any, from Schedule D-1,
line 9
9
10 Total long-term sales price amounts. Add lines 8 and 9 in
column (d) 10
11
Gain from Form 4797, Part I; long-term gain from Forms 2439 and 6252; and long-term gain or
(loss) from Forms 4684, 6781, and 8824
11
12
12
13
Net long-term gain or (loss) from partnerships, S corporations, estates, and trusts from
Schedule(s) K-1
14
Capital gain distributions. See page D-2 of the instructions
14
15
Long-term capital loss carryover. Enter the amount, if any, from line 15 of your Capital Loss
Carryover Worksheet on page D-7 of the instructions ( )
Net long-term capital gain or (loss). Combine lines 8 through 14 in column (f). Then go to
Part III on the back 15
For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see Form 1040 or Form 1040NR instructions. Schedule D (Form 1040) 2007Cat. No. 11338H
()
4 4
Part I
Part II
13
(b) Date
acquired
(Mo., day, yr.)
2
9
(99)
(a) Description of property
(Example: 100 sh. XYZ Co.)
(c) Date sold
(Mo., day, yr.)
(b) Date
acquired
(Mo., day, yr.)
(e) Cost or other basis
(see page D-7 of
the instructions)
(d) Sales price
(see page D-7 of
the instructions)
7
(f) Gain or (loss)
Subtract (e) from (d)
2007
Page 68 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 69 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
15,350
1,000
/H12011
/H12011
Schedule D (Form 1040) 2007
Summary
Combine lines 7 and 15 and enter the result16 16
18
Part III
Page 2
18 Enter the amount, if any, from line 7 of the 28% Rate Gain Worksheet on page D-8 of the
instructions /H17075
Are lines 18 and 19 both zero or blank?
19
Schedule D (Form 1040) 2007
21
Enter the amount, if any, from line 18 of the Unrecaptured Section 1250 Gain Worksheet on 
page D-9 of the instructions /H17075
20
If line 16 is a loss, enter here and on Form 1040, line 13, or Form 1040NR, line 14, the smaller
of:
21
19
● The loss on line 16 or
● ($3,000), or if married filing separately, ($1,500) /H20854
Yes. Complete Form 1040 through line 43, or Form 1040NR through line 40. Then complete
the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet on page 35 of the Instructions for
Form 1040 (or in the Instructions for Form 1040NR). Do not complete lines 21 and 22 below.
No. Complete Form 1040 through line 43, or Form 1040NR through line 40. Then complete the
Schedule D Tax Worksheet on page D-10 of the instructions. Do not complete lines 21 and
22 below.
Do you have qualified dividends on Form 1040, line 9b, or Form 1040NR, line 10b?22
Yes. Complete Form 1040 through line 43, or Form 1040NR through line 40. Then complete
the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet on page 35 of the Instructions for
Form 1040 (or in the Instructions for Form 1040NR).
No. Complete the rest of Form 1040 or Form 1040NR.
( )
Are lines 15 and 16 both gains?17
Yes. Go to line 18.
No. Skip lines 18 through 21, and go to line 22.
Note. When figuring which amount is smaller, treat both amounts as positive numbers.
If line 16 is:
● A gain, enter the amount from line 16 on Form 1040, line 13, or Form 1040NR, line 14. Then
go to line 17 below.
● A loss, skip lines 17 through 20 below. Then go to line 21. Also be sure to complete line 22.
● Zero, skip lines 17 through 21 below and enter -0- on Form 1040, line 13, or Form 1040NR,
line 14. Then go to line 22.
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 69

Page 70 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Schedule D Tax Worksheet
Complete this worksheet only if line 18 or line 19 of Schedule D is more than zero. Otherwise, complete the Qualified Dividends and
Capital Gain Tax Worksheet on page 35 of the Instructions for Form 1040 (or in the Instructions for Form 1040NR) to figure your tax.
Exception: Do not use the Qualified Dividends and Capital Gain Tax Worksheet or this worksheet to figure your tax if:
• Line 15 or line 16 of Schedule D is zero or less and you have no qualified dividends on Form 1040, line 9b (or Form 1040NR, line 10b); or
• Form 1040, line 43 (or Form 1040NR, line 40) is zero or less.
Instead, see the instructions for Form 1040, line 44 (or Form 1040NR, line 41).
1. Enter your taxable income from Form 1040, line 43 (or Form 1040NR, line 40) ............................ 1. 30,000
2. Enter your qualified dividends from Form 1040, line 9b (or Form
1040NR, line 10b) ................................ 2.
3. Enter the amount from Form 4952 (used to
figure investment interest expense deduction),
line 4g ........................... 3.
4. Enter the amount from Form 4952, line 4e* . . . 4.
5. Subtract line 4 from line 3. If zero or less, enter -0- .......... 5.
6. Subtract line 5 from line 2. If zero or less, enter -0- ...................... 6.
7. Enter the smaller of line 15 or line 16 of Schedule D ........ 7. 9,900
8. Enter the smaller of line 3 or line 4 .................... 8.
9. Subtract line 8 from line 7. If zero or less, enter -0- ...................... 9. 9,900
10. Add lines 6 and 9 ......................................................... 10. 9,900
11. Add lines 18 and 19 of Schedule D ................................ 11. 1,000
12. Enter the smaller of line 9 or line 11 ............................................ 12. 1,000
13. Subtract line 12 from line 10. ............................................................. 13. 8,900
14. Subtract line 13 from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0-. .............................................. 14. 21,100
15. Enter the smaller of:
}
• The amount on line 1 or
• $31,850 if single or married filing separately; ....... 15. 30,000
$63,700 if married filing jointly or qualifying widow(er); or
$42,650 if head of household
16. Enter the smaller of line 14 or line 15 .............................. 16. 21,100
17. Subtract line 10 from line 1. If zero or less, enter -0- ......... 17. 20,100
18. Enter the larger of line 16 or line 17 ........................................... /H1707518. 21,100
If lines 15 and 16 are the same, skip lines 19 and 20 and go to line 21. Otherwise, go to line 19.
19. Subtract line 16 from line 15 ................................................ /H1707519. 8,900
20. Multiply line 19 by 5% (.05) .............................................................. 20. 445
If lines 1 and 15 are the same, skip lines 21 through 33 and go to line 34. Otherwise, go to line 21.
21. Enter the smaller of line 1 or line 13 ............................... 21.
22. Enter the amount from line 19 (if line 19 is blank, enter -0-) ................ 22.
23. Subtract line 22 from line 21. If zero or less, enter -0- ............................... /H1707523.
24. Multiply line 23 by 15% (.15) .............................................................. 24.
If Schedule D, line 19, is zero or blank, skip lines 25 through 30 and go to line 31. Otherwise, go to line 25.
25. Enter the smaller of line 9 above or Schedule D, line 19 .................. 25.
26. Add lines 10 and 18 .............................. 26.
27. Enter the amount from line 1 above .................... 27.
28. Subtract line 27 from line 26. If zero or less, enter -0- .................... 28.
29. Subtract line 28 from line 25. If zero or less, enter -0- ............................... /H1707529.
30. Multiply line 29 by 25% (.25) .............................................................. 30.
If Schedule D, line 18, is zero or blank, skip lines 31 through 33 and go to line 34. Otherwise, go to line 31.
31. Add lines 18, 19, 23, and 29 .................................................. 31.
32. Subtract line 31 from line 1 ................................................... 32.
33. Multiply line 32 by 28% (.28) .............................................................. 33.
34. Figure the tax on the amount on line 18. Use the Tax Table or Tax Computation Worksheet, whichever applies ...... 34. 2,778
35. Add lines 20, 24, 30, 33, and 34 ........................................................... 35. 3,223
36. Figure the tax on the amount on line 1. Use the Tax Table or Tax Computation Worksheet, whichever applies ....... 36. 4,113
37. Tax on all taxable income (including capital gains and qualified dividends).  Enter the smaller of line 35 or line 36.
Also enter this amount on Form 1040, line 44 (or Form 1040NR, line 41) ................................ 37. 3,223
*If applicable, enter instead the smaller amount you entered on the dotted line next to line 4e of Form 4952.
Page 70 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 71 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
28% Rate Gain Worksheet—Line 18
1. Enter the total of all collectibles gain or (loss) from items you reported on line 8, column (f), of
Schedules D and D-1 ........................................................... 1.
2. Enter as a positive number the amount of any section 1202 exclusion you reported on line 8, column (f),
of Schedules D and D-1, for which you excluded 50% of the gain, plus 2/3 of any section 1202 exclusion
you reported on line 8, column (f), of Schedules D and D-1, for which you excluded 60% of the gain . . . 2. 1,500.00
3. Enter the total of all collectibles gain or (loss) from Form 4684, line 4 (but only if Form 4684, line 15, is
more than zero); Form 6252; Form 6781, Part II; and Form 8824 ............................ 3.
4. Enter the total of any collectibles gain reported to you on:
• Form 1099-DIV, box 2d;
}
............. 4.• Form 2439, box 1d; and
• Schedule K-1 from a partnership, S corporation, estate, or trust.
5. Enter your long-term capital loss carryovers from Schedule D, line 14, and Schedule K-1 (Form 1041), 5. ( 500.00)box 11, code C ................................................................
6. If Schedule D, line 7, is a (loss), enter that (loss) here. Otherwise, enter -0- ..................... 6. -0-
7. Combine lines 1 through 6. If zero or less, enter -0-. If more than zero, also enter this amount on
Schedule D, line 18 ............................................................. 7. 1,000.00
Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property Page 71

Page 72 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
statement should be attached to either yourHow To Report
2007 individual income tax return or a requestSpecial Rules for
for an extension of time to file that return. TheTransactions from trading activities result in cap-
statement must include the following informa-ital gains and losses and must be reported onTraders in Securities
tion.Schedule D (Form 1040). Losses from these
Special rules apply if you are a trader in securi- transactions are subject to the limit on capital • That you are making an election underties in the business of buying and selling securi- losses explained earlier in this chapter. section 475(f) of the Internal Revenueties for your own account. To be engaged in Code.business as a trader in securities, you must Mark-to-market election made. If you made • The first tax year for which the election ismeet all the following conditions.
the mark-to-market election, you should report effective.• You must seek to profit from daily market all gains and losses from trading as ordinary • The trade or business for which you aremovements in the prices of securities and gains and losses in Part II of Form 4797, instead making the election.not from dividends, interest, or capital ap- of as capital gains and losses on Schedule D. In
preciation. that case, securities held at the end of the year If you are not required to file a 2007 incomein your business as a trader are marked to mar-• Your activity must be substantial. tax return, you make the election by placing theket by treating them as if they were sold (and above statement in your books and records no• You must carry on the activity with con- reacquired) for fair market value on the last later than March 15, 2008. Attach a copy of thetinuity and regularity. business day of the year. But do not mark to statement to your 2008 return.market any securities you held for investment. After making the election to change to theThe following facts and circumstances should Report sales from those securities on Schedule mark-to-market method of accounting, you mustbe considered in determining if your activity is a D, not Form 4797. change your method of accounting for securitiessecurities trading business.
under Revenue Procedure 2002-9 (or its suc-• Typical holding periods for securities cessor). Revenue Procedure 2002-9 requiresExpenses. Interest expense and other invest-bought and sold. you to file Form 3115, Application for Change inment expenses that an investor would deduct on
Accounting Method. Follow its instructions. La-• The frequency and dollar amount of your Schedule A (Form 1040) are deducted by a
bel the Form 3115 as filed under “Section 10A oftrades during the year. trader on Schedule C (Form 1040), Profit or the Appendix of Rev. Proc. 2002-9.”Loss From Business, if the expenses are from• The extent to which you pursue the activity Once you make the election, it will apply tothe trading business. Commissions and otherto produce income for a livelihood. 2008 and all later tax years, unless you getcosts of acquiring or disposing of securities are permission from IRS to revoke it. The effect of• The amount of time you devote to the ac- not deductible but must be used to figure gain or making the election is described undertivity. loss. The limit on investment interest expense, Mark-to-market election made, earlier.which applies to investors, does not apply to For more information on this election, seeIf your trading activities are not a business, interest paid or incurred in a trading business. Revenue Procedure 99-17, on page 52 of Inter-you are considered an investor, and not a trader.
nal Revenue Bulletin 1999-7 atIt does not matter whether you call yourself a
www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb99-07.pdf.trader or a “day trader.” Self-employment tax. Gains and losses from
selling securities as part of a trading business
Note. You may be a trader in some securi- are not subject to self-employment tax. This is
ties and have other securities you hold for in- true whether the election is made or not.
vestment. The special rules discussed here do
not apply to the securities held for investment.
You must keep detailed records to distinguish
How To Make the
the securities. The securities held for investment Mark-to-Market Election
must be identified as such in your records on the
To make the mark-to-market election for 2008,day you got them (for example, by holding them
you must file a statement by April 15, 2008. Thisin a separate brokerage account).
Page 72 Chapter 4 Sales and Trades of Investment Property

Page 73 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Internet. You can access the IRS web- and press 1 for automated refund informa-
site at www.irs.gov 24 hours a day, 7 tion or call 1-800-829-1954. Be sure to
days a week to: wait at least 6 weeks from the date you
5. filed your return (3 weeks if you filed elec-• E-file your return. Find out about commer-
tronically). Have your 2007 tax returncial tax preparation and e-file services
available because you will need to knowavailable free to eligible taxpayers.
your social security number, your filing• Check the status of your 2007 refund.How To Get Tax status, and the exact whole dollar amountClick on Where’s My Refund. Wait at least of your refund.6 weeks from the date you filed your re-
Help turn (3 weeks if you filed electronically). Evaluating the quality of our telephoneHave your 2007 tax return available be- services. To ensure IRS representatives givecause you will need to know your socialYou can get help with unresolved tax issues, accurate, courteous, and professional answers,security number, your filing status, and theorder free publications and forms, ask tax ques- we use several methods to evaluate the qualityexact whole dollar amount of your refund.tions, and get information from the IRS in sev- of our telephone services. One method is for a
• Download forms, instructions, and publica-eral ways. By selecting the method that is best second IRS representative to listen in on ortions.for you, you will have quick and easy access to record random telephone calls. Another is to ask
tax help. some callers to complete a short survey at the• Order IRS products online.
end of the call.• Research your tax questions online.
Contacting your Taxpayer Advocate. The Walk-in. Many products and services• Search publications online by topic orTaxpayer Advocate Service (TAS) is an inde- are available on a walk-in basis.keyword.pendent organization within the IRS whose em-
ployees assist taxpayers who are experiencing • View Internal Revenue Bulletins (IRBs)
• Products. You can walk in to many posteconomic harm, who are seeking help in resolv- published in the last few years.
offices, libraries, and IRS offices to pick uping tax problems that have not been resolved • Figure your withholding allowances using certain forms, instructions, and publica-through normal channels, or who believe that an the withholding calculator online at tions. Some IRS offices, libraries, groceryIRS system or procedure is not working as it www.irs.gov/individuals. stores, copy centers, city and county gov-should.
• Determine if Form 6251 must be filed us- ernment offices, credit unions, and officeYou can contact the TAS by calling the TAS ing our Alternative Minimum Tax (AMT) supply stores have a collection of productstoll-free case intake line at 1-877-777-4778 or Assistant. available to print from a CD or photocopyTTY/TDD 1-800-829-4059 to see if you are eligi-
from reproducible proofs. Also, some IRSble for assistance. You can also call or write to • Sign up to receive local and national tax
offices and libraries have the Internal Rev-your local taxpayer advocate, whose phone news by email.
enue Code, regulations, Internal Revenuenumber and address are listed in your local • Get information on starting and operating Bulletins, and Cumulative Bulletins avail-telephone directory and in Publication 1546, a small business. able for research purposes.Taxpayer Advocate Service – Your Voice at the
IRS. You can file Form 911, Request for Tax- • Services. You can walk in to your localpayer Advocate Service Assistance (And Appli- Taxpayer Assistance Center every busi-Phone. Many services are available bycation for Taxpayer Assistance Order), or ask an ness day for personal, face-to-face taxphone.IRS employee to complete it on your behalf. For help. An employee can explain IRS letters,more information, go to www.irs.gov/advocate. request adjustments to your tax account,• Ordering forms, instructions, and publica-Taxpayer Advocacy Panel (TAP). The or help you set up a payment plan. If youtions. Call 1-800-829-3676 to order cur-TAP listens to taxpayers, identifies taxpayer is- need to resolve a tax problem, have ques-rent-year forms, instructions, andsues, and makes suggestions for improving IRS tions about how the tax law applies to yourpublications, and prior-year forms and in-services and customer satisfaction. If you have individual tax return, or you’re more com-structions. You should receive your ordersuggestions for improvements, contact the TAP, fortable talking with someone in person,within 10 days.toll free at 1-888-912-1227 or go to visit your local Taxpayer Assistance• Asking tax questions. Call the IRS withwww.improveirs.org. Center where you can spread out youryour tax questions at 1-800-829-1040. records and talk with an IRS representa-Low Income Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs).
• Solving problems. You can get tive face-to-face. No appointment is nec-LITCs are independent organizations that pro-
face-to-face help solving tax problems essary, but if you prefer, you can call yourvide low income taxpayers with representation
every business day in IRS Taxpayer As-in federal tax controversies with the IRS for free local Center and leave a message re-
sistance Centers. An employee can ex-or for a nominal charge. The clinics also provide questing an appointment to resolve a tax
plain IRS letters, request adjustments totax education and outreach for taxpayers with account issue. A representative will callyour account, or help you set up a pay-limited English proficiency or who speak English you back within 2 business days to sched-ment plan. Call your local Taxpayer Assis-as a second language. Publication 4134, Low ule an in-person appointment at your con-tance Center for an appointment. To findIncome Taxpayer Clinic List, provides informa- venience. To find the number, go to www.the number, go to www.irs.gov/localcon-tion on clinics in your area. It is available at www. irs.gov/localcontacts or look in the phonetacts or look in the phone book underirs.gov or at your local IRS office. book under United States Government, In-United States Government, Internal Reve-
ternal Revenue Service.nue Service.
Free tax services. To find out what services • TTY/TDD equipment. If you have accessare available, get Publication 910, IRS Guide to Mail. You can send your order forto TTY/TDD equipment, call forms, instructions, and publications toFree Tax Services. It contains a list of free tax 1-800-829-4059 to ask tax questions or to the address below. You should receivepublications and describes other free tax infor- order forms and publications. a response within 10 days after your request ismation services, including tax education and
• TeleTax topics. Call 1-800-829-4477 to lis- received.assistance programs and a list of TeleTax top-
ten to pre-recorded messages coveringics.
various tax topics.Accessible versions of IRS published prod- National Distribution Center
ucts are available on request in a variety of P.O. Box 8903• Refund information. To check the status of
alternative formats for people with disabilities. your 2007 refund, call 1-800-829-4477 Bloomington, IL 61702-8903
Chapter 5 How To Get Tax Help Page 73

Page 74 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
CD/DVD for tax products. You can – The first release will ship the beginning • Tax law changes for 2007.
order Publication 1796, IRS Tax Prod- of January 2008. • Tax Map: an electronic research tool anducts CD/DVD, and obtain: – The final release will ship the beginning finding aid.
of March 2008.• Current-year forms, instructions, and pub- • Web links to various government agen-lications. cies, business associations, and IRS orga-Purchase the CD/DVD from National Techni-
• Prior-year forms, instructions, and publica- nizations.cal Information Service (NTIS) at www.irs.gov/tions. cdorders for $35 (no handling fee) or call • “Rate the Product” survey—your opportu-
• Bonus: Historical Tax Products DVD - nity to suggest changes for future editions.1-877-CDFORMS (1-877-233-6767) toll free to
Ships with the final release. buy the CD/DVD for $35 (plus a $5 handling • A site map of the CD to help you navigate
fee). Price is subject to change.• Tax Map: an electronic research tool and the pages of the CD with ease.
finding aid. • An interactive “Teens in Biz” module thatCD for small businesses. Publication
• Tax law frequently asked questions. gives practical tips for teens about starting3207, The Small Business Resource
their own business, creating a businessGuide CD for 2007, is a must for every• Tax Topics from the IRS telephone re- plan, and filing taxes.small business owner or any taxpayer about tosponse system. start a business. This year’s CD includes:
• Fill-in, print, and save features for most tax An updated version of this CD is available• Helpful information, such as how to pre-forms. each year in early April. You can get a free copy
pare a business plan, find financing for by calling 1-800-829-3676 or by visiting www.irs.• Internal Revenue Bulletins. your business, and much more. gov/smallbiz.
• Toll-free and email technical support. • All the business tax forms, instructions,
and publications needed to successfully• The CD which is released twice during the
year. manage a business.
Page 74 Chapter 5 How To Get Tax Help

Page 75 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Glossary
The definitions in this glossary 2. The transaction is one of the Investment interest: The inter- Passive activity: An activity in-
volving the conduct of a trade orare the meanings of the terms as following. est you paid or accrued on money
business in which you do not mate-used in this publication. The same you borrowed that is allocable toa. A straddle, including any rially participate and any rental ac-term used in another publication property held for investment.set of offsetting positions tivity. However, the rental of realmay have a slightly different mean-
on stock. Limited partner: A partner estate is not a passive activity ifing.
whose participation in partnership both of the following are true.b. Any transaction in whichAccrual method: An accounting activities is restricted, and whoseyou acquire property • More than one-half of the per-method under which you report personal liability for partnership(whether or not actively sonal services you performyour income when you earn it, debts is limited to the amount oftraded) at substantially the during the year in all trades orwhether or not you have received it. money or other property that he orsame time that you con- businesses are performed inYou generally deduct your ex- she contributed or may have totract to sell the same prop- real property trades or busi-penses when you incur a liability for contribute.erty or substantially nesses in which you materi-them, rather than when you pay identical property at a price ally participate.Listed option: Any option that isthem. set in the contract. traded on, or subject to the rules of, • You perform more than 750At-risk rules: Rules that limit the a qualified board or exchange.c. Any other transaction that hours of services during theamount of loss you may deduct to is marketed or sold as pro- year in real property trades orthe amount you risk losing in the Marked to market rule: The businesses in which you ma-ducing capital gains from aactivity. treatment of each section 1256 terially participate.transaction described in contract (defined later) held by a(1).Basis: Basis is the amount of taxpayer at the close of the year as Portfolio income: Gross incomeyour investment in property for tax if it were sold for its fair market from interest, dividends, annuities,purposes. The basis of property Demand loan: A loan payable in value on the last business day of or royalties that is not derived in theyou buy is usually the cost. Basis is full at any time upon demand by the the year. ordinary course of a trade or busi-used to figure gain or loss on the lender. ness. It includes gains from thesale or disposition of investment Market discount: The stated re- sale or trade of property (other thanproperty. Dividend: A distribution of demption price of a bond at matur- an interest in a passive activity)money or other property made by a ity minus your basis in the bondBelow-market loan: A demand producing portfolio income or heldcorporation to its shareholders out immediately after you acquire it.loan (defined later) on which inter- for investment.of its earnings and profits. Market discount arises when theest is payable at a rate below the value of a debt obligation de- Premium: The amount by whichapplicable federal rate, or a term Equity option: Any option: creases after its issue date. your cost or other basis in a bondloan where the amount loaned is • To buy or sell stock, or right after you get it is more thanmore than the present value of all Market discount bond: Any the total of all amounts payable onpayments due under the loan. • That is valued directly or indi- bond having market discount ex- the bond after you get it (other thanrectly by reference to any cept:Call: An option that entitles the payments of qualified stated inter-stock or narrow-based secur-purchaser to buy, at any time est).• Short-term obligations withity index.before a specified future date, fixed maturity dates of up to 1 Private activity bond: A bondproperty such as a stated number year from the date of issue,Fair market value: The price at that is part of a state or local gov-of shares of stock at a specified • Tax-exempt obligations thatwhich property would change ernment bond issue of which:price.
you bought before May 1,hands between a willing buyer and
1. More than 10% of the pro-1993,Cash method: An accounting a willing seller, both having reason-
ceeds are to be used for amethod under which you report able knowledge of the relevant • U.S. savings bonds, and private business use, andyour income in the year in which facts.
• Certain installment obliga-you actually or constructively re- 2. More than 10% of the pay-Forgone interest: The amountceive it. You generally deduct your tions. ment of the principal or inter-of interest that would be payable forexpenses in the year you pay them. est is:any period if interest accrued at the Nominee: A person who re-Commodities trader: A person applicable federal rate and was a. Secured by an interest inceives, in his or her name, incomewho is actively engaged in trading payable annually on December 31, property to be used for athat actually belongs to someonesection 1256 contracts and is regis- minus any interest payable on the private business use (orelse.tered with a domestic board of loan for that period. payments for the property),
trade designated as a contract orNonequity option: Any listedForward contract: A contract tomarket by the Commodities Fu- option that is not an equity option, b. Derived from payments fordeliver a substantially fixed amounttures Trading Commission. such as debt options, commodity property (or borrowedof property (including cash) for a futures options, currency options,Commodity future: A contract money) used for a privatesubstantially fixed price. and broad-based stock index op-made on a commodity exchange, business use.
tions.Futures contract: An ex-calling for the sale or purchase of a
change-traded contract to buy orfixed amount of a commodity at a Options dealer: Any person reg- Put: An option that entitles thesell a specified commodity or finan-future date for a fixed price. istered with an appropriate national purchaser to sell, at any timecial instrument at a specified price securities exchange as a marketConversion transaction: Any before a specified future date,at a specified future date. See also maker or specialist in listed op-transaction that you entered into property such as a stated numberCommodity future. tions.after April 30, 1993, that meets of shares of stock at a specified
Gift loan: Any below-market loanboth of these tests. price.Original issue discount (OID):where the forgone interest is in the The amount by which the stated1. Substantially all of your ex- Real estate mortgage invest-nature of a gift.
redemption price at maturity of apected return from the trans- ment conduit (REMIC): An en-
debt instrument is more than its is-Interest: Compensation for theaction is due to the time value tity that is formed for the purpose of
of your net investment. use or forbearance of money. sue price. holding a fixed pool of mortgages
Publication 550 (2007) Page 75

Page 76 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
secured by interests in real prop- Restricted stock: Stock you get borrow the property to deliver to a b. Does not participate in cor-
buyer and, at a later date, you buy porate growth to any signif-for services you perform that iserty, with multiple classes of inter-
substantially identical property and icant extent, andnontransferable and is subject to aests held by investors. These
deliver it to the lender.substantial risk of forfeiture.interests may be either regular or c. Has a fixed redemptionresidual. price.Straddle: Generally, a set of off-Section 1256 contract: Any:
setting positions on personal prop-Regulated futures contract: A • Regulated futures contract, erty. A straddle may consist of asection 1256 contract that: Term loan: Any loan that is not apurchased option to buy and a pur-• Foreign currency contract as demand loan.• Provides that amounts that chased option to sell on the samedefined in chapter 4 undermust be deposited to, or may number of shares of the security,Section 1256 Contracts Wash sale: A sale of stock or se-be withdrawn from, your mar- with the same exercise price andMarked to Market, curities at a loss within 30 daysgin account depend on daily period. before or after you buy or acquire in• Nonequity option,market conditions (a system a fully taxable trade, or acquire aStripped preferred stock: Stockof marking to market), and • Dealer equity option, or contract or option to buy, substan-that meets the following tests. tially identical stock or securities.• Is traded on, or subject to the • Dealer securities futures con-
rules of, a qualified board of 1. There has been a separationtract.
in ownership between theexchange, such as a domes-
stock and any dividend on thetic board of trade designated Securities futures contract: A stock that has not becomeas a contract market by the contract of sale for future delivery payable.Commodity Futures Trading of a single security or of a nar-
Commission or any board of row-based security index. 2. The stock:trade or exchange approved
by the Secretary of the Trea- Short sale: The sale of property a. Is limited and preferred as
sury. that you generally do not own. You to dividends, ■
Page 76 Publication 550 (2007)

Page 77 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.Index
 See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Private activity ......... 12, 75 Custodian account for ....... 3 Market discount bonds (SeeA
Gifts to ..................... 5 Market discount bonds)Redemption or retirementAbusive tax shelters  (See Tax
Investment income of .....3 ,  3 3o f ....................... 3 8 Original issue discount (Seeshelters)
Qualified dividends ......... 3 3 Original issue discount (OID))Sold between interestAccounting fees ............. 3 5
Savings account with parent asdates .................... 1 1 Short-term obligations ..... 1 6 ,Accrual method ...... 7 ,  16, 25, trustee .................... 5 49State and local32, 75 U.S. savings bond owner .... 8government .............. 4 9 Stripped bonds andAccuracy-related penalty ..... 5 coupons ................. 1 4Stripped ............ 12, 14, 44 Clerical help ................. 3 5Acquisition discount .... 16, 44 Tax-exempt ................ 4 9 Discounted debtCollateralized debt obligationsAdjusted basis ....... 21, 42, 44 Traded flat .................. 6 instruments ............... 1 3(CDOs) .................... 2 6Alaska Permanent Fund U.S. savings (See U.S. savings Discounted tax-exemptComments on publication .... 2dividends ............. 23, 33 bonds) obligations ................ 4 4Commodities traders ........ 7 5Amortization of bond U.S. Treasury (See U.S. Dividends  (See also FormCommodity futures ...... 51, 53,premium ............... 33-35 Treasury bills, notes, and 1099-DIV) .......... 19-25, 7575Annuities: bonds) Alaska PermanentCommunity property:Borrowing on ............... 3 6 Brokerage fees .......... 35, 64 Fund ................ 23, 33U.S. savings bonds .......... 8Interest on .................. 6 Exempt-interest ...... 5 ,  23, 53Constructive ownershipLife insurance proceeds used to Extraordinary .............. 5 5transactions .......... 48, 51b u y...................... 1 2 C Holding period ............. 2 0Constructive receipt ......... 1 6Sale of ..................... 5 0 Calls and puts ........... 56, 75 Insurance policies .......... 2 3Constructive sales .......... 3 9Single-premium ............ 3 6 Table 4-1 .................. 5 7 Money market funds ........ 2 1Trade for ............... 38, 46 Contractors, insolvencyCapital assets ............... 4 8 Nominees .............. 19, 24of ......................... 5 4Applicable federal rate ....... 6 Capital gain Ordinary ................... 2 0
ConversionAppreciated financial distributions ...... 21, 24, 33, Patronage ................. 2 3
transactions .......... 50, 75positions .................. 3 9 53 Payments in lieu of ......... 5 5
Convertible stocks andArbitrage bonds ............. 1 2 Qualified ............ 20, 23, 33Capital gain tax
bonds ..................... 4 6 Qualified foreignAssistance  (See Tax help) computation .............. 6 6
Cooperatives, sales of stock corporation .............. 2 0At-risk rules .......... 31, 64, 75 Capital gains and
to ......................... 6 1 Received in January ........ 2 0losses .................. 48-53Attorneys’ fees.............. 3 5
Reinvestment plans .... 21, 35,Co-owners of U.S. savingsConstructive ownershipAutomatic investment 43bonds ...................... 8transactions ............. 5 1service ............. 35, 43, 52 Reporting requirements .... 1 9 ,Corporate distributions ..... 1 9Definition .................. 4 8
23-25Capital gain ......... 24, 33, 53Empowerment zone
Restricted stock ............ 2 3Constructive ............... 2 2B assets ................... 6 3
Sale or trade vs. ............ 3 8Dividends (See Dividends)Investment property ........ 4 8Backup withholding .......... 3
Scrip ...................... 2 3Fractional shares ........... 2 2Long-term ............. 54, 65Bad debts ............... 50, 53 Sold stock ................. 2 0Liquidating ............. 21, 25Long-term debtBankrupt financial institutions: Stock .................. 43, 53Nondividend ........... 21, 24instruments .............. 4 9Deposit in .................. 5 0 Underreported .............. 3Return of capital ............ 2 1Losses, limit on ............ 6 5Bargain purchases .......... 4 1 Veterans’ insurance ......5 ,  2 3Stock rights ................ 2 2Passive activities ........... 6 4Basis ................. 41-47, 75 Divorce ................. 42, 47Undistributed capitalQualified covered callAdjusted ............ 21, 42, 44 gains .................... 2 1options .................. 5 9Cost ....................... 4 1 CorporateQualified small businessInherited property .......... 4 2 Ereorganizations ........... 4 5stock .................... 6 2Investment property ........ 4 1 Education Savings BondReporting requirements .... 5 9 , Cost basis ................... 4 1Like-kind exchanges ........ 4 5 Program ............... 10-1163, 64 Coupon bonds .............. 1 6Other than cost ............. 4 1 Interest excluded under ..... 1 9Rollover of gain from sale ofREITs ..................... 4 3 Recordkeepingsecurities ................ 6 2REMIC, residual interest .... 2 6 D requirements ............. 1 1Short-term ............. 54, 64Replacement stock ......... 6 3 Day traders .................. 7 2 Employee stock ownershipTax rates .................. 6 6Stocks and bonds ...... 21, 22, plans (ESOPs), sales of stock28% rate gain worksheet, Dealer equity options ........ 4 034, 42 to ......................... 6 1completed sample ..... 6 6 Dealer securities futuresBearer obligations ....... 14, 50 Table 4-2 ................ 6 6 Employer identificationcontracts .................. 4 0Below-market loans ..... 6-7, 75 numbers (EINs) ........... 2 7Capital loss carryover ...... 6 0 , Debt instruments, retirementBonds: 65, 67 Empowerment zone ......... 6 3of ......................... 5 0Accrued interest on ......... 1 9 Worksheet 4-1 ............. 6 5 Endowment contracts ....... 3 6Decedents ............... 42, 65Amortization of premium .... 3 3 Cash method ...... 7 ,  16, 32, 75 U.S. savings bond interest, Enterprise zone facilityArbitrage ................... 1 2 Reporting options for savings reporting of ............... 9 bonds ..................... 1 2Basis .................. 34, 42 bond interest .............. 7 Demand loans ............... 7 5 Equity option ............ 40, 75Capital asset ............... 4 8 Cash-settled options ........ 4 0 Demutualization ............. 4 6 Estate income received byConvertible ................ 4 6 Casualty losses ............. 5 0 beneficiary ................. 3Deposits, loss on ............ 5 0Coupon .................... 1 6
CDOs (Collateralized debt Exempt-interest dividends onEnterprise zone facility ...... 1 2 Discount on debt
obligations) ............... 2 6 mutual fund stock ......... 5 3Federally guaranteed ....... 1 2 instruments ............ 13-16
Certificates of depositIdentification ............... 4 3 Certificates of deposit ....... 1 4 Expenses of producing
(CDs) ..................... 1 4Market discount .... 12, 32, 44, Election to report all interest as income .................... 3 5
Children:49, 64, 75 OID ..................... 1 6
Alaska Permanent FundNew York Liberty bonds .... 1 2 Face-amount certificates .... 1 4
Fdividends ................ 3 3Par value .................. 4 4 Gain or loss treatment ...... 4 9
Capital gain distributions .... 3 3Premiums on ........ 34, 44, 75 Inflation-indexed ........... 1 4 Face-amount certificates .... 1 4
Publication 550 (2007) Page 77

Page 78 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Fair market value .... 41, 42, 45, Installment sale Local government obligationsG
75 payments ................. 6 ( See State or local governmentGains on qualified small
obligations)Insurance dividends ......... 6Federal guarantee on business stock ............ 6 2
Money market funds ......... 5bonds ..................... 1 2 Long-term capital gains andGains on sales or trades  (See
Nominee distributions ........ 5 losses ................. 54, 65Fees to buy or sell .......... 3 5 also Capital gains and
Prepaid insurance Long-term debtlosses) ............. 45, 47, 48Financial asset securitization
premiums ................. 6 instruments ............... 4 9investment trusts Gifts .............. 5 ,  42, 52, 75
Reporting ............... 16-19(FASITs) .................. 2 6 Losses on sales or trades  (SeeGlossary ................. 75-76 Seller-financed also Capital gains andForeign currency Government obligations ..... 1 6 mortgage ............ 17, 19 losses) .................... 4 8transactions .............. 3 9
Tax refunds ................. 6 Amount calculation ......... 4 5Foreign income .............. 2 Taxable ............ 5-6, 11, 12 Carryback election ..... 40, 41HForgone interest ............ 7 5 Tax-exempt ............ 12, 17 Mutual fund or REIT stock heldHedging transactions ...... 4 0 ,Form: U.S. savings bonds, person 6 months or less ......... 5 341, 511066 (Schedule Q) ......... 3 6 responsible for tax (Table Passive activities ....... 26, 27,Help  (See Tax help) 1-2) ...................... 83115 ....................... 8 31, 33Holding period: Underreported .............. 3 Related parties ............. 4 74952 ...................... 3 3 Investment property ........ 5 2 Usurious interest ............ 6 Section 1244 (small business)Form 1040 ............... 17, 23 Replacement stock ......... 6 3 VA insurance dividends ...... 5 stock .................... 5 1Straddles .................. 6 0Schedule B ................ 1 7 Small business investmentInvestment clubs ......... 26-27
Form 1040, Schedule D ..... 5 4 , company stock ........... 5 2Investment counsel and56, 63, 66 Wash sales ................ 5 9advice ..................... 3 5IWorksheet, completed Investment expenses ..... 31-37Income from sources outsidesample .................. 7 0 Allocated .................. 2 5U.S. ........................ 2 MForm 1040A ............. 17, 23 At-risk rules ................ 3 1Income tax treaties (Table Marked to market rules ..... 4 0 ,Form 1040X ................. 3 9 Deductible ................. 3 51-3) ....................... 2 1 72, 75Limits on deductions ........ 3 1Form 1041 ................... 2 7 Indian tribal government .... 1 2 Market discount bonds ..... 1 2 ,Nondeductible ............. 3 6Form 1065 ................... 2 7 15, 32, 44, 49, 64, 75Individual retirement Pass-through entities ....... 3 6Schedule K-1 .............. 2 7 Accrued marketarrangements (IRAs): Reporting requirements ..... 3 7 discount ................. 1 5Form 1066, Schedule Q ...... 2 6 Interest income .............. 5 Investment income ........... 3 Mark-to-market election ..... 7 2Form 1096 ............ 19, 24, 64 Inflation-indexed debt Children .................3 ,  3 3instruments ........... 14, 15 Maximum rate of capital gainsForm 1099-B ......... 38, 64, 67 General Information ......... 3 (Table 4-2) ................ 6 6Inherited property:Form 1099-DIV .... 3 ,  19, 23, 24 Net income ................ 3 2 Mechanics’ and suppliers’Basis ...................... 4 2Form 1099-INT ..... 3 ,  5 ,  10, 17, Records to keep ............. 3 liens ...................... 5 4Holding period ............. 5 319, 25, 26 Reporting of (Table 1-1) ..... 5Transfer by inheritance ..... 3 8 Meetings, expenses ofForm 1099-MISC ......... 19, 55 Investment property ......... 3 1 attending .................. 3 6Insolvency ofForm 1099-OID ....5 ,  13, 17, 25, Basis ...................... 4 1contractors ............... 5 4 Missing children, photographs26 Definition .................. 3 8 of .......................... 2Installment sales ............ 6 4Form 1099-S ................ 6 4 Gain or loss treatment ...... 4 8
Mixed straddles ......... 55, 60Insurance:Form 1120 ................... 2 7 Gift, received as ............ 4 2
Borrowing on ............... 3 6 Money market funds ........ 2 1Holding period ............. 5 2Form 2439 ................... 2 1
Interest income .............. 5Dividends, interest on .....6 ,  2 3 Liquidation, received in ..... 4 4Form 3115 ............. 8 ,  35, 72 Interest option on ........... 1 2 More information  (See Tax help)Nontaxable trades, receivedForm 4684 ................... 5 0 Life insurance companies, Mortgages:i n ....................... 4 2Form 4797 ............ 45, 51, 52 demutualization .......... 4 6 Revenue bonds ............ 1 2Sales and trades ........... 3 8Form 4952 ................... 3 3 Life, paid to beneficiary ..... 1 2 Secondary liability onServices, received for ....... 4 1Form 6198 ................... 6 4 Prepaid premiums ........... 6 home .................... 5 4Spouse, received from ...... 4 2Form 6781 ..... 41, 51, 59, 64, 67 Single-premium life ......... 3 6 Seller-financed ............. 1 9Taxable trades, received
Form 8275 ................... 3 0 Trades ..................... 4 6 i n ....................... 4 1 Municipal bonds  (See also State
Form 8275-R ................ 3 0 Veterans’ dividends, interest or local government
Form 8582 ................... 2 6 o n.....................5 ,  2 3 obligations) ......... 12, 17, 49
JForm 8614 .................... 3 Interest expenses: Mutual funds ..... 21, 31, 33, 36,
Joint accounts ............... 4Allocation of ................ 3 1 43, 53Form 8615 .................... 3
Joint and separateInvestment interest ..... 31, 75 publicly offered ............. 3 6Form 8815 ............... 10, 19
returns ................ 30, 66Limit on .................. 3 2Form 8824 ................... 4 5
When to deduct .......... 3 2Form 8832 ................... 2 7 NMargin accounts ........... 3 2Form 8886 ............... 29, 30 New York Liberty bonds ..... 1 2LPaid in advance ............ 3 2Form SS-4 ................... 2 7 Nominee distributions:Life insurance companies:Straddles .................. 3 6Form W-8BEN ................ 4 Dividends .............. 19, 24demutualization ............ 4 6Unstated ................... 4 1Form W-9 .................... 3 Interest income ...........5 ,  1 9Like-kind exchanges .... 45, 47Interest income .............. 5 Original issue discount ...... 1 3Forward contracts ........... 7 5 Basis of propertyAnnuity contracts ............ 6 Nominee, defined ........... 7 5Fractional shares ........ 22, 52 received ................. 4 5Bonds traded flat ............ 6 Nonbusiness bad debts .... 5 0 ,Reporting requirements ..... 4 5Free tax services ............ 7 3 Certificates of deposits ...... 5 53Limited partners ............. 7 5Frozen deposits ...........6 ,  1 9 Condemnation awards ....... 6
Noncapital assets ........... 4 8LiquidatingFutures contracts: Deferred interest
Nondeductible investmentdistributions .......... 21, 44accounts ................. 5Definition .................. 7 5 expenses ................. 3 6Listed options ........... 40, 75Dividends on deposit or shareRegulated ............. 39, 76 Nondividendaccounts ................. 5 Loans:Securities ........... 53, 55, 56 distributions .............. 2 1Frozen deposits ..........6 ,  1 9 Below-market .......... 6-7, 75
Futures, commodity ..... 51, 53, Nonequity options ....... 40, 75Gift for opening account ..... 5 Gift and demand .........6 ,  7 5
75 Individual retirement Guarantees ................ 5 4 Nonqualified preferred
arrangements (IRAs) ...... 5Wash sales ................ 5 5 Term ....................6 ,  7 6 stock ...................... 4 6
Page 78 Publication 550 (2007)

Page 79 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Nonresident aliens: Puts and calls ........... 56, 75 Revocable trust, trustee’s State or local government
Table 4-1 .................. 5 7 commissions for .......... 3 6 obligations ............. 12-13Backup withholding .......... 4
Market discount bonds (SeeRollover of gain from sale:Nontaxable return of
Market discount bonds)capital .................... 2 1 Empowerment zone
Q Private activity bonds ...... 1 2 ,assets ................... 6 3Nontaxable stock rights ..... 5 3
Qualified dividends .......... 2 3 75Securities .................. 6 2Nontaxable trades ....... 45, 52
Qualified small business Registration requirement .... 1 2Notes: stock ............... 44, 53, 62 Taxable interest ............ 1 2Individuals, bought at Gains on ................... 6 2 S Tax-exempt interest ........ 1 2discount ................. 5 0
S corporations .......... 26, 44 Stock:U.S. Treasury (See U.S.
Basis ........... 21, 22, 42, 63Safe deposit box ............ 3 5Treasury bills, notes, and R Capital asset ............... 4 8Sales and trades of investmentbonds) Real estate investment trusts Constructive ownership ..... 4 8property ................ 38-72(REITs) ............. 21, 43, 53 Convertible ................ 4 6Definition .................. 3 8Real estate mortgageO Corporate .................. 4 5Savings bonds  (See U.S.investment conduits Dividends (See Dividends)Office expenses ............. 3 5 savings bonds)(REMICs) ........ 25-26, 36, 75 Fractional shares ....... 22, 52Options .................. 56-57 SBIC stock  (See Small businessRegular interest ............ 2 5 Identification ............... 4 3Calls and puts .......... 56, 75 investment company stock)Residual interest ....... 26, 56 Installment sales ........... 6 4Cash settlement ........ 40, 56 Scrip dividends ............. 2 3Recordkeeping .............. 5 2 Nonqualified preferredDealer equity ............... 4 0 Section 1202 gain ........... 6 3Recordkeeping requirements: stock .................... 4 6Deep-in-the-money ......... 5 9 Section 1244 stock .......... 5 1Education Savings Bond Public utility,Equity ................. 40, 75 Section 1256 contracts ..... 3 9 ,Program ................. 1 1 reinvestment ............. 4 3Gain or loss ............ 56, 59 53, 56, 64, 76Investment income .......... 3 Redemption of ............. 3 8Holding period ............. 5 3 Net gain on ................ 4 0Small business stock ....... 5 2 Replacement stock ......... 6 3Listed ................. 40, 75 Net loss on ................ 4 0Redemption of stock ........ 3 8 Restricted stock ........ 23, 76Nonequity .............. 40, 75 Reporting requirements ..... 4 1Redemption or retirement of Rights .............. 22, 43, 53Qualified covered call ....... 5 8 Securities:bonds ..................... 3 8 S corporations ............. 4 4Reporting requirements ..... 5 6 Holding period ............. 5 2Regulated futures Sales to ESOPs orSection 1256 contracts .... 3 9 , Installment sales ........... 6 4contract ............... 39, 76 cooperatives ............. 6 156 Lost, stolen, etc., cost of Small business ......... 44, 53REITs  (See Real estateWash sales ................ 5 5 replacing ................ 3 5 Specialized small businessinvestment trusts (REITs))Options dealer .............. 7 5 Rollover of gain from investment company ..... 4 4Related partyOrdinary gains and sale ..................... 6 2 Splits ...................... 4 3transactions ....... 37, 47-48losses ................. 48, 50 Traders in .................. 7 2 Straddles (See Straddles)Related persons ............. 5 8Original issue discount Stripped preferred stock . . . 25,Worthless .............. 39, 54REMICs  (See Real estate(OID) ........ 12, 13-15, 44, 75 76Securities futuresmortgage investment conduitsAdjustment to .............. 1 9 Surrender of ............... 3 8contracts ....... 40, 53, 56, 76(REMICs))Reporting requirements ..... 1 3 Trades ..................... 4 6Self-employment income .... 4 1Reorganizations,Rules ...................... 1 4 Trust instruments treatedSelf-employment tax ........ 7 2corporate ................. 4 5 a s....................... 3 9Seller-financedReporting requirements: Straddles ................. 57-61mortgages ................ 1 9P Bad debts .................. 5 4 Defined .................... 7 6Bond premium Short sales ............... 54-55Passive activities ............ 7 5 Holding period ............. 6 0amortization ............. 3 5 Adjusted basis ............. 4 4Gains and losses ....... 26, 27, Interest expense and carryingCapital gains and31, 33, 64 Defined .................... 7 6 charges ................. 3 6losses ............ 59, 63, 64 Expenses of ............... 3 6Pass-through entities: Loss deferral rules .......... 5 8Dividend income ........... 2 3 Extraordinary dividends ..... 5 5Rollover of gain ............ 6 3 Mixed ................. 55, 60Exempt-interest dividends .... 5 Puts ....................... 5 7Patronage dividends ........ 2 3 Reporting requirements ..... 6 4Interest on U.S. savings Small business investmentPenalties: Stripped bonds andbonds ..................7 ,  8 company stock ........... 5 2Accuracy-related .........5 ,  2 9 coupons ........... 12, 14, 44Investment expenses ....... 3 7 Short-term capital gains andBackup withholding .......... 4 Stripped preferred stock ... 2 5 ,Like-kind exchanges ........ 4 5 losses ................. 54, 64Civil fraud .................. 3 0 76Options .................... 5 6 Short-term obligations ..... 1 6 ,Early withdrawal ..........5 ,  1 9 Original issue discount ...... 1 3 Substitute payments ........ 5 544, 49Failure to pay tax ........... 3 0 S corporation income, Suggestions forInterest deduction, limitFailure to supply SSN ....... 3 deductions, and publication ................. 2o n....................... 3 2Substantial credits ................... 2 6understatement .......... 3 0 Sixty/forty rule .............. 4 0Section 1256 contracts ..... 4 1
Valuation misstatement ..... 3 0 Small business investmentState or local government T
Political parties: company stock ........ 52, 63obligations ............... 1 2 Tables:Debts owed by ............. 5 4 Reporting requirements ..... 5 2Straddles .................. 6 4 Capital gains maximum rate
Portfolio income ............ 7 5 Small business stock ....... 4 4 ,Substitute payments ........ 5 5 (Table 4-2) ............... 6 6
52, 53, 62Tax-exempt interestPreferred stock: Income tax treaties (Table
income .................. 1 7Nonqualified ............... 4 6 Social security number (SSN): 1-3) ..................... 2 1
Trades ..................... 7 2Redeemable at a Custodial accounts .......... 3 Investment income, reporting of
Wash sales ................ 5 6premium ................. 2 2 Joint accounts .............. 3 (Table 1-1) ................ 5
Stripped ............... 25, 76 Repossession of real Requirement to give ......... 3 Puts and calls (Table
property ................... 5 3Premiums on bonds ..... 34, 44, 4-1) ..................... 5 7Specialized small business
75 Restricted property .......... 4 1 U.S. savings bonds, personinvestment company
Private activity bonds ...... 1 2 , responsible for tax (TableRestricted stock ......... 23, 76 stock .................. 44, 63
75 1-2) ...................... 8Retirement of debt Spouses:
Public utility stock Tax help ..................... 7 3instrument ................ 5 0 Transfers between (See also
reinvestment .............. 4 3 Tax rates:Related partyReturn of capital  (See
Publications  (See Tax help) transactions) ......... 42, 47Nondividend distributions) Capital gain and losses ..... 6 6
Publication 550 (2007) Page 79

Page 80 of 80 of Publication 550 11:15 - 11-JAN-2008
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Tax refunds: Trade or business ........... 3 1 Trust income received by V
Interest on .................. 6 beneficiary ................. 3Traders in securities ........ 7 2 Veterans’ insurance:
Tax shelters .............. 28-30 Trustee’s commission for Dividends on ............... 2 3Trades:
Penalties .................. 2 9 revocable trust ............ 3 6Insurance .................. 4 6
Reporting requirements ..... 2 9 Investment property ........ 3 8 TTY/TDD information ........ 7 3 WRules to curb abuse ........ 2 8 Like-kind ............... 45, 47 Warrants .................... 5 5Taxable income, expenses Nontaxable ......... 42, 45, 52 U Wash sales ........... 55-56, 76of ......................... 3 6 Reporting requirements ..... 7 2 U.S. savings bonds  (See also Holding period ............. 5 3Stock ...................... 4 6Taxes: Education Savings Bond Loss deferral rules,Taxable .................... 4 1State and local transfer ..... 3 6 Program) .......... 6 ,  7-11, 11 straddles ................ 5 9U.S. Treasury notes orState income ............... 3 6 Reporting interest on ......6 ,  7 Reporting requirements ..... 5 6bonds ................... 4 7Tax-exempt bonds .......... 4 9 Retirement or profit-sharing Withholding, backup ......... 3Treasury bills, notes, and bondsTax-exempt income: plan, distributed from ...... 9 Worksheets:(See U.S. Treasury bills, notes,Expenses of ............... 3 6 Worksheet ............... 1 8 Capital gains, 28% rateand bonds)Interest on ............. 12, 17 Tax, responsible person (Table worksheet, completedTreasury inflation-indexedTax-exempt obligations .... 1 2 , 1-2) ...................... 8 sample .................. 7 1securities ................. 1 415, 44 U.S. Treasury bills, notes, and Capital loss carryover ....... 6 5Treasury inflation-protectedTaxpayer Advocate .......... 7 3 bonds ........ 6 ,  11-13, 47, 52 Worthless securities .... 39, 54securities (TIPS) ...... 11, 14Taxpayer identification Usurious interest ............. 6Treaties, income tax (Table ■numbers (TINs):
1-3) ....................... 2 1Aliens ...................... 2
Term loans ................6 ,  7 6
Page 80 Publication 550 (2007)