Contents
What's New .................. 1
Reminders ................... 1
Introduction .................. 2
Who Must File ................. 3
Who Should File ............... 5
Filing Status .................. 5
Exemptions ................. 11
Exemptions for Dependents ....... 11
Phaseout of Exemptions ......... 23
Social Security Numbers for 
Dependents .............. 23
Standard Deduction ............ 24
2017 Standard Deduction Tables .... 25
How To Get Tax Help ........... 27
Index ..................... 29
What's New
Who must file.  In some cases, the amount of 
income you can receive before you must file a 
tax return has increased. Table 1 shows the fil-
ing requirements for most taxpayers.
Exemption phaseout. You lose at least part of 
the benefit of your exemptions if your adjusted 
gross income is above a certain amount. For 
2017, the phaseout begins at $156,900 for mar-
ried individuals filing separate returns; 
$261,500 for single individuals; $287,650 for 
heads of household; and $313,800 for married 
individuals filing joint returns or qualifying 
widow(er)s. See Phaseout of Exemptions, later.
Standard deduction increased.  The stand-
ard deduction for taxpayers who don't itemize 
their deductions on Schedule A of Form 1040 is 
higher for 2017 than it was for 2016. The 
amount depends on your filing status. You can 
use the 2017 Standard Deduction Tables  near 
the end of this publication to figure your stand-
ard deduction.
Reminders
Future developments.  Information about any 
future developments affecting Pub. 501 (such 
as legislation enacted after we release it) will be 
posted at IRS.gov/Pub501.
Taxpayer identification number for aliens.
If you are a nonresident or resident alien and 
you don't have and aren't eligible to get a social 
security number (SSN), you must apply for an 
individual taxpayer identification number (ITIN). 
Your spouse also may need an ITIN if he or she 
doesn't have and isn't eligible to get an SSN. 
See Form W-7, Application for IRS Individual 
Department 
of the 
Treasury
Internal 
Revenue 
Service
Publication 501
Cat. No. 15000U
Exemptions,
Standard
Deduction,
and Filing 
Information
For use in preparing
2017 Returns
Get forms and other information faster and easier at:
• IRS.gov (English) 
• IRS.gov/Spanish (Español) 
• IRS.gov/Chinese (中文) 
• IRS.gov/Korean (한국어) 
• IRS.gov/Russian (Pусский) 
• IRS.gov/Vietnamese (TiếngViệt) 
Userid: CPM Schema: tipx Leadpct: 100% Pt. size: 8  Draft  Ok to Print
AH XSL/XML Fileid: … tions/P501/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source (Init. & Date) _______
Page 1 of 30  12:05 - 2-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Jan 02, 2018

Taxpayer Identification Number. Also, see So-
cial Security Numbers for Dependents, later.
Photographs of missing children.  The Inter-
nal Revenue Service is a proud partner with the 
National Center for Missing  & Exploited 
Children® (NCMEC) . Photographs of missing 
children selected by the Center may appear in 
this publication on pages that would otherwise 
be blank. You can help bring these children 
home by looking at the photographs and calling 
1-800-THE-LOST (1-800-843-5678) if you rec-
ognize a child.
Introduction
This publication discusses some tax rules that 
affect every person who may have to file a fed-
eral income tax return. It answers some basic 
questions: who must file; who should file; what 
filing status to use; how many exemptions to 
claim; and the amount of the standard deduc-
tion.
Who Must File  explains who must file an in-
come tax return. If you have little or no gross in-
come, reading this section will help you decide 
if you have to file a return.
Who Should File  helps you decide if you 
should file a return, even if you aren't required 
to do so.
Filing Status helps you determine which fil-
ing status to use. Filing status is important in 
determining whether you must file a return and 
whether you may claim certain deductions and 
credits. It also helps determine your standard 
deduction and tax rate.
Exemptions, which reduce your taxable in-
come, are discussed in Exemptions.
Exemptions for Dependents explains the 
difference between a qualifying child  and a 
qualifying relative . Other topics include the so-
cial security number requirement for depend-
ents, the rules for multiple support agreements, 
and the rules for divorced or separated parents.
Phaseout of Exemptions explains how to de-
termine whether you must reduce the dollar 
amount of exemptions you claim and, if so, the 
amount of the reduction.
Standard Deduction gives the rules and dol-
lar amounts for the standard deduction — a 
benefit for taxpayers who don't itemize their de-
ductions. This section also discusses the stand-
ard deduction for taxpayers who are blind or 
age 65 or older, as well as special rules that 
limit the standard deduction available to de-
pendents. In addition, this section helps you de-
cide whether you would be better off taking the 
standard deduction or itemizing your deduc-
tions.
How To Get Tax Help  explains how to get 
tax help from the IRS.
This publication is for U.S. citizens and resi-
dent aliens only. If you are a resident alien for 
the entire year, you must follow the same tax 
rules that apply to U.S. citizens. The rules to de-
termine if you are a resident or nonresident 
alien are discussed in chapter 1 of Pub. 519.
Nonresident aliens. If you were a nonresident 
alien at any time during the year, the rules and 
tax forms that apply to you may be different 
from those that apply to U.S. citizens. See Pub. 
519.
Comments and suggestions.  We welcome 
your comments about this publication and your 
suggestions for future editions.
You can send us comments through 
IRS.gov/FormComments. Or you can write to:
Internal Revenue Service
Tax Forms and Publications
1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6526
Washington, DC 20224
Although we can’t respond individually to 
each comment received, we do appreciate your 
feedback and will consider your comments as 
we revise our tax forms, instructions, and publi-
cations.
Ordering forms and publications.  Visit 
IRS.gov/FormsPubs to download forms and 
publications. Otherwise, you can go to IRS.gov/
OrderForms to order current and prior-year 
forms and instructions. Your order should arrive 
within 10 business days.
Tax questions. If you have a tax question 
not answered by this publication, check 
IRS.gov and How To Get Tax Help at the end of 
this publication.
Useful Items
You may want to see:
Publication
Survivors, Executors, and 
Administrators
Tax Rules for Children and 
Dependents
Form (and Instructions)
Amended U.S. Individual Income 
Tax Return
Power of Attorney and Declaration 
of Representative
Release/Revocation of Release of 
Claim to Exemption for Child by 
Custodial Parent
Parents' Election To Report Child's 
Interest and Dividends
   559
   929
  1040X
   2848
   8332
   8814
Table 1. 2017 Filing Requirements Chart for Most Taxpayers
IF your filing status is...
AND at the end of 2017 you 
were...*
THEN file a return 
if your gross 
income was at 
least...**
single under 65  $10,400
65 or older $11,950
head of household under 65 $13,400
65 or older $14,950
married, filing jointly*** under 65 (both spouses) $20,800
65 or older (one spouse) $22,050
65 or older (both spouses) $23,300
married, filing separately any age  $4,050
qualifying widow(er) under 65 $16,750
65 or older $18,000
* If you were born before January 2, 1953, you're considered to be 65 or older at the 
end of 2017. (If your spouse died in 2017, see Death of spouse, later. If you're 
preparing a return for someone who died in 2017, see Death of taxpayer, later.
** Gross income means all income you receive in the form of money, goods, 
property, and services that isn't exempt from tax, including any income from sources 
outside the United States or from the sale of your main home (even if you can exclude 
part or all of it). Don't include any social security benefits unless (a) you're married 
filing a separate return and you lived with your spouse at any time during 2017 or (b) 
one-half of your social security benefits plus your other gross income and any 
tax-exempt interest is more than $25,000 ($32,000 if married filing jointly). If (a) or (b) 
applies, see the Form 1040 instructions to figure the taxable part of social security 
benefits you must include in gross income. Gross income includes gains, but not 
losses, reported on Form 8949 or Schedule D. Gross income from a business means, 
for example, the amount on Schedule C, line 7, or Schedule F, line 9. But in figuring 
gross income, don't reduce your income by any losses, including any loss on 
Schedule C, line 7, or Schedule F, line 9.
*** If you didn't live with your spouse at the end of 2017 (or on the date your spouse 
died) and your gross income was at least $4,050, you must file a return regardless of 
your age.
Page 2 of 30  Fileid: … tions/P501/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 12:05 - 2-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 2 Publication 501 (2017)

Who Must File
If you are a U.S. citizen or resident alien, 
whether you must file a federal income tax re-
turn depends on your gross income, your filing 
status, your age, and whether you are a de-
pendent. For details, see Table 1 and Table 2. 
You also must file if one of the situations descri-
bed in Table 3 applies. The filing requirements 
apply even if you owe no tax.
You may have to pay a penalty if you are re-
quired to file a return but fail to do so. If you will-
fully fail to file a return, you may be subject to 
criminal prosecution.
For information on what form to use — Form 
1040EZ, Form 1040A, or Form 1040 — see the 
instructions for your tax return.
Gross income.  Gross income is all income 
you receive in the form of money, goods, prop-
erty, and services that isn't exempt from tax. If 
you are married and live with your spouse in a 
community property state, half of any income 
defined by state law as community income may 
be considered yours. For a list of community 
property states, see Community property states 
under Married Filing Separately, later.
Self-employed persons.  If you are 
self-employed in a business that provides serv-
ices (where products aren't a factor), your gross 
income from that business is the gross receipts. 
If you are self-employed in a business involving 
manufacturing, merchandising, or mining, your 
gross income from that business is the total 
sales minus the cost of goods sold. In either 
case, you must add any income from invest-
ments and from incidental or outside operations 
or sources.
You must file Form 1040 if you owe any 
self-employment tax.
Filing status.  Your filing status generally de-
pends on whether you are single or married. 
Whether you are single or married is deter-
mined at the end of your tax year, which is De-
cember 31 for most taxpayers. Filing status is 
discussed in detail later in this publication.
Age. Age is a factor in determining if you must 
file a return only if you are 65 or older at the end 
of your tax year. For 2017, you are 65 or older if 
you were born before January 2, 1953.
Filing Requirements
for Most Taxpayers
You must file a return if your gross income for 
the year was at least the amount shown on the 
appropriate line in Table 1. Dependents should 
see Table 2 instead.
Deceased Persons
You must file an income tax return for a dece-
dent (a person who died) if both of the following 
are true.
1. You are the surviving spouse, executor, 
administrator, or legal representative.
TIP
2. The decedent met the filing requirements 
described in this publication at the time of 
his or her death.
For more information, see Final Income Tax 
Return for Decedent — Form 1040 in Pub. 559.
Death of spouse. If your spouse died in 2017, 
read this before using Table 1 or Table 2 to find 
whether you must file a 2017 return. Consider 
your spouse to be 65 or older at the end of 2017 
only if he or she was 65 or older at the time of 
death. Even if your spouse was born before 
January 2, 1953, he or she isn't considered 65 
or older at the end of 2017 unless he or she was 
65 or older at the time of death.
A person is considered to reach age 65 on 
the day before his or her 65th birthday.
Example. Your spouse was born on Febru-
ary 14, 1952, and died on February 13, 2017. 
Your spouse is considered age 65 at the time of 
death. However, if your spouse died on Febru-
ary 12, 2017, your spouse isn't considered age 
65 at the time of death and is not 65 or older at 
the end of 2017.
Death of taxpayer.  If you are preparing a re-
turn for someone who died in 2017, read this 
before using Table 1 or Table 2. Consider the 
taxpayer to be 65 or older at the end of 2017 
only if he or she was 65 or older at the time of 
death. Even if the taxpayer was born before 
January 2, 1953, he or she isn't considered 65 
or older at the end of 2017 unless he or she was 
65 or older at the time of death.
A person is considered to reach age 65 on 
the day before his or her 65th birthday.
U.S. Citizens or Resident Aliens 
Living Abroad
To determine whether you must file a return, in-
clude in your gross income any income you 
earned or received abroad, including any in-
come you can exclude under the foreign earned 
income exclusion. For more information on spe-
cial tax rules that may apply to you, see Pub. 
54.
Residents of Puerto Rico
If you are a U.S. citizen and also a bona fide 
resident of Puerto Rico, you generally must file 
a U.S. income tax return for any year in which 
you meet the income requirements. This is in 
addition to any legal requirement you may have 
to file an income tax return with Puerto Rico.
If you are a bona fide resident of Puerto Rico 
for the whole year, your U.S. gross income 
doesn't include income from sources within Pu-
erto Rico. It does, however, include any income 
you received for your services as an employee 
of the United States or any U.S. agency. If you 
receive income from Puerto Rican sources that 
isn't subject to U.S. tax, you must reduce your 
standard deduction, which reduces the amount 
of income you can have before you must file a 
U.S. income tax return.
For more information, see Pub. 570, Tax 
Guide for Individuals With Income From U.S. 
Possessions.
Individuals With Income From U.S. 
Possessions
If you had income from Guam, the Common-
wealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, Ameri-
can Samoa, or the U.S. Virgin Islands, special 
rules may apply when determining whether you 
must file a U.S. federal income tax return. In ad-
dition, you may have to file a return with the in-
dividual possession government. See Pub. 570 
for more information.
Dependents
A person who is a dependent may still have to 
file a return. It depends on his or her earned in-
come, unearned income, and gross income. 
For details, see Table 2. A dependent must also 
file if one of the situations described in Table 3 
applies.
Responsibility of parent. If a dependent child 
must file an income tax return but can't file due 
to age or any other reason, a parent, guardian, 
or other legally responsible person must file it 
for the child. If the child can't sign the return, the 
parent or guardian must sign the child's name 
followed by the words “By (your signature), pa-
rent for minor child.”
Earned income.  Earned income includes sal-
aries, wages, professional fees, and other 
amounts received as pay for work you actually 
perform. Earned income (only for purposes of 
filing requirements and the standard deduction) 
also includes any part of a taxable scholarship. 
See chapter 1 of Pub. 970, for more information 
on taxable and nontaxable scholarships.
Child's earnings.  Amounts a child earns 
by performing services are included in his or her 
gross income and not the gross income of the 
parent. This is true even if under local law the 
child's parent has the right to the earnings and 
may actually have received them. But if the 
child doesn't pay the tax due on this income, 
the parent is liable for the tax.
Unearned income.  Unearned income in-
cludes income such as interest, dividends, and 
capital gains. Trust distributions of interest, divi-
dends, capital gains, and survivor annuities are 
also considered unearned income.
Election to report child's unearned income 
on parent's return.  You may be able to in-
clude your child's interest and dividend income 
on your tax return. If you do this, your child 
won't have to file a return. To make this elec-
tion, all of the following conditions must be met.
Your child was under age 19 (or under age 
24 if a student) at the end of 2017. (A child 
born on January 1, 1999, is considered to 
be age 19 at the end of 2017; you can't 
make the election for this child unless the 
child was a student. Similarly, a child born 
on January 1, 1994, is considered to be 
age 24 at the end of 2017; you can't make 
the election for this child.)
Page 3 of 30  Fileid: … tions/P501/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 12:05 - 2-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2017)   Page 3

2017 Filing Requirements for Dependents 
See Exemptions for Dependents to find out if you are a dependent.
If your parent (or someone else) can claim you as a dependent, use this table to see if you must file a return.
In this table, unearned income includes taxable interest, ordinary dividends, and capital gain distributions. It also includes 
unemployment compensation, taxable social security benefits, pensions, annuities, and distributions of unearned income from a 
trust. Earned income includes salaries, wages, tips, professional fees, and taxable scholarship and fellowship grants. Gross income 
is the total of your unearned and earned income.
CAUTION
!
If your gross income was $4,050 or more, you usually can't be claimed as a dependent unless you are a qualifying child. 
For details, see Exemptions for Dependents.
Single dependents—Were you either age 65 or older or blind?
No. You must file a return if any of the following apply.
1. Your unearned income was more than $1,050.
2. Your earned income was more than $6,350.
3. Your gross income was more than the larger of— 
a. $1,050, or
b. Your earned income (up to $6,000) plus $350.
Yes. You must file a return if any of the following apply.
1. Your unearned income was more than $2,600 ($4,150 if 65 or older and blind).
2. Your earned income was more than $7,900 ($9,450 if 65 or older and blind).
3. Your gross income was more than the larger of—
a. $2,600 ($4,150 if 65 or older and blind), or 
b. Your earned income (up to $6,000) plus $1,900 ($3,450 if 65 or older and blind).
Married dependents—Were you either age 65 or older or blind?
No. You must file a return if any of the following apply.
1. Your gross income was at least $5 and your spouse files a separate return and itemizes deductions.
2. Your unearned income was more than $1,050.
3. Your earned income was more than $6,350.
4. Your gross income was more than the larger of—
a. $1,050, or
b.  Your earned income (up to $6,000) plus $350. 
Yes. You must file a return if any of the following apply.
1. Your gross income was at least $5 and your spouse files a separate return and itemizes deductions.
2. Your unearned income was more than $2,300 ($3,550 if 65 or older and blind).
3. Your earned income was more than $7,600 ($8,850 if 65 or older and blind).
4. Your gross income was more than the larger of—
a. $2,300 ($3,550 if 65 or older and blind), or 
b. Your earned income (up to $6,000) plus $1,600 ($2,850 if 65 or older and blind).
Table 2.
Page 4 of 30  Fileid: … tions/P501/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 12:05 - 2-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 4 Publication 501 (2017)

Your child had gross income only from in-
terest and dividends (including capital gain 
distributions and Alaska Permanent Fund 
dividends).
The interest and dividend income was less 
than $10,500.
Your child is required to file a return for 
2017 unless you make this election.
Your child doesn't file a joint return for 
2017.
No estimated tax payment was made for 
2017 and no 2016 overpayment was ap-
plied to 2017 under your child's name and 
social security number.
No federal income tax was withheld from 
your child's income under the backup with-
holding rules.
You are the parent whose return must be 
used when making the election to report 
your child's unearned income.
For more information, see Form 8814 and 
Parent's Election To Report Child's Interest and 
Dividends in Pub. 929.
Other Situations
You may have to file a tax return even if your 
gross income is less than the amount shown in 
Table 1 or Table 2 for your filing status. See Ta-
ble 3 for those other situations when you must 
file.
Who Should File
Even if you don't have to file, you should file a 
tax return if you can get money back. For exam-
ple, you should file if one of the following ap-
plies.
1. You had income tax withheld from your 
pay.
2. You made estimated tax payments for the 
year or had any of your overpayment for 
last year applied to this year's estimated 
tax.
3. You qualify for the earned income credit. 
See Pub. 596, for more information.
4. You qualify for the additional child tax 
credit. See the instructions for the tax form 
you file (Form 1040 or 1040A) for more in-
formation.
5. You qualify for the refundable American 
opportunity education credit. See Form 
8863.
6. You qualify for the health coverage tax 
credit. For information on this credit, see 
Form 8885.
7. You qualify for the credit for federal tax on 
fuels. See Form 4136.
Form 1099-B received.  Even if you aren't re-
quired to file a return, you should consider filing 
if all of the following apply.
You received a Form 1099-B, Proceeds 
From Broker and Barter Exchange Trans-
actions (or substitute statement).
The amount in box 1d of Form 1099-B (or 
substitute statement), when added to your 
other gross income, means you have to file 
a tax return because of the filing require-
ment in Table 1 or Table 2 that applies to 
you.
Box 1e of Form 1099-B (or substitute 
statement) is blank.
In this case, filing a return may keep you from 
getting a notice from the IRS.
Filing Status
You must determine your filing status before 
you can determine whether you must file a tax 
Table 3. Other Situations When You Must File a 2017 Return
If any of the six conditions listed below applied to you for 2017, you must file a return.
1. You owe any special taxes, including any of the following.
a. Alternative minimum tax. (See Form 6251.)
b. Additional tax on a qualified plan, including an individual retirement arrangement (IRA), or other tax-favored account. 
(See Pub. 590-A, Contributions to Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs); Pub. 590-B, Distributions from 
Individual Retirement Arrangements (IRAs); and Pub. 969, Health Savings Accounts and Other Tax-Favored Health 
Plans.) But if you are filing a return only because you owe this tax, you can file Form 5329 by itself.
c. Social security or Medicare tax on tips you didn't report to your employer (see Pub. 531) or on wages you received 
from an employer who didn't withhold these taxes (see Form 8919).
d. Write-in taxes, including uncollected social security, Medicare, or railroad retirement tax on tips you reported to your 
employer or on group-term life insurance and additional taxes on health savings accounts. (See Pub. 531, Pub. 969, 
and the Form 1040 instructions for line 62.)
e. Household employment taxes. But if you are filing a return only because you owe these taxes, you can file 
Schedule H (Form 1040) by itself.
f. Recapture taxes. (See the Form 1040 instructions for lines 44, 60b, and 62.)
2. You (or your spouse if filing jointly) received Archer MSA, Medicare Advantage MSA, or health savings account 
distributions.
3. You had net earnings from self-employment of at least $400. (See Schedule SE (Form 1040) and its instructions.)
4. You had wages of $108.28 or more from a church or qualified church-controlled organization that is exempt from employer 
social security and Medicare taxes. (See Schedule SE (Form 1040) and its instructions.)
5. Advance payments of the premium tax credit were made for you, your spouse, or a dependent who enrolled in coverage 
through the Health Insurance Marketplace. You should have received Form(s) 1095-A showing the amount of the advance 
payments, if any. 
6. Advance payments of the health coverage tax credit were made for you, your spouse, or a dependent. You or whoever 
enrolled you should have received Form(s) 1099-H showing the amount of the advance payments.
Page 5 of 30  Fileid: … tions/P501/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 12:05 - 2-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2017)   Page 5

return, your standard deduction (discussed 
later), and your tax. You also use your filing sta-
tus to determine whether you are eligible to 
claim certain other deductions and credits.
There are five filing statuses:
Single,
Married Filing Jointly,
Married Filing Separately,
Head of Household, and
Qualifying Widow(er).
If more than one filing status applies to you, 
choose the one that will give you the lowest tax.
Marital Status
In general, your filing status depends on 
whether you are considered unmarried or mar-
ried.
Unmarried persons.  You are considered un-
married for the whole year if, on the last day of 
your tax year, you are either:
Unmarried, or
Legally separated from your spouse under 
a divorce or separate maintenance decree.
State law governs whether you are married 
or legally separated under a divorce or separate 
maintenance decree.
Divorced persons. If you are divorced un-
der a final decree by the last day of the year, 
you are considered unmarried for the whole 
year.
Divorce and remarriage.  If you obtain a 
divorce for the sole purpose of filing tax returns 
as unmarried individuals, and at the time of di-
vorce you intend to and do, in fact, remarry 
each other in the next tax year, you and your 
spouse must file as married individuals in both 
years.
Annulled marriages.  If you obtain a court 
decree of annulment, which holds that no valid 
marriage ever existed, you are considered un-
married even if you filed joint returns for earlier 
years. You must file amended returns (Form 
1040X) claiming single or head of household 
status for all tax years that are affected by the 
annulment and not closed by the statute of limi-
tations for filing a tax return. Generally, for a 
credit or refund, you must file Form 1040X 
within 3 years (including extensions) after the 
date you filed your original return or within 2 
years after the date you paid the tax, whichever 
is later. If you filed your original tax return early 
(for example, March 1), your return is consid-
ered filed on the due date (generally April 15). 
However, if you had an extension to file (for ex-
ample, until October 15) but you filed earlier 
and we received it on July 1, your return is con-
sidered filed on July 1.
Head of household or qualifying 
widow(er). If you are considered unmarried, 
you may be able to file as a head of household 
or as a qualifying widow(er). See Head of 
Household and Qualifying Widow(er)  to see if 
you qualify.
Married persons.  If you are considered mar-
ried, you and your spouse can file a joint return 
or separate returns.
Considered married.  You are considered 
married for the whole year if, on the last day of 
your tax year, you and your spouse meet any 
one of the following tests.
1. You are married and living together.
2. You are living together in a common law 
marriage recognized in the state where 
you now live or in the state where the com-
mon law marriage began.
3. You are married and living apart but not le-
gally separated under a decree of divorce 
or separate maintenance.
4. You are separated under an interlocutory 
(not final) decree of divorce.
Spouse died during the year.  If your 
spouse died during the year, you are consid-
ered married for the whole year for filing status 
purposes.
If you didn't remarry before the end of the 
tax year, you can file a joint return for yourself 
and your deceased spouse. For the next 2 
years, you may be entitled to the special bene-
fits described later under Qualifying Widow(er).
If you remarried before the end of the tax 
year, you can file a joint return with your new 
spouse. Your deceased spouse's filing status is 
married filing separately for that year.
Married persons living apart.  If you live 
apart from your spouse and meet certain tests, 
you may be able to file as head of household 
even if you aren't divorced or legally separated. 
If you qualify to file as head of household in-
stead of as married filing separately, your 
standard deduction will be higher. Also, your tax 
may be lower, and you may be able to claim the 
earned income credit. See Head of Household , 
later.
Single
Your filing status is single if you are considered 
unmarried and you don't qualify for another fil-
ing status. To determine your marital status, 
see Marital Status, earlier.
Widow(er). Your filing status may be single if 
you were widowed before January 1, 2017, and 
didn't remarry before the end of 2017. You may, 
however, be able to use another filing status 
that will give you a lower tax. See Head of 
Household and Qualifying Widow(er) , later, to 
see if you qualify.
How to file.  You can file Form 1040. If you 
have taxable income of less than $100,000, you 
may be able to file Form 1040A. If, in addition, 
you have no dependents, are under 65 and not 
blind, and meet other requirements, you can file 
Form 1040EZ. If you file Form 1040A or Form 
1040, show your filing status as single by 
checking the box on line 1. Use the Single col-
umn of the Tax Table, or Section A of the Tax 
Computation Worksheet, to figure your tax.
Married Filing Jointly
You can choose married filing jointly as your fil-
ing status if you are considered married and 
both you and your spouse agree to file a joint 
return. On a joint return, you and your spouse 
report your combined income and deduct your 
combined allowable expenses. You can file a 
joint return even if one of you had no income or 
deductions.
If you and your spouse decide to file a joint 
return, your tax may be lower than your com-
bined tax for the other filing statuses. Also, your 
standard deduction (if you don't itemize deduc-
tions) may be higher, and you may qualify for 
tax benefits that don't apply to other filing sta-
tuses.
If you and your spouse each have in-
come, you may want to figure your tax 
both on a joint return and on separate 
returns (using the filing status of married filing 
separately). You can choose the method that 
gives the two of you the lower combined tax.
How to file.  If you file as married filing jointly, 
you can use Form 1040. If you and your spouse 
have taxable income of less than $100,000, you 
may be able to file Form 1040A. If, in addition, 
you and your spouse have no dependents, are 
both under 65 and not blind, and meet other re-
quirements, you can file Form 1040EZ. If you 
file Form 1040 or Form 1040A, show this filing 
status by checking the box on line 2. Use the 
Married filing jointly column of the Tax Table, or 
Section B of the Tax Computation Worksheet, 
to figure your tax.
Spouse died.  If your spouse died during the 
year, you are considered married for the whole 
year and can choose married filing jointly as 
your filing status. See Spouse died during the 
year, under Married persons, earlier.
If your spouse died in 2018 before filing a 
2017 return, you can choose married filing 
jointly as your filing status on your 2017 return.
Divorced persons. If you are divorced under a 
final decree by the last day of the year, you are 
considered unmarried for the whole year and 
you can't choose married filing jointly as your fil-
ing status.
Filing a Joint Return
Both you and your spouse must include all of 
your income, exemptions, and deductions on 
your joint return.
Accounting period. Both of you must use the 
same accounting period, but you can use differ-
ent accounting methods.
Joint responsibility. Both of you may be held 
responsible, jointly and individually, for the tax 
and any interest or penalty due on your joint re-
turn. This means that if one spouse doesn't pay 
the tax due, the other may have to. Or, if one 
spouse doesn't report the correct tax, both 
spouses may be responsible for any additional 
taxes assessed by the IRS. One spouse may 
be held responsible for all the tax due even if all 
the income was earned by the other spouse.
You may want to file separately if:
You believe your spouse isn't reporting all 
of his or her income, or
You don't want to be responsible for any 
taxes due if your spouse doesn't have 
TIP
Page 6 of 30  Fileid: … tions/P501/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 12:05 - 2-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 6 Publication 501 (2017)

enough tax withheld or doesn't pay enough 
estimated tax.
Divorced taxpayer.  You may be held 
jointly and individually responsible for any tax, 
interest, and penalties due on a joint return filed 
before your divorce. This responsibility may ap-
ply even if your divorce decree states that your 
former spouse will be responsible for any 
amounts due on previously filed joint returns.
Relief from joint responsibility.  In some 
cases, one spouse may be relieved of joint re-
sponsibility for tax, interest, and penalties on a 
joint return for items of the other spouse that 
were incorrectly reported on the joint return. 
You can ask for relief no matter how small the 
liability.
There are three types of relief available.
1. Innocent spouse relief.
2. Separation of liability (available only to 
joint filers who are divorced, widowed, le-
gally separated, or who haven't lived to-
gether for the 12 months ending on the 
date the election for this relief is filed).
3. Equitable relief.
You must file Form 8857, Request for Inno-
cent Spouse Relief, to request relief from joint 
responsibility. Pub. 971, explains the kinds of 
relief and who may qualify for them.
Signing a joint return.  For a return to be con-
sidered a joint return, both spouses generally 
must sign the return.
Spouse died before signing.  If your 
spouse died before signing the return, the exec-
utor or administrator must sign the return for 
your spouse. If neither you nor anyone else has 
been appointed as executor or administrator, 
you can sign the return for your spouse and en-
ter “Filing as surviving spouse” in the area 
where you sign the return.
Spouse away from home.  If your spouse 
is away from home, you should prepare the re-
turn, sign it, and send it to your spouse to sign 
so it can be filed on time.
Injury or disease prevents signing.  If 
your spouse can't sign because of injury or dis-
ease and tells you to sign for him or her, you 
can sign your spouse's name in the proper 
space on the return followed by the words “By 
(your name), Husband (or Wife).” Be sure to 
also sign in the space provided for your signa-
ture. Attach a dated statement, signed by you, 
to the return. The statement should include the 
form number of the return you are filing, the tax 
year, and the reason your spouse can't sign, 
and should state that your spouse has agreed 
to your signing for him or her.
Signing as guardian of spouse. If you are 
the guardian of your spouse who is mentally in-
competent, you can sign the return for your 
spouse as guardian.
Spouse in combat zone.  You can sign a 
joint return for your spouse if your spouse can't 
sign because he or she is serving in a combat 
zone (such as the Persian Gulf area, Serbia, 
Montenegro, Albania, or Afghanistan), even if 
you don't have a power of attorney or other 
statement. Attach a signed statement to your 
return explaining that your spouse is serving in 
a combat zone. For more information on special 
tax rules for persons who are serving in a com-
bat zone, or who are in missing status as a re-
sult of serving in a combat zone, see Pub. 3, 
Armed Forces' Tax Guide.
Other reasons spouse can't sign.  If your 
spouse can't sign the joint return for any other 
reason, you can sign for your spouse only if you 
are given a valid power of attorney (a legal 
document giving you permission to act for your 
spouse). Attach the power of attorney (or a 
copy of it) to your tax return. You can use Form 
2848.
Nonresident alien or dual-status alien. Gen-
erally, a married couple can't file a joint return if 
either one is a nonresident alien at any time 
during the tax year. However, if one spouse 
was a nonresident alien or dual-status alien 
who was married to a U.S. citizen or resident 
alien at the end of the year, the spouses can 
choose to file a joint return. If you do file a joint 
return, you and your spouse are both treated as 
U.S. residents for the entire tax year. See chap-
ter 1 of Pub. 519. 
Married Filing Separately
You can choose married filing separately as 
your filing status if you are married. This filing 
status may benefit you if you want to be respon-
sible only for your own tax or if it results in less 
tax than filing a joint return.
If you and your spouse don't agree to file a 
joint return, you must use this filing status un-
less you qualify for head of household status, 
discussed later.
You may be able to choose head of house-
hold filing status if you are considered unmar-
ried because you live apart from your spouse 
and meet certain tests (explained later, under 
Head of Household ). This can apply to you 
even if you aren't divorced or legally separated. 
If you qualify to file as head of household, in-
stead of as married filing separately, your tax 
may be lower, you may be able to claim the 
earned income credit and certain other credits, 
and your standard deduction will be higher. The 
head of household filing status allows you to 
choose the standard deduction even if your 
spouse chooses to itemize deductions. See 
Head of Household, later, for more information.
You will generally pay more combined 
tax on separate returns than you would 
on a joint return for the reasons listed 
under Special Rules , later. However, unless 
you are required to file separately, you should 
figure your tax both ways (on a joint return and 
on separate returns). This way you can make 
sure you are using the filing status that results in 
the lowest combined tax. When figuring the 
combined tax of a married couple, you may 
want to consider state taxes as well as federal 
taxes.
How to file.  If you file a separate return, you 
generally report only your own income, exemp-
tions, credits, and deductions. You can claim an 
exemption for your spouse only if your spouse 
TIP
had no gross income, isn't filing a return, and 
wasn't the dependent of another person.
You can file Form 1040. If your taxable in-
come is less than $100,000, you may be able to 
file Form 1040A. Select this filing status by 
checking the box on line 3 of either form. Enter 
your spouse's full name and SSN or ITIN in the 
spaces provided. If your spouse doesn't have 
and isn't required to have an SSN or ITIN, enter 
“NRA” in the space for your spouse's SSN. Use 
the Married filing separately  column of the Tax 
Table or Section C of the Tax Computation 
Worksheet to figure your tax.
Special Rules
If you choose married filing separately as your 
filing status, the following special rules apply. 
Because of these special rules, you usually pay 
more tax on a separate return than if you use 
another filing status you qualify for.
1. Your tax rate generally is higher than on a 
joint return.
2. Your exemption amount for figuring the al-
ternative minimum tax is half that allowed 
on a joint return.
3. You can't take the credit for child and de-
pendent care expenses in most cases, 
and the amount you can exclude from in-
come under an employer's dependent 
care assistance program is limited to 
$2,500 (instead of $5,000 on a joint re-
turn). However, if you are legally separa-
ted or living apart from your spouse, you 
may be able to file a separate return and 
still take the credit. See What’s Your Filing 
Status? in Pub. 503, Child and Dependent 
Care Expenses, for more information.
4. You can't take the earned income credit.
5. You can't take the exclusion or credit for 
adoption expenses in most cases.
6. You can't take the education credits (the 
American opportunity credit and lifetime 
learning credit) or the deduction for stu-
dent loan interest.
7. You can't exclude any interest income 
from qualified U.S. savings bonds you 
used for higher education expenses.
8. If you lived with your spouse at any time 
during the tax year:
a. You can't claim the credit for the eld-
erly or the disabled, and
b. You must include in income a greater 
percentage (up to 85%) of any social 
security or equivalent railroad retire-
ment benefits you received.
9. The following credits and deductions are 
reduced at income levels half those for a 
joint return:
a. The child tax credit,
b. The retirement savings contributions 
credit,
c. The deduction for personal exemp-
tions, and
d. Itemized deductions.
Page 7 of 30  Fileid: … tions/P501/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 12:05 - 2-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2017)   Page 7

10. Your capital loss deduction limit is $1,500 
(instead of $3,000 on a joint return).
11. If your spouse itemizes deductions, you 
can't claim the standard deduction. If you 
can claim the standard deduction, your 
basic standard deduction is half the 
amount allowed on a joint return.
At the time this publication was pre-
pared for print, the tuition and fees de-
duction had expired. Even if it is exten-
ded, you can't take it if your filing status is 
married filing separately. To see if it was exten-
ded, go to IRS.gov/Pub501.
Adjusted gross income (AGI) limits.  If your 
AGI on a separate return is lower than it would 
have been on a joint return, you may be able to 
deduct a larger amount for certain deductions 
that are limited by AGI, such as medical expen-
ses.
Individual retirement arrangements (IRAs).
You may not be able to deduct all or part of your 
contributions to a traditional IRA if you or your 
spouse were covered by an employee retire-
ment plan at work during the year. Your deduc-
tion is reduced or eliminated if your income is 
more than a certain amount. This amount is 
much lower for married individuals who file sep-
arately and lived together at any time during the 
year. For more information, see How Much Can 
You Deduct? in chapter 1 of Pub. 590-A.
Rental activity losses.  If you actively partici-
pated in a passive rental real estate activity that 
produced a loss, you generally can deduct the 
loss from your nonpassive income up to 
$25,000. This is called a special allowance. 
However, married persons filing separate re-
turns who lived together at any time during the 
year can't claim this special allowance. Married 
persons filing separate returns who lived apart 
at all times during the year are each allowed a 
$12,500 maximum special allowance for losses 
from passive real estate activities. See Rental 
Activities in Pub. 925, Passive Activity and 
At-Risk Rules.
Community property states.  Community 
property states include Arizona, California, 
Idaho, Louisiana, Nevada, New Mexico, Texas, 
Washington, and Wisconsin. If you live in a 
community property state and file separately, 
your income may be considered separate in-
come or community income for income tax pur-
poses. See Pub. 555.
Joint Return After
Separate Returns
You can change your filing status from a sepa-
rate return to a joint return by filing an amended 
return using Form 1040X.
You generally can change to a joint return 
any time within 3 years from the due date of the 
separate return or returns. This doesn't include 
any extensions. A separate return includes a re-
turn filed by you or your spouse claiming mar-
ried filing separately, single, or head of house-
hold filing status.
CAUTION
!
Separate Returns
After Joint Return
Once you file a joint return, you can't choose to 
file separate returns for that year after the due 
date of the return.
Exception. A personal representative for a de-
cedent can change from a joint return elected 
by the surviving spouse to a separate return for 
the decedent. The personal representative has 
1 year from the due date (including extensions) 
of the return to make the change. See Pub. 559 
for more information on filing income tax returns 
for a decedent.
Head of Household
You may be able to file as head of household if 
you meet all the following requirements.
1. You are unmarried or considered unmar-
ried on the last day of the year. See Mari-
tal Status, earlier, and Considered Unmar-
ried, later.
2. You paid more than half the cost of keep-
ing up a home for the year.
3. A qualifying person lived with you in the 
home for more than half the year (except 
for temporary absences, such as school). 
However, if the qualifying person is your 
dependent parent, he or she doesn't have 
to live with you. See Special rule for pa-
rent, later, under Qualifying Person.
If you qualify to file as head of house-
hold, your tax rate usually will be lower 
than the rates for single or married fil-
ing separately. You will also receive a higher 
standard deduction than if you file as single or 
married filing separately.
How to file.  If you file as head of household, 
you can use Form 1040. If you have taxable in-
come of less than $100,000 and meet certain 
other conditions, you may be able to file Form 
TIP
1040A. Indicate your choice of this filing status 
by checking the box on line 4 of either form. 
Use the Head of a household column of the Tax 
Table or Section D of the Tax Computation 
Worksheet to figure your tax.
Considered Unmarried
To qualify for head of household status, you 
must be either unmarried or considered unmar-
ried on the last day of the year. You are consid-
ered unmarried on the last day of the tax year if 
you meet all the following tests.
1. You file a separate return. A separate re-
turn includes a return claiming married fil-
ing separately, single, or head of house-
hold filing status.
2. You paid more than half the cost of keep-
ing up your home for the tax year.
3. Your spouse didn't live in your home dur-
ing the last 6 months of the tax year. Your 
spouse is considered to live in your home 
even if he or she is temporarily absent due 
to special circumstances. See Temporary 
absences, later.
4. Your home was the main home of your 
child, stepchild, or foster child for more 
than half the year. (See Home of qualifying 
person, later, for rules applying to a child's 
birth, death, or temporary absence during 
the year.)
5. You must be able to claim an exemption 
for the child. However, you meet this test if 
you can't claim the exemption only be-
cause the noncustodial parent can claim 
the child using the rules described later in 
Children of divorced or separated parents 
(or parents who live apart) under Qualify-
ing Child or in Support Test for Children of 
Divorced or Separated Parents (or Parents 
Who Live Apart) under Qualifying Relative. 
The general rules for claiming an exemp-
tion for a dependent are explained later 
under Exemptions for Dependents.
Cost of Keeping Up a HomeWorksheet 1. Keep for Your Records
   
Amount You
Paid
Total
Cost
Property taxes .............................. $ $ 
Mortgage interest expense .....................   
Rent .....................................   
Utility charges ..............................   
Repairs/maintenance .........................   
Property insurance ...........................   
Food eaten in the home ........................   
Other household expenses .....................   
Totals .................................... $ $ 
Minus total amount you paid ................... (  )
Amount others paid .......................... $ 
If the total amount you paid is more than the amount others paid, you meet the requirement of paying more than 
half the cost of keeping up the home.
Page 8 of 30  Fileid: … tions/P501/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 12:05 - 2-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 8 Publication 501 (2017)

If you were considered married for part 
of the year and lived in a community 
property state (listed earlier under Mar-
ried Filing Separately ), special rules may apply 
in determining your income and expenses. See 
Pub. 555 for more information.
Nonresident alien spouse.  You are consid-
ered unmarried for head of household purposes 
if your spouse was a nonresident alien at any 
time during the year and you don't choose to 
treat your nonresident spouse as a resident 
alien. However, your spouse isn't a qualifying 
person for head of household purposes. You 
must have another qualifying person and meet 
the other tests to be eligible to file as a head of 
household.
Choice to treat spouse as resident.  You 
are considered married if you choose to treat 
your spouse as a resident alien. See chapter 1 
of Pub. 519.
Keeping Up a Home
To qualify for head of household status, you 
must pay more than half of the cost of keeping 
up a home for the year. You can determine 
whether you paid more than half of the cost of 
keeping up a home by using Worksheet 1.
Costs you include.  Include in the cost of 
keeping up a home expenses such as rent, 
mortgage interest, real estate taxes, insurance 
on the home, repairs, utilities, and food eaten in 
the home.
Costs you don't include.  Don't include the 
cost of clothing, education, medical treatment, 
vacations, life insurance, or transportation. 
Also, don't include the rental value of a home 
you own or the value of your services or those 
of a member of your household.
Qualifying Person
See Table 4 to see who is a qualifying person. 
Any person not described in Table 4  isn't a 
qualifying person.
Example 1—child.  Your unmarried son 
lived with you all year and was 18 years old at 
the end of the year. He didn't provide more than 
half of his own support and doesn't meet the 
tests to be a qualifying child of anyone else. As 
a result, he is your qualifying child (see Qualify-
ing Child, later) and, because he is single, your 
qualifying person for head of household purpo-
ses.
Example 2—child who isn't qualifying 
person. The facts are the same as in Exam-
ple 1 except your son was 25 years old at the 
end of the year and his gross income was 
$5,000. Because he doesn't meet the age test 
(explained later under Qualifying Child ), your 
son isn't your qualifying child. Because he 
doesn't meet the gross income test  (explained 
later under Qualifying Relative ), he isn't your 
qualifying relative. As a result, he isn't your 
qualifying person for head of household purpo-
ses.
CAUTION
!
Example 3—girlfriend.  Your girlfriend 
lived with you all year. Even though she may be 
your qualifying relative if the gross income and 
support tests (explained later) are met, she isn't 
your qualifying person for head of household 
purposes because she isn't related to you in 
one of the ways listed under Relatives who 
don't have to live with you. See Table 4.
Example 4—girlfriend's child.  The facts 
are the same as in Example 3 except your girl-
friend's 10-year-old son also lived with you all 
year. He isn't your qualifying child and, because 
he is your girlfriend's qualifying child, he isn't 
your qualifying relative (see Not a Qualifying 
Child Test, later). As a result, he isn't your quali-
fying person for head of household purposes.
Home of qualifying person.  Generally, the 
qualifying person must live with you for more 
than half of the year.
Special rule for parent.  If your qualifying 
person is your father or mother, you may be eli-
gible to file as head of household even if your 
father or mother doesn't live with you. However, 
you must be able to claim an exemption for your 
father or mother. Also, you must pay more than 
half the cost of keeping up a home that was the 
main home for the entire year for your father or 
mother.
If you pay more than half the cost of keeping 
your parent in a rest home or home for the eld-
erly, that counts as paying more than half the 
cost of keeping up your parent's main home.
Death or birth.  You may be eligible to file 
as head of household even if the qualifying per-
son who qualifies you for this filing status is 
born or dies during the year. To qualify you for 
head of household filing status, the qualifying 
person (as defined in Table 4 ) must be one of 
the following.
Your qualifying child or qualifying relative 
who lived with you for more than half the 
part of the year he or she was alive.
Your parent for whom you paid, for the en-
tire part of the year he or she was alive, 
more than half the cost of keeping up the 
home he or she lived in.
Example. You are unmarried. Your mother, 
for whom you can claim an exemption, lived in 
an apartment by herself. She died on Septem-
ber 2. The cost of the upkeep of her apartment 
for the year until her death was $6,000. You 
paid $4,000 and your brother paid $2,000. Your 
brother made no other payments towards your 
mother's support. Your mother had no income. 
Because you paid more than half of the cost of 
keeping up your mother's apartment from Janu-
ary 1 until her death, and you can claim an ex-
emption for her, you can file as a head of 
household.
Temporary absences. You and your quali-
fying person are considered to live together 
even if one or both of you are temporarily ab-
sent from your home due to special circumstan-
ces such as illness, education, business, vaca-
tion, military service, or detention in a juvenile 
facility. It must be reasonable to assume the ab-
sent person will return to the home after the 
temporary absence. You must continue to keep 
up the home during the absence.
Kidnapped child.  You may be eligible to 
file as head of household even if the child who 
is your qualifying person has been kidnapped. 
You can claim head of household filing status if 
all the following statements are true.
1. The child is presumed by law enforcement 
authorities to have been kidnapped by 
someone who isn't a member of your fam-
ily or the child's family.
2. In the year of the kidnapping, the child 
lived with you for more than half the part of 
the year before the kidnapping.
3. In the year of the child’s return, the child 
lived with you for more than half the part of 
the year following the date of the child’s 
return.
4. You would have qualified for head of 
household filing status if the child hadn't 
been kidnapped.
This treatment applies for all years until the 
earlier of:
1. The year there is a determination that the 
child is dead, or
2. The year the child would have reached 
age 18.
Qualifying Widow(er)
If your spouse died in 2017, you can use mar-
ried filing jointly as your filing status for 2017 if 
you otherwise qualify to use that status. The 
year of death is the last year for which you can 
file jointly with your deceased spouse. See Mar-
ried Filing Jointly, earlier.
You may be eligible to use qualifying 
widow(er) as your filing status for 2 years fol-
lowing the year your spouse died. For example, 
if your spouse died in 2016 and you haven't re-
married, you may be able to use this filing sta-
tus for 2017 and 2018. The rules for using this 
filing status are explained in detail here.
This filing status entitles you to use joint re-
turn tax rates and the highest standard deduc-
tion amount (if you don't itemize deductions). It 
doesn't entitle you to file a joint return.
How to file.  If you file as a qualifying 
widow(er), you can use Form 1040. If you also 
have taxable income of less than $100,000 and 
meet certain other conditions, you may be able 
to file Form 1040A. Check the box on line 5 of 
either form. If the child who qualifies you for this 
filing status isn’t claimed as your dependent on 
line 6c of Form 1040 or Form 1040A, enter the 
child’s name on line 4 of the form you are filing. 
Use the Married filing jointly column of the Tax 
Table or Section B of the Tax Computation 
Worksheet to figure your tax.
Eligibility rules.  You are eligible to file your 
2017 return as a qualifying widow(er) if you 
meet all the following tests.
1. You were entitled to file a joint return with 
your spouse for the year your spouse died. 
It doesn't matter whether you actually filed 
a joint return.
Page 9 of 30  Fileid: … tions/P501/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 12:05 - 2-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2017)   Page 9

2. Your spouse died in 2015 or 2016 and you 
didn't remarry before the end of 2017.
3. You have a child or stepchild (not a foster 
child) whom you can claim as a dependent 
or could claim as a dependent except that, 
for 2017:
a. The child had gross income of $4,050 
or more,
b. The child filed a joint return, or
c. You could be claimed as a dependent 
on someone else’s return.
If the child isn’t claimed as your de-
pendent on Form 1040 or Form 1040A, 
line 6c, enter the child’s name on line 4 of 
the form you’re filing. If you don’t enter the 
name, it will take us longer to process your 
return.
4. This child lived in your home all year, ex-
cept for temporary absences. See Tempo-
rary absences, earlier, under Head of 
Household. There are also exceptions, de-
scribed later, for a child who was born or 
died during the year and for a kidnapped 
child.
5. You paid more than half the cost of keep-
ing up a home for the year. See Keeping 
Up a Home, earlier, under Head of House-
hold.
Example. John's wife died in 2015. John 
hasn't remarried. He has continued during 2016 
and 2017 to keep up a home for himself and his 
child, who lives with him and for whom he can 
claim an exemption. For 2015 he was entitled to 
file a joint return for himself and his deceased 
wife. For 2016 and 2017, he can file as a 
qualifying widower. After 2017, he can file as 
head of household if he qualifies.
Death or birth. You may be eligible to file as a 
qualifying widow(er) if the child who qualifies 
you for this filing status is born or dies during 
the year. You must have provided more than 
half of the cost of keeping up a home that was 
the child's main home during the entire part of 
the year he or she was alive.
Kidnapped child.  You may be eligible to file 
as a qualifying widow(er) even if the child who 
qualifies you for this filing status has been kid-
napped. You can claim qualifying widow(er) fil-
ing status if all the following statements are true.
1. The child is presumed by law enforcement 
authorities to have been kidnapped by 
Who Is a Qualifying Person Qualifying You To File as Head of Household?1
CAUTION
!
See the text of this publication for the other requirements you must meet to claim head of household filing status.
IF the person is your . . . AND . . . THEN that person is . . .
qualifying child (such as a son, daughter, 
or grandchild who lived with you more than 
half the year and meets certain other tests)2
he or she is single a qualifying person, whether or not 
you can claim an exemption for the 
person.
he or she is married and you can claim an 
exemption for him or her
a qualifying person.
he or she is married and you can't claim an 
exemption for him or her
not a qualifying person.3
qualifying relative4 who is your father or 
mother
you can claim an exemption for him or her5 a qualifying person.6
you can't claim an exemption for him or her not a qualifying person.
qualifying relative4 other than your father or 
mother (such as a grandparent, brother, or 
sister who meets certain tests). 
he or she lived with you more than half the 
year, and he or she is related to you in one 
of the ways listed under Relatives who don't 
have to live with you, later, and you can 
claim an exemption for him or her5
a qualifying person.
he or she didn't live with you more than half 
the year
not a qualifying person.
he or she isn't related to you in one of the 
ways listed under Relatives who don't have 
to live with you, later, and is your qualifying 
relative only because he or she lived with 
you all year as a member of your household 
not a qualifying person.
you can't claim an exemption for him or her not a qualifying person.
1 A person can't qualify more than one taxpayer to use the head of household filing status for the year.
2 The term “qualifying child” is defined under Exemptions for Dependents, later. Note: If you are a noncustodial parent, the term “qualifying child” 
for head of household filing status doesn't include a child who is your qualifying child for exemption purposes only because of the rules described 
under Children of divorced or separated parents (or parents who live apart) under Qualifying Child, later. If you are the custodial parent and those 
rules apply, the child generally is your qualifying child for head of household filing status even though the child isn't a qualifying child for whom you 
can claim an exemption.
3 This person is a qualifying person if the only reason you can't claim the exemption is that you can be claimed as a dependent on someone else's 
return.
4 The term “qualifying relative” is defined under Exemptions for Dependents, later.
5 If you can claim an exemption for a person only because of a multiple support agreement, that person isn't a qualifying person. See Multiple 
Support Agreement.
6 See Special rule for parent.
Table 4.
Page 10 of 30  Fileid: … tions/P501/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 12:05 - 2-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 10 Publication 501 (2017)

someone who isn't a member of your fam-
ily or the child's family.
2. In the year of the kidnapping, the child 
lived with you for more than half the part of 
the year before the kidnapping.
3. In the year of the child’s return, the child 
lived with you for more than half the part of 
the year following the date of the child’s 
return.
4. You would have qualified for qualifying 
widow(er) filing status if the child had not 
been kidnapped.
As mentioned earlier, this filing status 
is available for only 2 years following 
the year your spouse died.
Exemptions
Exemptions reduce your taxable income. You 
can deduct $4,050 for each exemption you 
claim in 2017. If you are entitled to two exemp-
tions for 2017, you can deduct $8,100 ($4,050 
× 2). But you may lose the benefit of part or all 
of your exemptions if your adjusted gross in-
come is above a certain amount. See Phaseout 
of Exemptions, later.
Types of exemptions.  There are two types of 
exemptions you may be able to take:
Personal exemptions for yourself and your 
spouse, and
Exemptions for dependents (dependency 
exemptions).
While each is worth the same amount ($4,050 
for 2017), different rules, discussed later, apply 
to each type.
Dependent can't claim a personal exemp-
tion. If you are entitled to claim an exemption 
for a dependent (such as your child), that de-
pendent can't claim a personal exemption on 
his or her own tax return.
How to claim exemptions.  How you claim an 
exemption on your tax return depends on which 
form you file.
Form 1040EZ filers.  If you file Form 
1040EZ, the exemption amount is combined 
with the standard deduction and entered on 
line 5.
Form 1040A filers. If you file Form 1040A, 
complete lines 6a through 6d. The total number 
of exemptions you can claim is the total in the 
box on line 6d. Also complete line 26.
Form 1040 filers.  If you file Form 1040, 
complete lines 6a through 6d. The total number 
of exemptions you can claim is the total in the 
box on line 6d. Also complete line 42. If your ad-
justed gross income is more than $156,900, 
see Phaseout of Exemptions, later.
U.S. citizen or resident alien.  If you are a 
U.S. citizen, U.S. resident alien, U.S. national 
(defined later) or a resident of Canada or Mex-
ico, you may qualify for any of the exemptions 
discussed here.
CAUTION
!
Nonresident aliens.  Generally, if you are a 
nonresident alien (other than a resident of Can-
ada or Mexico, or certain residents of India or 
Korea), you can qualify for only one personal 
exemption for yourself. You can't claim exemp-
tions for a spouse or dependents.
These restrictions don't apply if you are a 
nonresident alien married to a U. S. citizen or 
resident alien and have chosen to be treated as 
a resident of the United States.
More information.  For more information 
on exemptions if you are a nonresident alien, 
see chapter 5 in Pub. 519.
Dual-status taxpayers. If you have been both 
a nonresident alien and a resident alien in the 
same tax year, you should see Pub. 519 for in-
formation on determining your exemptions.
Personal Exemptions
You are generally allowed one exemption for 
yourself. If you are married, you may be allowed 
one exemption for your spouse. These are 
called personal exemptions.
Your Own Exemption
You can take one exemption for yourself unless 
you can be claimed as a dependent by another 
taxpayer. If another taxpayer is entitled to claim 
you as a dependent, you can't take an exemp-
tion for yourself even if the other taxpayer 
doesn't actually claim you as a dependent.
Your Spouse's Exemption
Your spouse is never considered your depend-
ent.
Joint return.  On a joint return, you can claim 
one exemption for yourself and one for your 
spouse.
Separate return.  If you file a separate return, 
you can claim an exemption for your spouse 
only if your spouse:
Had no gross income,
Isn't filing a return, and
Wasn't the dependent of another taxpayer.
You can claim an exemption for your spouse 
even if he or she is a nonresident alien. In that 
case, your spouse:
Must have no gross income for U.S. tax 
purposes,
Must not be filing a return, and
Must not be the dependent of another tax-
payer.
Head of household. If you qualify for head 
of household filing status because you are con-
sidered unmarried, you can claim an exemption 
for your spouse if the conditions described in 
the preceding paragraph are satisfied.
To claim the exemption for your spouse, 
check the box on line 6b of Form 1040 or Form 
1040A and enter the name of your spouse in 
the space to the right of the box. Enter the SSN 
or ITIN of your spouse in the space provided at 
the top of Form 1040 or Form 1040A.
Death of spouse.  If your spouse died during 
the year and you file a joint return for yourself 
and your deceased spouse, you generally can 
claim your spouse's exemption under the rules 
just explained in Joint return. If you file a sepa-
rate return for the year, you may be able to 
claim your spouse's exemption under the rules 
just described in Separate return.
If you remarried during the year, you can't 
take an exemption for your deceased spouse.
If you are a surviving spouse without gross 
income and you remarry in the year your 
spouse died, you can be claimed as an exemp-
tion on both the final separate return of your de-
ceased spouse and the separate return of your 
new spouse for that year. If you file a joint return 
with your new spouse, you can be claimed as 
an exemption only on that return.
Divorced or separated spouse.  If you ob-
tained a final decree of divorce or separate 
maintenance during the year, you can't take 
your former spouse's exemption. This rule ap-
plies even if you provided all of your former 
spouse's support.
Exemptions for 
Dependents
You are allowed one exemption for each person 
you can claim as a dependent. You can claim 
an exemption for a dependent even if your de-
pendent files a return. However, see Joint Re-
turn Test, later.
The term “dependent” means:
A qualifying child, or
A qualifying relative.
The terms “qualifying child” and “qualifying rela-
tive” are defined later.
All the requirements for claiming an exemp-
tion for a dependent are summarized in Table 5.
Dependent not allowed a personal 
exemption. If you can claim an ex-
emption for your dependent, the de-
pendent can't claim his or her own personal ex-
emption on his or her own tax return. This is 
true even if you don't claim the dependent's ex-
emption on your return. It is also true if the de-
pendent's exemption on your return is reduced 
or eliminated under the phaseout rule described 
under Phaseout of Exemptions, later.
Housekeepers, maids, or servants.  If these 
people work for you, you can't claim exemp-
tions for them.
Child tax credit. You may be entitled to a child 
tax credit for each qualifying child who was un-
der age 17 at the end of the year if you claimed 
an exemption for that child. For more informa-
tion, see the instructions for the tax form you file 
(Form 1040 or 1040A).
Exceptions
Even if you have a qualifying child or qualifying 
relative, you can claim an exemption for that 
person only if these three tests are met.
CAUTION
!
Page 11 of 30  Fileid: … tions/P501/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 12:05 - 2-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2017)   Page 11

1. Dependent taxpayer test.
2. Joint return test.
3. Citizen or resident test.
These three tests are explained in detail here.
Dependent Taxpayer Test
If you can be claimed as a dependent by an-
other person, you can't claim anyone else as a 
dependent. Even if you have a qualifying child 
or qualifying relative, you can't claim that per-
son as a dependent.
If you are filing a joint return and your 
spouse can be claimed as a dependent by 
someone else, you and your spouse can't claim 
any dependents on your joint return.
Joint Return Test
You generally can't claim a married person as a 
dependent if he or she files a joint return.
Exception. You can claim an exemption for a 
person who files a joint return if that person and 
his or her spouse file the joint return only to 
claim a refund of income tax withheld or estima-
ted tax paid.
Example 1—child files joint return.  You 
supported your 18-year-old daughter, and she 
lived with you all year while her husband was in 
the Armed Forces. He earned $25,000 for the 
year. The couple files a joint return. You can't 
take an exemption for your daughter.
Example 2—child files joint return only 
as claim for refund of withheld tax.  Your 
18-year-old son and his 17-year-old wife had 
$800 of wages from part-time jobs and no other 
income. They lived with you all year. Neither is 
required to file a tax return. They don't have a 
child. Taxes were taken out of their pay so they 
file a joint return only to get a refund of the with-
held taxes. The exception to the joint return test 
applies, so you aren't disqualified from claiming 
an exemption for each of them just because 
they file a joint return. You can claim exemp-
tions for each of them if all the other tests to do 
so are met.
Example 3—child files joint return to 
claim American opportunity credit.  The 
facts are the same as in Example 2 except no 
taxes were taken out of your son's pay or his 
Overview of the Rules for Claiming an Exemption for a Dependent
CAUTION
!
This table is only an overview of the rules. For details, see the rest of this publication.
You can't claim any dependents if you, or your spouse if filing jointly, could be claimed as a dependent by another taxpayer.
You can't claim a married person who files a joint return as a dependent unless that joint return is filed only to claim a refund of 
withheld income tax or estimated tax paid. 
You can't claim a person as a dependent unless that person is a U.S. citizen, U.S. resident alien, U.S. national, or a resident of 
Canada or Mexico.1
You can't claim a person as a dependent unless that person is your qualifying child or qualifying relative.
Tests To Be a Qualifying Child Tests To Be a Qualifying Relative
1. The child must be your son, daughter, stepchild, foster child, brother, 
sister, half brother, half sister, stepbrother, stepsister, or a descendant of 
any of them.
2. The child must be (a) under age 19 at the end of the year and younger 
than you (or your spouse if filing jointly), (b) under age 24 at the end of the 
year, a student, and younger than you (or your spouse if filing jointly), or 
(c) any age if permanently and totally disabled. 
3. The child must have lived with you for more than half of the year.2
4. The child must not have provided more than half of his or her own support 
for the year.
5. The child must not be filing a joint return for the year (unless that joint 
return is filed only to claim a refund of withheld income tax or estimated 
tax paid).
If the child meets the rules to be a qualifying child of more than one 
person, only one person can actually treat the child as a qualifying 
child. See Qualifying Child of More Than One Person, later, to find out 
which person is the person entitled to claim the child as a qualifying 
child. 
1. The person can't be your qualifying child or the qualifying 
child of any other taxpayer.
2. The person either (a) must be related to you in one of the 
ways listed under Relatives who don't have to live with you, or 
(b) must live with you all year as a member of your 
household2 (and your relationship must not violate local law).
3. The person's gross income for the year must be less than 
$4,050.3
4. You must provide more than half of the person's total support 
for the year.4
1 There is an exception for certain adopted children.
2 There are exceptions for temporary absences, children who were born or died during the year, children of divorced or separated parents (or 
parents who live apart), and kidnapped children.
3 There is an exception if the person is disabled and has income from a sheltered workshop.
4 There are exceptions for multiple support agreements, children of divorced or separated parents (or parents who live apart), and kidnapped 
children.
Table 5.
Page 12 of 30  Fileid: … tions/P501/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 12:05 - 2-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 12 Publication 501 (2017)

wife's pay. However, they file a joint return to 
claim an American opportunity credit of $124 
and get a refund of that amount. Because 
claiming the American opportunity credit is their 
reason for filing the return, they aren't filing it 
only to get a refund of income tax withheld or 
estimated tax paid. The exception to the joint 
return test doesn't apply, so you can't claim an 
exemption for either of them.
Citizen or Resident Test
You generally can't claim a person as a de-
pendent unless that person is a U.S. citizen, 
U.S. resident alien, U.S. national, or a resident 
of Canada or Mexico. However, there is an ex-
ception for certain adopted children, as ex-
plained next.
Exception for adopted child.  If you are a 
U.S. citizen or U.S. national who has legally 
adopted a child who isn't a U.S. citizen, U.S. 
resident alien, or U.S. national, this test is met if 
the child lived with you as a member of your 
household all year. This exception also applies 
if the child was lawfully placed with you for legal 
adoption.
Child's place of residence.  Children usually 
are citizens or residents of the country of their 
parents.
If you were a U.S. citizen when your child 
was born, the child may be a U.S. citizen and 
meet this test even if the other parent was a 
nonresident alien and the child was born in a 
foreign country.
Foreign students' place of residence.  For-
eign students brought to this country under a 
qualified international education exchange pro-
gram and placed in American homes for a tem-
porary period generally aren't U.S. residents 
and don't meet this test. You can't claim an ex-
emption for them. However, if you provided a 
home for a foreign student, you may be able to 
take a charitable contribution deduction. See 
Expenses Paid for Student Living With You in 
Pub. 526.
U.S. national.  A U.S. national is an individual 
who, although not a U.S. citizen, owes his or 
her allegiance to the United States. U.S. nation-
als include American Samoans and Northern 
Mariana Islanders who chose to become U.S. 
nationals instead of U.S. citizens.
Qualifying Child
Five tests must be met for a child to be your 
qualifying child. The five tests are:
1. Relationship,
2. Age,
3. Residency,
4. Support, and
5. Joint return.
These tests are explained next.
If a child meets the five tests to be the 
qualifying child of more than one per-
son, there are rules you must use to 
determine which person can actually treat the 
child as a qualifying child. See Qualifying Child 
of More Than One Person, later.
Relationship Test
To meet this test, a child must be:
Your son, daughter, stepchild, foster child, 
or a descendant (for example, your grand-
child) of any of them, or
Your brother, sister, half brother, half sis-
ter, stepbrother, stepsister, or a descend-
ant (for example, your niece or nephew) of 
any of them.
Adopted child.  An adopted child is always 
treated as your own child. The term “adopted 
child” includes a child who was lawfully placed 
with you for legal adoption.
Foster child. A foster child is an individual who 
is placed with you by an authorized placement 
agency or by judgment, decree, or other order 
of any court of competent jurisdiction.
Age Test
To meet this test, a child must be:
Under age 19 at the end of the year and 
younger than you (or your spouse if filing 
jointly),
A student under age 24 at the end of the 
year and younger than you (or your spouse 
if filing jointly), or
Permanently and totally disabled at any 
time during the year, regardless of age.
Example. Your son turned 19 on Decem-
ber 10. Unless he was permanently and totally 
disabled or a student, he doesn't meet the age 
test because, at the end of the year, he wasn't 
under age 19.
Child must be younger than you or your 
spouse. To be your qualifying child, a child 
who isn't permanently and totally disabled must 
be younger than you. However, if you are mar-
ried filing jointly, the child must be younger than 
you or your spouse but doesn't have to be 
younger than both of you.
Example 1—child not younger than you 
or your spouse.  Your 23-year-old brother, 
who is a student and unmarried, lives with you 
and your spouse, who provide more than half of 
his support. He isn't disabled. Both you and 
your spouse are 21 years old, and you file a 
joint return. Your brother isn't your qualifying 
child because he isn't younger than you or your 
spouse.
Example 2—child younger than your 
spouse but not younger than you.  The facts 
are the same as in  Example 1  except your 
spouse is 25 years old. Because your brother is 
younger than your spouse and you and your 
spouse are filing a joint return, your brother is 
your qualifying child, even though he isn't 
younger than you.
CAUTION
!
Student defined. To qualify as a student, your 
child must be, during some part of each of any 5 
calendar months of the year:
1. A full-time student at a school that has a 
regular teaching staff, course of study, and 
a regularly enrolled student body at the 
school, or
2. A student taking a full-time, on-farm train-
ing course given by a school described in 
(1), or by a state, county, or local govern-
ment agency.
The 5 calendar months don't have to be con-
secutive.
Full-time student.  A full-time student is a 
student who is enrolled for the number of hours 
or courses the school considers to be full-time 
attendance.
School defined.  A school can be an ele-
mentary school, junior or senior high school, 
college, university, or technical, trade, or me-
chanical school. However, an on-the-job train-
ing course, correspondence school, or school 
offering courses only through the Internet 
doesn't count as a school.
Vocational high school students.  Stu-
dents who work on “co-op” jobs in private indus-
try as a part of a school's regular course of 
classroom and practical training are considered 
full-time students.
Permanently and totally disabled. Your child 
is permanently and totally disabled if both of the 
following apply.
He or she can't engage in any substantial 
gainful activity because of a physical or 
mental condition.
A doctor determines the condition has las-
ted or can be expected to last continuously 
for at least a year or can lead to death.
Residency Test
To meet this test, your child must have lived 
with you for more than half the year. There are 
exceptions for temporary absences, children 
who were born or died during the year, kidnap-
ped children, and children of divorced or sepa-
rated parents.
Temporary absences.  Your child is consid-
ered to have lived with you during periods of 
time when one of you, or both, are temporarily 
absent due to special circumstances such as:
Illness,
Education,
Business,
Vacation,
Military service, or
Detention in a juvenile facility.
Death or birth of child.  A child who was born 
or died during the year is treated as having lived 
with you more than half the year if your home 
was the child's home more than half the time he 
or she was alive during the year. The same is 
true if the child lived with you more than half the 
year except for any required hospital stay fol-
lowing birth.
Child born alive. You may be able to claim 
an exemption for a child born alive during the 
Page 13 of 30  Fileid: … tions/P501/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 12:05 - 2-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2017)   Page 13

year, even if the child lived only for a moment. 
State or local law must treat the child as having 
been born alive. There must be proof of a live 
birth shown by an official document, such as a 
birth certificate. The child must be your qualify-
ing child or qualifying relative, and all the other 
tests to claim an exemption for a dependent 
must be met.
Stillborn child. You can't claim an exemp-
tion for a stillborn child.
Kidnapped child. You can treat your child as 
meeting the residency test even if the child has 
been kidnapped, but the following statements 
must be true.
1. The child is presumed by law enforcement 
authorities to have been kidnapped by 
someone who isn't a member of your fam-
ily or the child's family.
2. In the year the kidnapping occurred, the 
child lived with you for more than half of 
the part of the year before the date of the 
kidnapping.
3. In the year of the child’s return, the child 
lived with you for more than half the part of 
the year following the date of the child’s 
return.
This treatment applies for all years until the 
earlier of:
1. The year there is a determination that the 
child is dead, or
2. The year the child would have reached 
age 18.
Children of divorced or separated parents 
(or parents who live apart).  In most cases, 
because of the residency test, a child of di-
vorced or separated parents is the qualifying 
child of the custodial parent. However, the child 
will be treated as the qualifying child of the non-
custodial parent if all four of the following state-
ments are true.
1. The parents:
a. Are divorced or legally separated un-
der a decree of divorce or separate 
maintenance,
b. Are separated under a written separa-
tion agreement, or
c. Lived apart at all times during the last 
6 months of the year, whether or not 
they are or were married.
2. The child received over half of his or her 
support for the year from the parents.
3. The child is in the custody of one or both 
parents for more than half of the year.
4. Either of the following statements is true.
a. The custodial parent signs a written 
declaration, discussed later, that he or 
she won't claim the child as a depend-
ent for the year, and the noncustodial 
parent attaches this written declara-
tion to his or her return. (If the decree 
or agreement went into effect after 
1984 and before 2009, see Post-1984 
and pre-2009 divorce decree or sepa-
ration agreement, later. If the decree 
or agreement went into effect after 
2008, see Post-2008 divorce decree 
or separation agreement, later.)
b. A pre-1985 decree of divorce or sepa-
rate maintenance or written separa-
tion agreement that applies to 2017 
states that the noncustodial parent 
can claim the child as a dependent, 
the decree or agreement wasn't 
changed after 1984 to say the non-
custodial parent can't claim the child 
as a dependent, and the noncustodial 
parent provides at least $600 for the 
child's support during the year.
If statements (1) through (4) are all true, only 
the noncustodial parent can:
Claim the child as a dependent, and
Claim the child as a qualifying child for the 
child tax credit.
However, this doesn’t allow the noncustodial 
parent to claim head of household filing status, 
the credit for child and dependent care expen-
ses, the exclusion for dependent care benefits, 
the earned income credit, or the health cover-
age tax credit. See Applying the tiebreaker rules 
to divorced or separated parents (or parents 
who live apart), later.
Example—earned income credit.  Even if 
statements (1) through (4) are all true and the 
custodial parent signs Form 8332 or a substan-
tially similar statement that he or she won’t 
claim the child as a dependent for 2017, this 
doesn’t allow the noncustodial parent to claim 
the child as a qualifying child for the earned in-
come credit. The custodial parent or another 
taxpayer, if eligible, can claim the child for the 
earned income credit.
Custodial parent and noncustodial pa-
rent. The custodial parent is the parent with 
whom the child lived for the greater number of 
nights during the year. The other parent is the 
noncustodial parent.
If the parents divorced or separated during 
the year and the child lived with both parents 
before the separation, the custodial parent is 
the one with whom the child lived for the greater 
number of nights during the rest of the year.
A child is treated as living with a parent for a 
night if the child sleeps:
At that parent's home, whether or not the 
parent is present, or
In the company of the parent, when the 
child doesn't sleep at a parent's home (for 
example, the parent and child are on vaca-
tion together).
Equal number of nights.  If the child lived 
with each parent for an equal number of nights 
during the year, the custodial parent is the pa-
rent with the higher adjusted gross income 
(AGI).
December 31. The night of December 31 is 
treated as part of the year in which it begins. For 
example, the night of December 31, 2017, is 
treated as part of 2017.
Emancipated child. If a child is emancipa-
ted under state law, the child is treated as not 
living with either parent. See Examples 5 and 6.
Absences. If a child wasn't with either pa-
rent on a particular night (because, for example, 
the child was staying at a friend's house), the 
child is treated as living with the parent with 
whom the child normally would have lived for 
that night, except for the absence. But if it can't 
be determined with which parent the child nor-
mally would have lived or if the child would not 
have lived with either parent that night, the child 
is treated as not living with either parent that 
night.
Parent works at night. If, due to a parent's 
nighttime work schedule, a child lives for a 
greater number of days, but not nights, with the 
parent who works at night, that parent is treated 
as the custodial parent. On a school day, the 
child is treated as living at the primary resi-
dence registered with the school.
Example 1—child lived with one parent 
for a greater number of nights. You and your 
child’s other parent are divorced. In 2017, your 
child lived with you 210 nights and with the 
other parent 155 nights. You are the custodial 
parent.
Example 2—child is away at camp.  In 
2017, your daughter lives with each parent for 
alternate weeks. In the summer, she spends 6 
weeks at summer camp. During the time she is 
at camp, she is treated as living with you for 3 
weeks and with her other parent, your 
ex-spouse, for 3 weeks because this is how 
long she would have lived with each parent if 
she had not attended summer camp.
Example 3—child lived same number of 
nights with each parent.  Your son lived with 
you 180 nights during the year and lived the 
same number of nights with his other parent, 
your ex-spouse. Your AGI is $40,000. Your 
ex-spouse's AGI is $25,000. You are treated as 
your son's custodial parent because you have 
the higher AGI.
Example 4—child is at parent’s home 
but with other parent. Your son normally lives 
with you during the week and with his other pa-
rent, your ex-spouse, every other weekend. 
You become ill and are hospitalized. The other 
parent lives in your home with your son for 10 
consecutive days while you are in the hospital. 
Your son is treated as living with you during this 
10-day period because he was living in your 
home.
Example 5—child emancipated in May. 
When your son turned age 18 in May 2017, he 
became emancipated under the law of the state 
where he lives. As a result, he isn't considered 
in the custody of his parents for more than half 
of the year. The special rule for children of di-
vorced or separated parents doesn't apply.
Example 6—child emancipated in Au-
gust. Your daughter lives with you from Janu-
ary 1, 2017, until May 31, 2017, and lives with 
her other parent, your ex-spouse, from June 1, 
2017, through the end of the year. She turns 18 
and is emancipated under state law on August 
1, 2017. Because she is treated as not living 
with either parent beginning on August 1, she is 
treated as living with you the greater number of 
nights in 2017. You are the custodial parent.
Page 14 of 30  Fileid: … tions/P501/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 12:05 - 2-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 14 Publication 501 (2017)

Written declaration.  The custodial parent 
must use either Form 8332 or a similar state-
ment (containing the same information required 
by the form) to make the written declaration to 
release the exemption to the noncustodial pa-
rent. The noncustodial parent must attach a 
copy of the form or statement to his or her tax 
return.
The exemption can be released for 1 year, 
for a number of specified years (for example, al-
ternate years), or for all future years, as speci-
fied in the declaration.
Post-1984 and pre-2009 divorce decree 
or separation agreement.  If the divorce de-
cree or separation agreement went into effect 
after 1984 and before 2009, the noncustodial 
parent may be able to attach certain pages from 
the decree or agreement instead of Form 8332. 
The decree or agreement must state all three of 
the following.
1. The noncustodial parent can claim the 
child as a dependent without regard to any 
condition, such as payment of support.
2. The custodial parent won't claim the child 
as a dependent for the year.
3. The years for which the noncustodial pa-
rent, rather than the custodial parent, can 
claim the child as a dependent.
The noncustodial parent must attach all of 
the following pages of the decree or agreement 
to his or her tax return.
The cover page (write the other parent's 
social security number on this page).
The pages that include all of the informa-
tion identified in items (1) through (3) 
above.
The signature page with the other parent's 
signature and the date of the agreement.
Post-2008 divorce decree or separation 
agreement. The noncustodial parent can't at-
tach pages from the decree or agreement in-
stead of Form 8332 if the decree or agreement 
went into effect after 2008. The custodial parent 
must sign either Form 8332 or a similar state-
ment whose only purpose is to release the cus-
todial parent's claim to an exemption for a child, 
and the noncustodial parent must attach a copy 
to his or her return. The form or statement must 
release the custodial parent's claim to the child 
without any conditions. For example, the re-
lease must not depend on the noncustodial pa-
rent paying support.
The noncustodial parent must attach 
the required information even if it was 
filed with a return in an earlier year.
Revocation of release of claim to an ex-
emption. The custodial parent can revoke a 
release of claim to an exemption. For the revo-
cation to be effective for 2017, the custodial pa-
rent must have given (or made reasonable ef-
forts to give) written notice of the revocation to 
the noncustodial parent in 2016 or earlier. The 
custodial parent can use Part III of Form 8332 
for this purpose and must attach a copy of the 
revocation to his or her return for each tax year 
he or she claims the child as a dependent as a 
result of the revocation.
CAUTION
!
Remarried parent. If you remarry, the sup-
port provided by your new spouse is treated as 
provided by you.
Parents who never married.  This rule for 
divorced or separated parents also applies to 
parents who never married and lived apart at all 
times during the last 6 months of the year.
Support Test (To Be a
Qualifying Child)
To meet this test, the child can't have provided 
more than half of his or her own support for the 
year.
This test is different from the support test to 
be a qualifying relative, which is described later. 
However, to see what is or isn't support, see 
Support Test (To Be a Qualifying Relative) , 
later. If you aren't sure whether a child provided 
more than half of his or her own support, you 
may find Worksheet 2 helpful.
Example. You provided $4,000 toward 
your 16-year-old son's support for the year. He 
has a part-time job and provided $6,000 to his 
own support. He provided more than half of his 
own support for the year. He isn't your qualify-
ing child.
Foster care payments and expenses.  Pay-
ments you receive for the support of a foster 
child from a child placement agency are consid-
ered support provided by the agency. Similarly, 
payments you receive for the support of a foster 
child from a state or county are considered sup-
port provided by the state or county.
If you aren't in the trade or business of pro-
viding foster care and your unreimbursed 
out-of-pocket expenses in caring for a foster 
child were mainly to benefit an organization 
qualified to receive deductible charitable contri-
butions, the expenses are deductible as chari-
table contributions but aren't considered sup-
port you provided. For more information about 
the deduction for charitable contributions, see 
Pub. 526. If your unreimbursed expenses aren't 
deductible as charitable contributions, they may 
qualify as support you provided.
If you are in the trade or business of provid-
ing foster care, your unreimbursed expenses 
aren't considered support provided by you.
Example 1.  Lauren, a foster child, lived 
with Mr. and Mrs. Smith for the last 3 months of 
the year. The Smiths cared for Lauren because 
they wanted to adopt her (although she had not 
been placed with them for adoption). They 
didn't care for her as a trade or business or to 
benefit the agency that placed her in their 
home. The Smiths' unreimbursed expenses 
aren't deductible as charitable contributions but 
are considered support they provided for Lau-
ren.
Example 2.  You provided $3,000 toward 
your 10-year-old foster child's support for the 
year. The state government provided $4,000, 
which is considered support provided by the 
state, not by the child. See Support provided by 
the state (welfare, food benefits, housing, etc.) , 
later. Your foster child didn't provide more than 
half of her own support for the year.
Scholarships. A scholarship received by a 
child who is a student isn't taken into account in 
determining whether the child provided more 
than half of his or her own support.
TANF and other governmental payments. 
Under proposed Treasury regulations, if you re-
ceived Temporary Assistance to Needy Fami-
lies (TANF) payments or other similar payments 
and used the payment to support another per-
son, those payments are considered support 
you provided for that person, rather than sup-
port provided by the government or other third 
party.
Joint Return Test (To Be a 
Qualifying Child)
To meet this test, the child can't file a joint re-
turn for the year.
Exception. An exception to the joint return test 
applies if your child and his or her spouse file a 
joint return only to claim a refund of income tax 
withheld or estimated tax paid.
Example 1—child files joint return.  You 
supported your 18-year-old daughter, and she 
lived with you all year while her husband was in 
the Armed Forces. He earned $25,000 for the 
year. The couple files a joint return. Because 
your daughter and her husband file a joint re-
turn, she isn't your qualifying child.
Example 2—child files joint return only 
as claim for refund of withheld tax.  Your 
18-year-old son and his 17-year-old wife had 
$800 of wages from part-time jobs and no other 
income. They lived with you all year. Neither is 
required to file a tax return. They don't have a 
child. Taxes were taken out of their pay so they 
file a joint return only to get a refund of the with-
held taxes. The exception to the joint return test 
applies, so your son may be your qualifying 
child if all the other tests are met.
Example 3—child files joint return to 
claim American opportunity credit.  The 
facts are the same as in  Example 2 except no 
taxes were taken out of your son's pay or his 
wife's pay. However, they file a joint return to 
claim an American opportunity credit of $124 
and get a refund of that amount. Because 
claiming the American opportunity credit is their 
reason for filing the return, they aren't filing it 
only to get a refund of income tax withheld or 
estimated tax paid. The exception to the joint 
return test doesn't apply, so your son isn't your 
qualifying child.
Qualifying Child of More Than One 
Person
If your qualifying child isn't a qualifying 
child of anyone else, this topic doesn't 
apply to you and you don't need to 
read about it. This is also true if your qualifying 
child isn't a qualifying child of anyone else ex-
cept your spouse with whom you plan to file a 
joint return.
TIP
Page 15 of 30  Fileid: … tions/P501/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 12:05 - 2-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2017)   Page 15

Worksheet for Determining SupportWorksheet 2. Keep for Your Records
Funds Belonging to the Person You Supported
1. Enter the total funds belonging to the person you supported, including income received (taxable 
and nontaxable) and amounts borrowed during the year, plus the amount in savings and other 
accounts at the beginning of the year. Don't include funds provided by the state; include those 
amounts on line 23 instead .......................................................... 1.  
2. Enter the amount on line 1 that was used for the person's support .......................... 2.  
3. Enter the amount on line 1 that was used for other purposes ............................... 3.  
4. Enter the total amount in the person's savings and other accounts at the end of the year ........ 4.  
5. Add lines 2 through 4. (This amount should equal line 1.) ................................. 5.  
Expenses for Entire Household (where the person you supported lived)
6. Lodging (complete line 6a or 6b):
a. Enter the total rent paid ........................................................... 6a.  
b. Enter the fair rental value of the home. If the person you supported owned the home, 
also include this amount in line 21 .................................................. 6b.  
7. Enter the total food expenses ........................................................ 7.  
8. Enter the total amount of utilities (heat, light, water, etc. not included in line 6a or 6b) ........... 8.  
9. Enter the total amount of repairs (not included in line 6a or 6b) ............................. 9.  
10. Enter the total of other expenses. Don't include expenses of maintaining the home, such as 
mortgage interest, real estate taxes, and insurance ...................................... 10.  
11. Add lines 6a through 10. These are the total household expenses .......................... 11.  
12. Enter total number of persons who lived in the household ................................. 12.  
Expenses for the Person You Supported
13. Divide line 11 by line 12. This is the person's share of the household expenses ............... 13.  
14. Enter the person's total clothing expenses .............................................. 14.  
15. Enter the person's total education expenses ............................................ 15.  
16. Enter the person's total medical and dental expenses not paid for or reimbursed by 
insurance ........................................................................ 16.  
17. Enter the person's total travel and recreation expenses ................................... 17.  
18. Enter the total of the person's other expenses ........................................... 18.  
19. Add lines 13 through 18. This is the total cost of the person's support for the year ............. 19.  
Did the Person Provide More Than Half of His or Her Own Support?
20. Multiply line 19 by 50% (0.50) ........................................................ 20.  
21. Enter the amount from line 2, plus the amount from line 6b if the person you supported owned 
the home. This is the amount the person provided for his or her own support ................. 21.  
22. Is line 21 more than line 20?
No. You meet the support test for this person to be your qualifying child. If this person also meets the other tests to be a 
qualifying child, stop here; don't complete lines 23–26. Otherwise, go to line 23 and fill out the rest of the worksheet to 
determine if this person is your qualifying relative. 
 Yes. You don't meet the support test for this person to be either your qualifying child or your qualifying relative. Stop 
here.
Did You Provide More Than Half?
23. Enter the amount others provided for the person's support. Include amounts provided by state, 
local, and other welfare societies or agencies. Don't include any amounts included on 
line 1 ............................................................................ 23.  
24. Add lines 21 and 23 ................................................................ 24.  
25. Subtract line 24 from line 19. This is the amount you provided for the person's support ......... 25.  
26. Is line 25 more than line 20?
Yes. You meet the support test for this person to be your qualifying relative.
 No. You don't meet the support test for this person to be your qualifying relative. You can't claim an exemption for this 
person unless you can do so under a multiple support agreement, the support test for children of divorced or separated 
parents, or the special rule for kidnapped children. See Multiple Support Agreement, Support Test for Children of Divorced 
or Separated Parents (or Parents Who Live Apart), or Kidnapped child under Qualifying Relative.
Page 16 of 30  Fileid: … tions/P501/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 12:05 - 2-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 16 Publication 501 (2017)

If a child is treated as the qualifying 
child of the noncustodial parent under 
the rules for children of divorced or 
separated parents (or parents who live apart), 
described earlier, see Applying the tiebreaker 
rules to divorced or separated parents (or pa-
rents who live apart), later.
Sometimes, a child meets the relationship, age, 
residency, support, and joint return tests to be a 
qualifying child of more than one person. Al-
though the child is a qualifying child of each of 
these persons, only one person can actually 
treat the child as a qualifying child to take all of 
the following tax benefits (provided the person 
is eligible for each benefit).
1. The exemption for the child.
2. The child tax credit.
3. Head of household filing status.
4. The credit for child and dependent care 
expenses.
5. The exclusion from income for dependent 
care benefits.
6. The earned income credit.
The other person can’t take any of these 
benefits based on this qualifying child. In other 
words, you and the other person can’t agree to 
divide these tax benefits between you.
Tiebreaker rules. To determine which person 
can treat the child as a qualifying child to claim 
these six tax benefits, the following tiebreaker 
rules apply.
If only one of the persons is the child's pa-
rent, the child is treated as the qualifying 
child of the parent.
If the parents file a joint return together and 
can claim the child as a qualifying child, 
the child is treated as the qualifying child of 
the parents.
If the parents don't file a joint return to-
gether but both parents claim the child as a 
qualifying child, the IRS will treat the child 
as the qualifying child of the parent with 
whom the child lived for the longer period 
of time during the year. If the child lived 
with each parent for the same amount of 
time, the IRS will treat the child as the qual-
ifying child of the parent who had the 
higher adjusted gross income (AGI) for the 
year.
If no parent can claim the child as a quali-
fying child, the child is treated as the quali-
fying child of the person who had the high-
est AGI for the year.
If a parent can claim the child as a qualify-
ing child but no parent does so claim the 
child, the child is treated as the qualifying 
child of the person who had the highest 
AGI for the year, but only if that person's 
AGI is higher than the highest AGI of any of 
the child's parents who can claim the child.
Subject to these tiebreaker rules, you and 
the other person may be able to choose which 
of you claims the child as a qualifying child.
CAUTION
!
You may be able to qualify for the 
earned income credit under the rules 
for taxpayers without a qualifying child 
if you have a qualifying child for the earned in-
come credit who is claimed as a qualifying child 
by another taxpayer. For more information, see 
Pub. 596.
Example 1—child lived with parent and 
grandparent. You and your 3-year-old daugh-
ter Jane lived with your mother all year. You are 
25 years old, unmarried, and your AGI is 
$9,000. Your mother's AGI is $15,000. Jane's 
father didn't live with you or your daughter. You 
haven't signed Form 8832 (or a similar state-
ment) to release the child's exemption to the 
noncustodial parent.
Jane is a qualifying child of both you and 
your mother because she meets the relation-
ship, age, residency, support, and joint return 
tests for both you and your mother. However, 
only one of you can claim her. Jane isn't a quali-
fying child of anyone else, including her father. 
You agree to let your mother claim Jane. This 
means your mother can claim Jane as a qualify-
ing child for all of the six tax benefits listed ear-
lier, if she qualifies for each of those benefits 
(and if you don't claim Jane as a qualifying child 
for any of those tax benefits).
Example 2—parent has higher AGI than 
grandparent. The facts are the same as in Ex-
ample 1  except your AGI is $18,000. Because 
your mother's AGI isn't higher than yours, she 
can't claim Jane. Only you can claim Jane.
Example 3—two persons claim same 
child. The facts are the same as in Example 1 
except you and your mother both claim Jane as 
a qualifying child. In this case, you, as the 
child's parent, will be the only one allowed to 
claim Jane as a qualifying child. The IRS will 
disallow your mother's claim to the six tax bene-
fits listed earlier based on Jane. However, your 
mother may qualify for the earned income credit 
as a taxpayer without a qualifying child.
Example 4—qualifying children split be-
tween two persons.  The facts are the same 
as in Example 1 except you also have two other 
young children who are qualifying children of 
both you and your mother. Only one of you can 
claim each child. However, if your mother's AGI 
is higher than yours, you can allow your mother 
to claim one or more of the children. For exam-
ple, if you claim one child, your mother can 
claim the other two.
Example 5—taxpayer who is a qualifying 
child. The facts are the same as in Example 1 
except you are only 18 years old and didn't pro-
vide more than half of your own support for the 
year. This means you are your mother's qualify-
ing child. If she can claim you as a dependent, 
then you can't claim your daughter as a de-
pendent because of the Dependent Taxpayer 
Test explained earlier.
Example 6—separated parents.  You, 
your husband, and your 10-year-old son lived 
together until August 1, 2017, when your hus-
band moved out of the household. In August 
and September, your son lived with you. For the 
rest of the year, your son lived with your 
TIP
husband, the boy's father. Your son is a qualify-
ing child of both you and your husband because 
your son lived with each of you for more than 
half the year and because he met the relation-
ship, age, support, and joint return tests for both 
of you. At the end of the year, you and your hus-
band still weren't divorced, legally separated, or 
separated under a written separation agree-
ment, so the rule for children of divorced or sep-
arated parents (or parents who live apart) 
doesn't apply.
You and your husband will file separate re-
turns. Your husband agrees to let you treat your 
son as a qualifying child. This means, if your 
husband doesn't claim your son as a qualifying 
child, you can claim your son as a qualifying 
child for the dependency exemption, child tax 
credit, and exclusion for dependent care bene-
fits (assuming you otherwise qualify for each of 
those tax benefits). However, you can't claim 
head of household filing status because you 
and your husband didn't live apart for the last 6 
months of the year. As a result, your filing status 
is married filing separately, so you can't claim 
the earned income credit or the credit for child 
and dependent care expenses.
Example 7—separated parents claim 
same child.  The facts are the same as in Ex-
ample 6  except you and your husband both 
claim your son as a qualifying child. In this case, 
only your husband will be allowed to treat your 
son as a qualifying child. This is because, dur-
ing 2017, the boy lived with him longer than with 
you. If you claimed an exemption or the child 
tax credit for your son, the IRS will disallow your 
claim to both these tax benefits. If you don't 
have another qualifying child or dependent, the 
IRS will also disallow your claim to the exclu-
sion for dependent care benefits. In addition, 
because you and your husband didn't live apart 
for the last 6 months of the year, your husband 
can't claim head of household filing status. As a 
result, his filing status is married filing sepa-
rately, so he can't claim the earned income 
credit or the credit for child and dependent care 
expenses.
Example 8—unmarried parents.  You, 
your 5-year-old son, and your son's father lived 
together all year. You and your son's father 
aren't married. Your son is a qualifying child of 
both you and his father because he meets the 
relationship, age, residency, support, and joint 
return tests for both you and his father. Your 
AGI is $12,000 and your son's father's AGI is 
$14,000. Your son's father agrees to let you 
claim the child as a qualifying child. This means 
you can claim him as a qualifying child for the 
dependency exemption, child tax credit, head 
of household filing status, credit for child and 
dependent care expenses, exclusion for de-
pendent care benefits, and the earned income 
credit, if you qualify for each of those tax bene-
fits (and if your son's father doesn't claim your 
son as a qualifying child for any of those tax 
benefits).
Example 9—unmarried parents claim 
same child. The facts are the same as in Ex-
ample 8 except you and your son's father both 
claim your son as a qualifying child. In this case, 
only your son's father will be allowed to treat 
your son as a qualifying child. This is because 
Page 17 of 30  Fileid: … tions/P501/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 12:05 - 2-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2017)   Page 17

his AGI, $14,000, is more than your AGI, 
$12,000. If you claimed an exemption or the 
child tax credit for your son, the IRS will disal-
low your claim to both these tax benefits. If you 
don't have another qualifying child or depend-
ent, the IRS will also disallow your claim to head 
of household filing status, the credit for child 
and dependent care expenses, and the exclu-
sion for dependent care benefits. However, you 
may be able to claim the earned income credit 
as a taxpayer without a qualifying child.
Example 10—child didn't live with a pa-
rent. You and your 7-year-old niece, your si-
ster's child, lived with your mother all year. You 
are 25 years old, and your AGI is $9,300. Your 
mother's AGI is $15,000. Your niece's parents 
file jointly, have an AGI of less than $9,000, and 
don't live with you or their child. Your niece is a 
qualifying child of both you and your mother be-
cause she meets the relationship, age, resi-
dency, support, and joint return tests for both 
you and your mother. However, only your 
mother can treat her as a qualifying child. This 
is because your mother's AGI, $15,000, is more 
than your AGI, $9,300.
Applying the tiebreaker rules to divorced or 
separated parents (or parents who live 
apart). If a child is treated as the qualifying 
child of the noncustodial parent under the rules 
described earlier for children of divorced or sep-
arated parents (or parents who live apart) , only 
the noncustodial parent can claim an exemption 
and the child tax credit for the child. However, 
only the custodial parent can claim the credit for 
child and dependent care expenses or the ex-
clusion for dependent care benefits for the 
child, and only the custodial parent can treat the 
child as a dependent for the health coverage 
tax credit. Also, the noncustodial parent can't 
claim the child as a qualifying child for head of 
household filing status or the earned income 
credit. Instead, the custodial parent, if eligible, 
or other eligible person can claim the child as a 
qualifying child for those two benefits. If the 
child is the qualifying child of more than one 
person for these benefits, then the tiebreaker 
rules determine whether the custodial parent or 
another eligible person can treat the child as a 
qualifying child.
Example 1.  You and your 5-year-old son 
lived all year with your mother, who paid the en-
tire cost of keeping up the home. Your AGI is 
$10,000. Your mother's AGI is $25,000. Your 
son's father didn't live with you or your son.
Under the rules explained earlier for children 
of divorced or separated parents (or parents 
who live apart), your son is treated as the quali-
fying child of his father, who can claim an ex-
emption and the child tax credit for him. Be-
cause of this, you can't claim an exemption or 
the child tax credit for your son. However, those 
rules don't allow your son's father to claim your 
son as a qualifying child for head of household 
filing status, the credit for child and dependent 
care expenses, the exclusion for dependent 
care benefits, the earned income credit, or the 
health coverage tax credit.
You and your mother didn't have any child 
care expenses or dependent care benefits, so 
neither of you can claim the credit for child and 
dependent care expenses or the exclusion for 
dependent care benefits. Also, neither of you 
qualifies for the health coverage tax credit. But 
the boy is a qualifying child of both you and your 
mother for head of household filing status and 
the earned income credit because he meets the 
relationship, age, residency, support, and joint 
return tests for both you and your mother. (The 
support test doesn't apply for the earned in-
come credit.) However, you agree to let your 
mother claim your son. This means she can 
claim him for head of household filing status 
and the earned income credit if she qualifies for 
each and if you don't claim him as a qualifying 
child for the earned income credit. (You can't 
claim head of household filing status because 
your mother paid the entire cost of keeping up 
the home.) You may be able to claim the earned 
income credit as a taxpayer without a qualifying 
child.
Example 2.  The facts are the same as in 
Example 1 except your AGI is $25,000 and your 
mother's AGI is $21,000. Your mother can't 
claim your son as a qualifying child for any pur-
pose because her AGI isn't higher than yours.
Example 3.  The facts are the same as in 
Example 1  except you and your mother both 
claim your son as a qualifying child for the 
earned income credit. Your mother also claims 
him as a qualifying child for head of household 
filing status. You, as the child's parent, will be 
the only one allowed to claim your son as a 
qualifying child for the earned income credit. 
The IRS will disallow your mother's claim to 
head of household filing status unless she has 
another qualifying child or dependent. Your 
mother can’t claim the earned income credit as 
a taxpayer without a qualifying child because 
her AGI is more than $15,010.
Qualifying Relative
Four tests must be met for a person to be your 
qualifying relative. The four tests are:
1. Not a qualifying child test,
2. Member of household or relationship test,
3. Gross income test, and
4. Support test.
Age. Unlike a qualifying child, a qualifying rela-
tive can be any age. There is no age test for a 
qualifying relative.
Kidnapped child.  You can treat a child as 
your qualifying relative even if the child has 
been kidnapped, but the following statements 
must be true.
1. The child is presumed by law enforcement 
authorities to have been kidnapped by 
someone who isn't a member of your fam-
ily or the child's family.
2. In the year the kidnapping occurred, the 
child met the tests to be your qualifying 
relative for the part of the year before the 
date of the kidnapping.
3. In the year of the child’s return, the child 
met the tests to be your qualifying relative 
for the part of the year following the date of 
the child’s return.
This treatment applies for all years until the 
earlier of:
1. The year there is a determination that the 
child is dead, or
2. The year the child would have reached 
age 18.
Not a Qualifying Child Test
A child isn't your qualifying relative if the child is 
your qualifying child or the qualifying child of 
any other taxpayer.
Example 1.  Your 22-year-old daughter, 
who is a student, lives with you and meets all 
the tests to be your qualifying child. She isn't 
your qualifying relative.
Example 2.  Your 2-year-old son lives with 
your parents and meets all the tests to be their 
qualifying child. He isn't your qualifying relative.
Example 3. Your son lives with you but isn't 
your qualifying child because he is 30 years old 
and doesn't meet the age test. He may be your 
qualifying relative if the gross income test and 
the support test are met.
Example 4.  Your 13-year-old grandson 
lived with his mother for 3 months, with his un-
cle for 4 months, and with you for 5 months dur-
ing the year. He isn't your qualifying child be-
cause he doesn't meet the residency test. He 
may be your qualifying relative if the gross in-
come test and the support test are met.
Child of person not required to file a return. 
A child isn't the qualifying child of any other tax-
payer and so may qualify as your qualifying rel-
ative if the child's parent (or other person for 
whom the child is defined as a qualifying child) 
isn't required to file an income tax return and ei-
ther:
Doesn't file an income tax return, or
Files a return only to get a refund of in-
come tax withheld or estimated tax paid.
Example 1—return not required.  You 
support an unrelated friend and her 3-year-old 
child, who lived with you all year in your home. 
Your friend has no gross income, isn't required 
to file a 2017 tax return, and doesn't file a 2017 
tax return. Both your friend and her child are 
your qualifying relatives if the support test is 
met.
Example 2—return filed to claim refund. 
The facts are the same as in Example 1 except 
your friend had wages of $1,500 during the year 
and had income tax withheld from her wages. 
She files a return only to get a refund of the in-
come tax withheld and doesn't claim the earned 
income credit or any other tax credits or deduc-
tions. Both your friend and her child are your 
qualifying relatives if the support test is met.
Example 3—earned income credit 
claimed. The facts are the same as in Exam-
ple 2  except your friend had wages of $8,000 
during the year and claimed the earned income 
credit on her return. Your friend's child is the 
qualifying child of another taxpayer (your 
friend), so you can't claim your friend's child as 
Page 18 of 30  Fileid: … tions/P501/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 12:05 - 2-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 18 Publication 501 (2017)

your qualifying relative. Also, you can't claim 
your friend as your qualifying relative because 
of the gross income test explained later.
Child in Canada or Mexico.  You may be able 
to claim your child as a dependent even if the 
child lives in Canada or Mexico. If the child 
doesn't live with you, the child doesn't meet the 
residency test to be your qualifying child. How-
ever, the child may still be your qualifying rela-
tive. If the persons the child does live with aren't 
U.S. citizens and have no U.S. gross income, 
those persons aren't “taxpayers,” so the child 
isn't the qualifying child of any other taxpayer. If 
the child isn't the qualifying child of any other 
taxpayer, the child is your qualifying relative as 
long as the gross income test and the support 
test are met.
You can't claim as a dependent a child who 
lives in a foreign country other than Canada or 
Mexico, unless the child is a U.S. citizen, U.S. 
resident alien, or U.S. national. There is an ex-
ception for certain adopted children who lived 
with you all year. See Citizen or Resident Test , 
earlier.
Example. You provide all the support of 
your children, ages 6, 8, and 12, who live in 
Mexico with your mother and have no income. 
You are single and live in the United States. 
Your mother isn't a U.S. citizen and has no U.S. 
income, so she isn't a “taxpayer.” Your children 
aren't your qualifying children because they 
don't meet the residency test. But because they 
aren't the qualifying children of any other tax-
payer, they are your qualifying relatives and you 
can claim them as dependents. You may also 
be able to claim your mother as a dependent if 
the gross income and support tests are met.
Member of Household or 
Relationship Test
To meet this test, a person must either:
1. Live with you all year as a member of your 
household, or
2. Be related to you in one of the ways listed 
under Relatives who don't have to live with 
you.
If at any time during the year the person was 
your spouse, that person can't be your qualify-
ing relative. However, see Personal Exemp-
tions, earlier.
Relatives who don't have to live with you. A 
person related to you in any of the following 
ways doesn't have to live with you all year as a 
member of your household to meet this test.
Your child, stepchild, foster child, or a de-
scendant of any of them (for example, your 
grandchild). (A legally adopted child is 
considered your child.)
Your brother, sister, half brother, half sis-
ter, stepbrother, or stepsister.
Your father, mother, grandparent, or other 
direct ancestor, but not foster parent.
Your stepfather or stepmother.
A son or daughter of your brother or sister.
A son or daughter of your half brother or 
half sister.
A brother or sister of your father or mother.
Your son-in-law, daughter-in-law, fa-
ther-in-law, mother-in-law, brother-in-law, 
or sister-in-law.
Any of these relationships that were established 
by marriage aren't ended by death or divorce.
Example. You and your wife began sup-
porting your wife's father, a widower, in 2011. 
Your wife died in 2016. Despite your wife's 
death, your father-in-law continues to meet this 
test, even if he doesn't live with you. You can 
claim him as a dependent if all other tests are 
met, including the gross income test and sup-
port test.
Foster child. A foster child is an individual 
who is placed with you by an authorized place-
ment agency or by judgment, decree, or other 
order of any court of competent jurisdiction.
Joint return.  If you file a joint return, the per-
son can be related to either you or your spouse. 
Also, the person doesn't need to be related to 
the spouse who provides support.
For example, your spouse's uncle who re-
ceives more than half of his support from you 
may be your qualifying relative, even though he 
doesn't live with you. However, if you and your 
spouse file separate returns, your spouse's un-
cle can be your qualifying relative only if he lives 
with you all year as a member of your house-
hold.
Temporary absences. A person is considered 
to live with you as a member of your household 
during periods of time when one of you, or both, 
are temporarily absent due to special circum-
stances such as:
Illness,
Education,
Business,
Vacation,
Military service, or
Detention in a juvenile facility.
If the person is placed in a nursing home for 
an indefinite period of time to receive constant 
medical care, the absence may be considered 
temporary.
Death or birth.  A person who died during the 
year, but lived with you as a member of your 
household until death, will meet this test. The 
same is true for a child who was born during the 
year and lived with you as a member of your 
household for the rest of the year. The test is 
also met if a child lived with you as a member of 
your household except for any required hospital 
stay following birth.
If your dependent died during the year and 
you otherwise qualify to claim an exemption for 
the dependent, you can still claim the exemp-
tion.
Example. Your dependent mother died on 
January 15. She met the tests to be your quali-
fying relative. The other tests to claim an ex-
emption for a dependent were also met. You 
can claim an exemption for her on your return.
Local law violated.  A person doesn't meet 
this test if at any time during the year the rela-
tionship between you and that person violates 
local law.
Example. Your girlfriend lived with you as a 
member of your household all year. However, 
your relationship with her violated the laws of 
the state where you live, because she was mar-
ried to someone else. Therefore, she doesn't 
meet this test and you can't claim her as a de-
pendent.
Adopted child.  An adopted child is always 
treated as your own child. The term “adopted 
child” includes a child who was lawfully placed 
with you for legal adoption.
Cousin. Your cousin meets this test only if he 
or she lives with you all year as a member of 
your household. A cousin is a descendant of a 
brother or sister of your father or mother.
Gross Income Test
To meet this test, a person's gross income for 
the year must be less than $4,050.
Gross income defined.  Gross income is all 
income in the form of money, property, and 
services that isn't exempt from tax.
In a manufacturing, merchandising, or min-
ing business, gross income is the total net sales 
minus the cost of goods sold, plus any miscella-
neous income from the business.
Gross receipts from rental property are 
gross income. Don't deduct taxes, repairs, or 
other expenses to determine the gross income 
from rental property.
Gross income includes a partner's share of 
the gross (not net) partnership income.
Gross income also includes all taxable un-
employment compensation, taxable social se-
curity benefits, and certain scholarship and fel-
lowship grants. Scholarships received by 
degree candidates and used for tuition, fees, 
supplies, books, and equipment required for 
particular courses generally aren't included in 
gross income. For more information about 
scholarships, see chapter 1 of Pub. 970.
Disabled dependent working at sheltered 
workshop. For purposes of the gross income 
test, the gross income of an individual who is 
permanently and totally disabled at any time 
during the year doesn't include income for serv-
ices the individual performs at a sheltered work-
shop. The availability of medical care at the 
workshop must be the main reason for the indi-
vidual's presence there. Also, the income must 
come solely from activities at the workshop that 
are incident to this medical care.
A “sheltered workshop” is a school that:
Provides special instruction or training de-
signed to alleviate the disability of the indi-
vidual, and
Is operated by certain tax-exempt organi-
zations or by a state, a U.S. possession, a 
political subdivision of a state or posses-
sion, the United States, or the District of 
Columbia.
“Permanently and totally disabled”  has the 
same meaning here as under Qualifying Child, 
earlier.
Page 19 of 30  Fileid: … tions/P501/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 12:05 - 2-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2017)   Page 19

Support Test (To Be a
Qualifying Relative)
To meet this test, you generally must provide 
more than half of a person's total support during 
the calendar year.
However, if two or more persons provide 
support, but no one person provides more than 
half of a person's total support, see Multiple 
Support Agreement, later.
How to determine if support test is met. 
You figure whether you have provided more 
than half of a person's total support by compar-
ing the amount you contributed to that person's 
support with the entire amount of support that 
person received from all sources. This includes 
support the person provided from his or her 
own funds.
You may find Worksheet 2 helpful in figuring 
whether you provided more than half of a per-
son's support.
Person's own funds not used for support. 
A person's own funds aren't support unless they 
are actually spent for support.
Example. Your mother received $2,400 in 
social security benefits and $300 in interest. 
She paid $2,000 for lodging and $400 for recre-
ation. She put $300 in a savings account.
Even though your mother received a total of 
$2,700 ($2,400 + $300), she spent only $2,400 
($2,000 + $400) for her own support. If you 
spent more than $2,400 for her support and no 
other support was received, you have provided 
more than half of her support.
Child's wages used for own support.  You 
can't include in your contribution to your child's 
support any support paid for by the child with 
the child's own wages, even if you paid the wa-
ges.
Year support is provided.  The year you pro-
vide the support is the year you pay for it, even 
if you do so with borrowed money that you re-
pay in a later year.
If you use a fiscal year to report your in-
come, you must provide more than half of the 
dependent's support for the calendar year in 
which your fiscal year begins.
Armed Forces dependency allotments.  The 
part of the allotment contributed by the govern-
ment and the part taken out of your military pay 
are both considered provided by you in figuring 
whether you provide more than half of the sup-
port. If your allotment is used to support per-
sons other than those you name, you can take 
the exemptions for them if they otherwise qual-
ify.
Example. You are in the Armed Forces. 
You authorize an allotment for your widowed 
mother that she uses to support herself and her 
sister. If the allotment provides more than half of 
each person's support, you can take an exemp-
tion for each of them, if they otherwise qualify, 
even though you authorize the allotment only 
for your mother.
Tax-exempt military quarters allowan-
ces. These allowances are treated the same 
way as dependency allotments in figuring sup-
port. The allotment of pay and the tax-exempt 
basic allowance for quarters are both consid-
ered as provided by you for support.
Tax-exempt income. In figuring a person's to-
tal support, include tax-exempt income, sav-
ings, and borrowed amounts used to support 
that person. Tax-exempt income includes cer-
tain social security benefits, welfare benefits, 
nontaxable life insurance proceeds, Armed 
Forces family allotments, nontaxable pensions, 
and tax-exempt interest.
Example 1.  You provide $4,000 toward 
your mother's support during the year. She has 
earned income of $600, nontaxable social se-
curity benefits of $4,800, and tax-exempt inter-
est of $200. She uses all these for her support. 
You can't claim an exemption for your mother 
because the $4,000 you provide isn't more than 
half of her total support of $9,600 ($4,000 + 
$600 + $4,800 + $200).
Example 2. Your niece takes out a student 
loan of $2,500 and uses it to pay her college tui-
tion. She is personally responsible for the loan. 
You provide $2,000 toward her total support. 
You can't claim an exemption for her because 
you provide less than half of her support.
Social security benefits.  If spouses each 
receive benefits that are paid by one check 
made out to both of them, half of the total paid 
is considered to be for the support of each 
spouse, unless they can show otherwise.
If a child receives social security benefits 
and uses them toward his or her own support, 
the benefits are considered as provided by the 
child.
Support provided by the state (welfare, 
food benefits, housing, etc.).  Benefits provi-
ded by the state to a needy person generally 
are considered support provided by the state. 
However, payments based on the needs of the 
recipient won't be considered as used entirely 
for that person's support if it is shown that part 
of the payments weren't used for that purpose.
TANF and other governmental pay-
ments. Under proposed Treasury regulations, 
if you received Temporary Assistance to Needy 
Families (TANF) payments or other similar pay-
ments and used the payment to support an-
other person, those payments are considered 
support you provided for that person, rather 
than support provided by the government or 
other third party.
Foster care.  Payments you receive for the 
support of a foster child from a child placement 
agency are considered support provided by the 
agency. See Foster care payments and expen-
ses, earlier.
Home for the aged.  If you make a lump-sum 
advance payment to a home for the aged to 
take care of your relative for life and the pay-
ment is based on that person's life expectancy, 
the amount of support you provide each year is 
the lump-sum payment divided by the relative's 
life expectancy. The amount of support you pro-
vide also includes any other amounts you provi-
ded during the year.
Total Support
To figure if you provided more than half of a 
person's support, you must first determine the 
total support provided for that person. Total 
support includes amounts spent to provide 
food, lodging, clothing, education, medical and 
dental care, recreation, transportation, and sim-
ilar necessities.
Generally, the amount of an item of support 
is the amount of the expense incurred in provid-
ing that item. For lodging, the amount of support 
is the fair rental value of the lodging.
Expenses not directly related to any one 
member of a household, such as the cost of 
food for the household, must be divided among 
the members of the household.
Example 1.  Grace Brown, mother of Mary 
Miller, lives with Frank and Mary Miller and their 
two children. Grace gets social security benefits 
of $2,400, which she spends for clothing, trans-
portation, and recreation. Grace has no other 
income. Frank and Mary's total food expense 
for the household is $5,200. They pay Grace's 
medical and drug expenses of $1,200. The fair 
rental value of the lodging provided for Grace is 
$1,800 a year, based on the cost of similar 
rooming facilities. Figure Grace's total support 
as follows:
Fair rental value of lodging ........... $ 1,800 
Clothing, transportation, and 
recreation ....................... 2,400 
Medical expenses ................. 1,200 
Share of food (1/5 of $5,200) .......... 1,040 
Total support ............... $6,440 
The support Frank and Mary provide 
($1,800 lodging + $1,200 medical expenses + 
$1,040 food = $4,040) is more than half of 
Grace's $6,440 total support.
Example 2. Your parents live with you, your 
spouse, and your two children in a house you 
own. The fair rental value of your parents' share 
of the lodging is $2,000 a year ($1,000 each), 
which includes furnishings and utilities. Your fa-
ther receives a nontaxable pension of $4,200, 
which he spends equally between your mother 
and himself for items of support such as cloth-
ing, transportation, and recreation. Your total 
food expense for the household is $6,000. Your 
heat and utility bills amount to $1,200. Your 
mother has hospital and medical expenses of 
$600, which you pay during the year. Figure 
your parents' total support as follows:
Page 20 of 30  Fileid: … tions/P501/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 12:05 - 2-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 20 Publication 501 (2017)

Support provided Father Mother 
Fair rental value of lodging .... $1,000 $1,000 
Pension spent for their 
support ................. 2,100 2,100 
Share of food (1/6 of 
$6,000) ................. 1,000 1,000 
Medical expenses for 
mother ................. 600 
Parents' total support .... $4,100 $4,700 
You must apply the support test separately 
to each parent. You provide $2,000 ($1,000 
lodging + $1,000 food) of your father's total sup-
port of $4,100 — less than half. You provide 
$2,600 to your mother ($1,000 lodging + $1,000 
food + $600 medical) — more than half of her 
total support of $4,700. You meet the support 
test for your mother, but not your father. Heat 
and utility costs are included in the fair rental 
value of the lodging, so these aren't considered 
separately.
Lodging. If you provide a person with lodging, 
you are considered to provide support equal to 
the fair rental value of the room, apartment, 
house, or other shelter in which the person 
lives. Fair rental value includes a reasonable al-
lowance for the use of furniture and appliances, 
and for heat and other utilities that are provided.
Fair rental value defined. Fair rental value 
is the amount you could reasonably expect to 
receive from a stranger for the same kind of 
lodging. It is used instead of actual expenses 
such as taxes, interest, depreciation, paint, in-
surance, utilities, and the cost of furniture and 
appliances. In some cases, fair rental value 
may be equal to the rent paid.
If you provide the total lodging, the amount 
of support you provide is the fair rental value of 
the room the person uses, or a share of the fair 
rental value of the entire dwelling if the person 
has use of your entire home. If you don't provide 
the total lodging, the total fair rental value must 
be divided depending on how much of the total 
lodging you provide. If you provide only a part 
and the person supplies the rest, the fair rental 
value must be divided between both of you ac-
cording to the amount each provides.
Example. Your parents live rent free in a 
house you own. It has a fair rental value of 
$5,400 a year furnished, which includes a fair 
rental value of $3,600 for the house and $1,800 
for the furniture. This doesn't include heat and 
utilities. The house is completely furnished with 
furniture belonging to your parents. You pay 
$600 for their utility bills. Utilities aren't usually 
included in rent for houses in the area where 
your parents live. Therefore, you consider the 
total fair rental value of the lodging to be $6,000 
($3,600 fair rental value of the unfurnished 
house + $1,800 allowance for the furnishings 
provided by your parents + $600 cost of utilities) 
of which you are considered to provide $4,200 
($3,600 + $600).
Person living in his or her own home. 
The total fair rental value of a person's home 
that he or she owns is considered support con-
tributed by that person.
Living with someone rent free.  If you live 
with a person rent free in his or her home, you 
must reduce the amount you provide for sup-
port of that person by the fair rental value of 
lodging he or she provides you.
Property. Property provided as support is 
measured by its fair market value. Fair market 
value is the price that property would sell for on 
the open market. It is the price that would be 
agreed upon between a willing buyer and a will-
ing seller, with neither being required to act, and 
both having reasonable knowledge of the rele-
vant facts.
Capital expenses.  Capital items, such as 
furniture, appliances, and cars, bought for a 
person during the year can be included in total 
support under certain circumstances.
The following examples show when a capi-
tal item is or isn't support.
Example 1.  You buy a $200 power lawn 
mower for your 13-year-old child. The child is 
given the duty of keeping the lawn trimmed. Be-
cause the lawn mower benefits all members of 
the household, don't include the cost of the 
lawn mower in the support of your child.
Example 2.  You buy a $150 television set 
as a birthday present for your 12-year-old child. 
The television set is placed in your child's bed-
room. You can include the cost of the television 
set in the support of your child.
Example 3.  You pay $5,000 for a car and 
register it in your name. You and your 
17-year-old daughter use the car equally. Be-
cause you own the car and don't give it to your 
daughter but merely let her use it, don't include 
the cost of the car in your daughter's total sup-
port. However, you can include in your daugh-
ter's support your out-of-pocket expenses of 
operating the car for her benefit.
Example 4.  Your 17-year-old son, using 
personal funds, buys a car for $4,500. You pro-
vide the rest of your son's support — $4,000. 
Because the car is bought and owned by your 
son, the car's fair market value ($4,500) must 
be included in his support. Your son has provi-
ded more than half of his own total support of 
$8,500 ($4,500 + $4,000), so he isn't your quali-
fying child. You didn't provide more than half of 
his total support, so he isn't your qualifying rela-
tive. You can't claim an exemption for your son.
Medical insurance premiums. Medical insur-
ance premiums you pay, including premiums for 
supplementary Medicare coverage, are inclu-
ded in the support you provide.
Medical insurance benefits.  Medical in-
surance benefits, including basic and supple-
mentary Medicare benefits, aren't part of sup-
port.
Tuition payments and allowances under the 
GI Bill. Amounts veterans receive under the GI 
Bill for tuition payments and allowances while 
they attend school are included in total support.
Example. During the year, your son re-
ceives $2,200 from the government under the 
GI Bill. He uses this amount for his education. 
You provide the rest of his support — $2,000. 
Because GI benefits are included in total sup-
port, your son's total support is $4,200 ($2,200 
+ $2,000). You haven't provided more than half 
of his support.
Child care expenses.  If you pay someone to 
provide child or dependent care, you can in-
clude these payments in the amount you provi-
ded for the support of your child or disabled de-
pendent, even if you claim a credit for the 
payments. For information on the credit, see 
Pub. 503.
Other support items.  Other items may be 
considered as support depending on the facts 
in each case.
Don't Include in Total Support
The following items aren't included in total sup-
port.
1. Federal, state, and local income taxes 
paid by persons from their own income. 
2. Social security and Medicare taxes paid 
by persons from their own income. 
3. Life insurance premiums. 
4. Funeral expenses. 
5. Scholarships received by your child if your 
child is a student. 
6. Survivors' and Dependents' Educational 
Assistance payments used for the support 
of the child who receives them.
Multiple Support Agreement
Sometimes no one provides more than half of 
the support of a person. Instead, two or more 
persons, each of whom would be able to take 
the exemption but for the support test, together 
provide more than half of the person's support.
When this happens, you can agree that any 
one of you who individually provides more than 
10% of the person's support, but only one, can 
claim an exemption for that person as a qualify-
ing relative. Each of the others must sign a 
statement agreeing not to claim the exemption 
for that year. The person who claims the ex-
emption must keep these signed statements for 
his or her records. A multiple support declara-
tion identifying each of the others who agreed 
not to claim the exemption must be attached to 
the return of the person claiming the exemption. 
Form 2120, Multiple Support Declaration, can 
be used for this purpose.
You can claim an exemption under a multi-
ple support agreement for someone related to 
you or for someone who lived with you all year 
as a member of your household.
Example 1. You, your sister, and your two 
brothers provide the entire support of your 
mother for the year. You provide 45%, your sis-
ter 35%, and your two brothers each provide 
10%. Either you or your sister can claim an ex-
emption for your mother. The other must sign a 
statement agreeing not to take an exemption for 
your mother. The one who claims the exemp-
tion must attach Form 2120, or a similar 
Page 21 of 30  Fileid: … tions/P501/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 12:05 - 2-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2017)   Page 21

declaration, to his or her return and must keep 
the statement signed by the other for his or her 
records. Because neither brother provides more 
than 10% of the support, neither can take the 
exemption and neither has to sign a statement.
Example 2. You and your brother each pro-
vide 20% of your mother's support for the year. 
The remaining 60% of her support is provided 
equally by two persons who aren't related to 
her. She doesn't live with them. Because more 
than half of her support is provided by persons 
who can't claim an exemption for her, no one 
can take the exemption.
Example 3.  Your father lives with you and 
receives 25% of his support from social secur-
ity, 40% from you, 24% from his brother (your 
uncle), and 11% from a friend. Either you or 
your uncle can take the exemption for your fa-
ther if the other signs a statement agreeing not 
to. The one who takes the exemption must at-
tach Form 2120, or a similar declaration, to his 
return and must keep for his records the signed 
statement from the one agreeing not to take the 
exemption.
Support Test for Children of 
Divorced or Separated Parents (or 
Parents Who Live Apart)
In most cases, a child of divorced or separated 
parents (or parents who live apart) will be a 
qualifying child of one of the parents. See Chil-
dren of divorced or separated parents (or pa-
rents who live apart)  under Qualifying Child, 
earlier. However, if the child doesn't meet the 
requirements to be a qualifying child of either 
parent, the child may be a qualifying relative of 
one of the parents. In that case, the following 
rules must be used in applying the support test.
A child will be treated as being the qualifying 
relative of his or her noncustodial parent if all 
four of the following statements are true.
1. The parents:
a. Are divorced or legally separated un-
der a decree of divorce or separate 
maintenance,
b. Are separated under a written separa-
tion agreement, or
c. Lived apart at all times during the last 
6 months of the year, whether or not 
they are or were married.
2. The child received over half of his or her 
support for the year from the parents (and 
the rules on multiple support agreements, 
explained earlier, don't apply).
3. The child is in the custody of one or both 
parents for more than half of the year.
4. Either of the following statements is true.
a. The custodial parent signs a written 
declaration, discussed later, that he or 
she won't claim the child as a depend-
ent for the year, and the noncustodial 
parent attaches this written declara-
tion to his or her return. (If the decree 
or agreement went into effect after 
1984 and before 2009, see Post-1984 
and pre-2009 divorce decree or sepa-
ration agreement, later. If the decree 
or agreement went into effect after 
2008, see Post-2008 divorce decree 
or separation agreement, later.)
b. A pre-1985 decree of divorce or sepa-
rate maintenance or written separa-
tion agreement that applies to 2017 
states that the noncustodial parent 
can claim the child as a dependent, 
the decree or agreement wasn't 
changed after 1984 to say the non-
custodial parent can't claim the child 
as a dependent, and the noncustodial 
parent provides at least $600 for the 
child's support during the year.
Custodial parent and noncustodial parent. 
The custodial parent is the parent with whom 
the child lived for the greater number of nights 
during the year. The other parent is the noncus-
todial parent.
If the parents divorced or separated during 
the year and the child lived with both parents 
before the separation, the custodial parent is 
the one with whom the child lived for the greater 
number of nights during the rest of the year.
A child is treated as living with a parent for a 
night if the child sleeps:
At that parent's home, whether or not the 
parent is present, or
In the company of the parent, when the 
child doesn't sleep at a parent's home (for 
example, the parent and child are on vaca-
tion together).
Equal number of nights.  If the child lived 
with each parent for an equal number of nights 
during the year, the custodial parent is the pa-
rent with the higher adjusted gross income.
December 31. The night of December 31 is 
treated as part of the year in which it begins. For 
example, the night of December 31, 2017, is 
treated as part of 2017.
Emancipated child. If a child is emancipa-
ted under state law, the child is treated as not 
living with either parent.
Absences. If a child wasn't with either pa-
rent on a particular night (because, for example, 
the child was staying at a friend's house), the 
child is treated as living with the parent with 
whom the child normally would have lived for 
that night. But if it can't be determined with 
which parent the child normally would have 
lived or if the child wouldn't have lived with ei-
ther parent that night, the child is treated as not 
living with either parent that night.
Parent works at night. If, due to a parent's 
nighttime work schedule, a child lives for a 
greater number of days, but not nights, with the 
parent who works at night, that parent is treated 
as the custodial parent. On a school day, the 
child is treated as living at the primary resi-
dence registered with the school.
Written declaration.  The custodial parent 
must use either Form 8332 or a similar state-
ment (containing the same information required 
by the form) to make the written declaration to 
release the exemption to the noncustodial pa-
rent. The noncustodial parent must attach a 
copy of the form or statement to his or her tax 
return.
The exemption can be released for 1 year, 
for a number of specified years (for example, al-
ternate years), or for all future years, as speci-
fied in the declaration.
Post-1984 and pre-2009 divorce decree 
or separation agreement.  If the divorce de-
cree or separation agreement went into effect 
after 1984 and before 2009, the noncustodial 
parent may be able to attach certain pages from 
the decree or agreement instead of Form 8332. 
The decree or agreement must state all three of 
the following.
1. The noncustodial parent can claim the 
child as a dependent without regard to any 
condition, such as payment of support.
2. The custodial parent won't claim the child 
as a dependent for the year.
3. The years for which the noncustodial pa-
rent, rather than the custodial parent, can 
claim the child as a dependent.
The noncustodial parent must attach all of 
the following pages of the decree or agreement 
to his or her tax return.
The cover page (write the other parent's 
social security number on this page).
The pages that include all of the informa-
tion identified in items (1) through (3) 
above.
The signature page with the other parent's 
signature and the date of the agreement.
Post-2008 divorce decree or separation 
agreement. The noncustodial parent can't at-
tach pages from the decree or agreement to the 
tax return instead of Form 8332 if the decree or 
agreement went into effect after 2008. The cus-
todial parent must sign either Form 8332 or a 
similar statement whose only purpose is to re-
lease the custodial parent's claim to an exemp-
tion for a child, and the noncustodial parent 
must attach a copy to his or her return. The form 
or statement must release the custodial parent's 
claim to the child without any conditions. For 
example, the release must not depend on the 
noncustodial parent paying support.
The noncustodial parent must attach 
the required information even if it was 
filed with a return in an earlier year.
Revocation of release of claim to an ex-
emption. The custodial parent can revoke a 
release of claim to an exemption that he or she 
previously released to the noncustodial parent. 
For the revocation to be effective for 2017, the 
custodial parent must have given (or made rea-
sonable efforts to give) written notice of the rev-
ocation to the noncustodial parent in 2016 or 
earlier. The custodial parent can use Part III of 
Form 8332 for this purpose and must attach a 
copy of the revocation to his or her return for 
each tax year he or she claims the child as a 
dependent as a result of the revocation.
Remarried parent. If you remarry, the support 
provided by your new spouse is treated as pro-
vided by you.
Child support under pre-1985 agreement.
All child support payments actually received 
CAUTION
!
Page 22 of 30  Fileid: … tions/P501/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 12:05 - 2-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 22 Publication 501 (2017)

from the noncustodial parent under a pre-1985 
agreement are considered used for the support 
of the child.
Example. Under a pre-1985 agreement, 
the noncustodial parent provides $1,200 for the 
child's support. This amount is considered sup-
port provided by the noncustodial parent even if 
the $1,200 was actually spent on things other 
than support.
Alimony. Payments to a spouse that are in-
cludible in the spouse's gross income as either 
alimony, separate maintenance payments, or 
similar payments from an estate or trust, aren't 
treated as a payment for the support of a de-
pendent.
Parents who never married. This special rule 
for divorced or separated parents also applies 
to parents who never married and lived apart at 
all times during the last 6 months of the year.
Multiple support agreement. If the support of 
the child is determined under a multiple support 
agreement, this special support test for di-
vorced or separated parents (or parents who 
live apart) doesn't apply.
Phaseout of Exemptions
You lose at least part of the benefit of your ex-
emptions if your adjusted gross income (AGI) is 
above a certain amount. For 2017, the phase-
out begins at the following amounts.
Filing Status
AGI Level That Reduces
Exemption Amount
Married filing separately ............. $156,900
Single ......................... 261,500
Head of household ................ 287,650
Married filing jointly ................ 313,800
Qualifying widow(er) ............... 313,800
You must reduce the dollar amount of your 
exemptions by 2% for each $2,500, or part of 
$2,500 ($1,250 if you are married filing sepa-
rately), that your AGI exceeds the amount 
shown above for your filing status. If your AGI 
exceeds the amount shown above by more 
than $122,500 ($61,250 if married filing sepa-
rately), the amount of your deduction for ex-
emptions is reduced to zero.
If your AGI exceeds the level for your filing 
status, use Worksheet 3 to figure the amount of 
your deduction for exemptions.
Social Security
Numbers for 
Dependents
You must show the social security number 
(SSN) of any dependent for whom you claim an 
exemption in column (2) of line 6c of your Form 
1040 or Form 1040A.
If you don't show the dependent's SSN 
when required or if you show an incor-
rect SSN, the exemption may be disal-
lowed.
No SSN.  If a person for whom you expect to 
claim an exemption on your return doesn't have 
an SSN, either you or that person should apply 
for an SSN as soon as possible by filing Form 
CAUTION
!
SS-5, Application for a Social Security Card, 
with the Social Security Administration (SSA). 
You can get Form SS-5 online at SSA.gov or at 
your local SSA office.
It usually takes about 2 weeks to get an SSN 
once the SSA has all the information it needs. If 
you don't have a required SSN by the filing due 
date, you can file Form 4868, Application for 
Automatic Extension of Time To File U.S. Indi-
vidual Income Tax Return, for an extension of 
time to file.
Born and died in 2017.  If your child was 
born and died in 2017, and you don't have an 
SSN for the child, you may attach a copy of the 
child's birth certificate, death certificate, or hos-
pital records instead. The document must show 
the child was born alive. If you do this, enter 
“DIED” in column (2) of line 6c of your Form 
1040 or Form 1040A.
Alien or adoptee with no SSN.  If your de-
pendent doesn't have and can't get an SSN, 
you must show the individual taxpayer identifi-
cation number (ITIN) or adoption taxpayer iden-
tification number (ATIN) instead of an SSN.
Taxpayer identification numbers for ali-
ens. If your dependent is a resident or nonresi-
dent alien who doesn't have and isn't eligible to 
get an SSN, your dependent must apply for an 
individual taxpayer identification number (ITIN). 
For details on how to apply, see Form W-7, Ap-
plication for IRS Individual Taxpayer Identifica-
tion Number.
Taxpayer identification numbers for 
adoptees. If you have a child who was placed 
with you by an authorized placement agency, 
you may be able to claim an exemption for the 
child. However, if you can't get an SSN or an 
ITIN for the child, you must get an adoption tax-
payer identification number (ATIN) for the child 
Worksheet 3. Worksheet for Determining the Deduction for Exemptions Keep for Your Records
1. Is the amount on Form 1040, line 38, more than the amount on line 4 below for your filing status?
No. Stop. Multiply $4,050 by the total number of exemptions claimed on line 6d of Form 1040 and 
enter the result on Form 1040, line 42.
Yes. Continue.
2. Multiply $4,050 by the total number of exemptions claimed on line 6d of Form 1040 ............... 2.  
3. Enter the amount from Form 1040, line 38 ................................ 3.  
4. Enter the amount shown below for your filing status:
4.  
Married filing separately — $156,900
Single — $261,500 
Head of household — $287,650
Married filing jointly or Qualifying 
widow(er) — $313,800
....................
5. Subtract line 4 from line 3. If the result is more than $122,500 ($61,250 if married 
filing separately), stop here. You can't take a deduction for exemptions ....... 5.  
6. Divide line 5 by $2,500 ($1,250 if married filing separately). If the result isn't a 
whole number, round it up to the next higher whole number (for example, 
increase .00004 to 1) ................................................. 6.  
7. Multiply line 6 by 2% (0.02) and enter the result as a decimal (rounded to at least 
three places) ........................................................ 7.  
8. Multiply line 2 by line 7 .................................................................. 8.  
9. Deduction for exemptions. Subtract line 8 from line 2. Enter the result here and on Form 
1040, line 42 .......................................................................... 9.  
Page 23 of 30  Fileid: … tions/P501/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 12:05 - 2-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2017)   Page 23

from the IRS. See Form W-7A, Application for 
Taxpayer Identification Number for Pending 
U.S. Adoptions, for details.
Standard Deduction
Most taxpayers have a choice of either taking a 
standard deduction or itemizing their deduc-
tions. If you have a choice, you can use the 
method that gives you the lower tax.
The standard deduction is a dollar amount 
that reduces your taxable income. It is a benefit 
that eliminates the need for many taxpayers to 
itemize actual deductions, such as medical ex-
penses, charitable contributions, and taxes, on 
Schedule A (Form 1040). The standard deduc-
tion is higher for taxpayers who:
Are 65 or older, or
Are blind.
You benefit from the standard deduc-
tion if your standard deduction is more 
than the total of your allowable item-
ized deductions.
Persons not eligible for the standard de-
duction. Your standard deduction is zero and 
you should itemize any deductions you have if:
1. Your filing status is married filing sepa-
rately, and your spouse itemizes deduc-
tions on his or her return,
2. You are filing a tax return for a short tax 
year because of a change in your annual 
accounting period, or
3. You are a nonresident or dual-status alien 
during the year. You are considered a 
dual-status alien if you were both a non-
resident and resident alien during the 
year.
If you are a nonresident alien who is 
married to a U.S. citizen or resident alien 
at the end of the year, you can choose to 
be treated as a U.S. resident. (See Pub. 
519.) If you make this choice, you can take 
the standard deduction.
If an exemption for you can be claimed 
on another person's return (such as 
your parents' return), your standard de-
duction may be limited. See Standard Deduc-
tion for Dependents, later.
Standard Deduction Amount
The standard deduction amount depends on 
your filing status, whether you are 65 or older or 
blind, and whether another taxpayer can claim 
an exemption for you. Generally, the standard 
deduction amounts are adjusted each year for 
inflation. The standard deduction amounts for 
most people are shown in Table 6.
Decedent's final return. The standard deduc-
tion for a decedent's final tax return is the same 
as it would have been had the decedent contin-
ued to live. However, if the decedent wasn't 65 
or older at the time of death, the higher stand-
ard deduction for age can't be claimed.
TIP
CAUTION
!
Higher Standard Deduction for 
Age (65 or Older)
If you are age 65 or older on the last day of the 
year and don't itemize deductions, you are enti-
tled to a higher standard deduction. You are 
considered 65 on the day before your 65th 
birthday. Therefore, you can take a higher 
standard deduction for 2017 if you were born 
before January 2, 1953.
Use Table 7 to figure the standard deduction 
amount.
Death of taxpayer.  If you are preparing a re-
turn for someone who died in 2017, consider 
the taxpayer to be 65 or older at the end of 
2017 only if he or she was 65 or older at the 
time of death. Even if the taxpayer was born be-
fore January 2, 1953, he or she isn't considered 
65 or older at the end of 2017 unless he or she 
was 65 or older at the time of death.
A person is considered to reach age 65 on 
the day before his or her 65th birthday.
Higher Standard Deduction for 
Blindness
If you are blind on the last day of the year and 
you don't itemize deductions, you are entitled to 
a higher standard deduction.
Not totally blind. If you aren't totally blind, you 
must get a certified statement from an eye doc-
tor (ophthalmologist or optometrist) that:
1. You can't see better than 20/200 in the 
better eye with glasses or contact lenses, 
or
2. Your field of vision is 20 degrees or less.
If your eye condition isn't likely to improve 
beyond these limits, the statement should in-
clude this fact. Keep the statement in your re-
cords.
If your vision can be corrected beyond these 
limits only by contact lenses that you can wear 
only briefly because of pain, infection, or ulcers, 
you can take the higher standard deduction for 
blindness if you otherwise qualify.
Spouse 65 or Older or Blind
You can take the higher standard deduction if 
your spouse is age 65 or older or blind and:
1. You file a joint return, or
2. You file a separate return and can claim 
an exemption for your spouse because 
your spouse had no gross income and 
can't be claimed as a dependent by an-
other taxpayer.
Death of spouse.  If your spouse died in 2017 
before reaching age 65, you can't take a higher 
standard deduction because of your spouse. 
Even if your spouse was born before January 2, 
1953, he or she isn't considered 65 or older at 
the end of 2017 unless he or she was 65 or 
older at the time of death.
A person is considered to reach age 65 on 
the day before his or her 65th birthday.
Example. Your spouse was born on Febru-
ary 14, 1952, and died on February 13, 2017. 
Your spouse is considered age 65 at the time of 
death. However, if your spouse died on Febru-
ary 12, 2017, your spouse isn't considered age 
65 at the time of death and isn't 65 or older at 
the end of 2017.
You can't claim the higher standard de-
duction for an individual other than 
yourself and your spouse.
Examples
The following examples illustrate how to deter-
mine your standard deduction using Table 6 
and Table 7.
Example 1.  Larry, 46, and Donna, 33, are 
filing a joint return for 2017. Neither is blind, and 
neither can be claimed as a dependent. They 
decide not to itemize their deductions. They use 
Table 6. Their standard deduction is $12,700.
Example 2.  The facts are the same as in 
Example 1, except that Larry is blind at the end 
of 2017. Larry and Donna use Table 7 . Their 
standard deduction is $13,950.
Example 3. Bill and Lisa are filing a joint re-
turn for 2017. Both are over age 65. Neither is 
blind, and neither can be claimed as a depend-
ent. If they don't itemize deductions, they use 
Table 7. Their standard deduction is $15,200.
Standard Deduction for 
Dependents
The standard deduction for an individual who 
can be claimed as a dependent on another per-
son's tax return is generally limited to the 
greater of:
1. $1,050, or
2. The individual's earned income for the 
year plus $350 (but not more than the reg-
ular standard deduction amount, generally 
$6,350).
However, if the individual is 65 or older or blind, 
the standard deduction may be higher.
If you (or your spouse if filing jointly) can be 
claimed as a dependent on someone else's re-
turn, use Table 8  to determine your standard 
deduction.
Earned income defined.  Earned income 
is salaries, wages, tips, professional fees, and 
other amounts received as pay for work you ac-
tually perform.
For purposes of the standard deduction, 
earned income also includes any part of a taxa-
ble scholarship or fellowship grant. See chap-
ter 1 of Pub. 970 for more information on what 
qualifies as a scholarship or fellowship grant.
Example 1.  Michael is 16 years old and 
single. His parents can claim an exemption for 
him on their 2017 tax return. He has interest in-
come of $780 and wages of $150. He has no 
itemized deductions. Michael uses Table 8  to 
find his standard deduction. He enters $150 
(his earned income) on line 1, $500 ($150 + 
$350) on line 3, $1,050 (the larger of $500 and 
CAUTION
!
Page 24 of 30  Fileid: … tions/P501/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 12:05 - 2-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 24 Publication 501 (2017)

$1,050) on line 5, and $6,350 on line 6. His 
standard deduction, on line 7a, is $1,050 (the 
smaller of $1,050 and $6,350).
Example 2. Joe, a 22-year-old college stu-
dent, can be claimed as a dependent on his pa-
rents' 2017 tax return. Joe is married and files a 
separate return. His wife doesn't itemize deduc-
tions on her separate return. Joe has $1,500 in 
interest income and wages of $3,800. He has 
no itemized deductions. Joe finds his standard 
deduction by using Table 8 . He enters his 
earned income, $3,800, on line 1. He adds lines 
1 and 2 and enters $4,150 on line 3. On line 5, 
he enters $4,150, the larger of lines 3 and 4. 
Because Joe is married filing a separate return, 
he enters $6,350 on line 6. On line 7a he enters 
$4,150 as his standard deduction because it is 
smaller than $6,350, the amount on line 6.
Example 3.  Amy, who is single, can be 
claimed as a dependent on her parents' 2017 
tax return. She is 18 years old and blind. She 
has interest income of $1,300 and wages of 
$2,900. She has no itemized deductions. Amy 
uses Table 8  to find her standard deduction. 
She enters her wages of $2,900 on line 1. She 
adds lines 1 and 2 and enters $3,250 on line 3. 
On line 5, she enters $3,250, the larger of lines 
3 and 4. Because she is single, Amy enters 
$6,350 on line 6. She enters $3,250 on line 7a. 
This is the smaller of the amounts on lines 5 
and 6. Because she checked one box in the top 
part of the worksheet, she enters $1,550 on 
line 7b. She then adds the amounts on lines 7a 
and 7b and enters her standard deduction of 
$4,800 on line 7c.
Example 4. Ed is 18 years old and single. 
His parents can claim an exemption for him on 
their 2017 tax return. He has wages of $7,000, 
interest income of $500, and a business loss of 
$3,000. He has no itemized deductions. Ed 
uses Table 8  to figure his standard deduction. 
He enters $4,000 ($7,000 − $3,000) on line 1. 
He adds lines 1 and 2 and enters $4,350 on 
line 3. On line 5, he enters $4,350, the larger of 
lines 3 and 4. Because he is single, Ed enters 
$6,350 on line 6. On line 7a he enters $4,350 as 
his standard deduction because it is smaller 
than $6,350, the amount on line 6.
Who Should Itemize
You should itemize deductions if your total de-
ductions are more than the standard deduction 
amount. Also, you should itemize if you don't 
qualify for the standard deduction, as discussed 
earlier under Persons not eligible for the stand-
ard deduction.
You should first figure your itemized deduc-
tions and compare that amount to your stand-
ard deduction to make sure you are using the 
method that gives you the greater benefit.
You may be subject to a limit on some 
of your itemized deductions if your ad-
justed gross income is more than 
$261,500 ($287,650 if head of household, 
$313,800 if married filing jointly or qualifying 
widow(er), $156,900 if married filing sepa-
rately). See the Instructions for Schedule A 
(Form 1040) for more information on figuring 
the correct amount of your itemized deductions.
When to itemize.  You may benefit from 
itemizing your deductions on Schedule A (Form 
1040) if you:
1. Don't qualify for the standard deduction, or 
the amount you can claim is limited,
2. Had large uninsured medical and dental 
expenses during the year,
3. Paid interest and taxes on your home,
4. Had large unreimbursed employee busi-
ness expenses or other miscellaneous de-
ductions,
5. Had large uninsured casualty or theft los-
ses,
6. Made large contributions to qualified chari-
ties, or
7. Have total itemized deductions that are 
more than the standard deduction to 
which you otherwise are entitled.
If you decide to itemize your deductions, 
complete Schedule A and attach it to your Form 
1040. Enter the amount from Schedule A, 
line 29, on Form 1040, line 40.
CAUTION
!
Electing to itemize for state tax or other 
purposes. Even if your itemized deductions 
are less than your standard deduction, you can 
elect to itemize deductions on your federal re-
turn rather than take the standard deduction. 
You may want to do this if, for example, the tax 
benefit of itemizing your deductions on your 
state tax return is greater than the tax benefit 
you lose on your federal return by not taking the 
standard deduction. To make this election, you 
must check the box on line 30 of Schedule A.
Changing your mind. If you don't itemize your 
deductions and later find that you should have 
itemized — or if you itemize your deductions 
and later find you shouldn't have — you can 
change your return by filing Form 1040X.
Married persons who filed separate re-
turns. You can change methods of taking de-
ductions only if you and your spouse both make 
the same changes. Both of you must file a con-
sent to assessment for any additional tax either 
one may owe as a result of the change.
You and your spouse can use the method 
that gives you the lower total tax, even though 
one of you may pay more tax than you would 
have paid by using the other method. You both 
must use the same method of claiming deduc-
tions. If one itemizes deductions, the other 
should itemize because he or she won't qualify 
for the standard deduction. See Persons not eli-
gible for the standard deduction, earlier.
2017 Standard 
Deduction Tables
If you are married filing a separate re-
turn and your spouse itemizes deduc-
tions, or if you are a dual-status alien, 
you can't take the standard deduction even if 
you were born before January 2, 1953, or are 
blind.
CAUTION
!
Standard Deduction Chart for Most People*Table 6.
IF your filing status is... YOUR standard deduction is...
Single or Married filing separately $ 6,350
Married filing jointly or Qualifying widow(er)  12,700
Head of household   9,350
*Don't use this chart if you were born before January 2, 1953, or are blind, or if someone else can claim you (or your spouse if filing jointly) as a dependent. 
Use Table 7 or 8 instead.
Page 25 of 30  Fileid: … tions/P501/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 12:05 - 2-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2017)   Page 25

Standard Deduction Chart for People Born Before January 2, 1953, or Who are Blind*Table 7.
Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the chart.
You: Born before January 2, 1953  
  Blind 
Your spouse, if claiming spouse's exemption: Born before January 2, 1953 
  Blind 
Total number of boxes you checked 
IF
your filing status is...
AND
the number in the box above is...
THEN
your standard deduction is...
Single
 1 $ 7,900
2   9,450
Married filing jointly or 
Qualifying widow(er)
 1 $13,950
2  15,200
3  16,450
4  17,700
Married filing separately
 1 $ 7,600
2   8,850
3  10,100
4  11,350
Head of household
 1 $10,900
 2  12,450
*If someone else can claim you (or your spouse if filing jointly) as a dependent, use Table 8 instead. 
Standard Deduction Worksheet for Dependents
Use this worksheet only if someone else can claim you (or your spouse if 
filing jointly) as a dependent.
Table 8.
Keep for Your Records
Check the correct number of boxes below. Then go to the worksheet.
You: Born before January 2, 1953 
 Blind 
Your spouse, if claiming spouse's exemption: Born before January 2, 1953 
 Blind 
Total number of boxes you checked 
1. Enter your earned income (defined below). If none, enter -0-. 1.  
2. Additional amount. 2. $350
3. Add lines 1 and 2. 3.  
4. Minimum standard deduction. 4. $1,050
5. Enter the larger of line 3 or line 4. 5.  
6. Enter the amount shown below for your filing status. 
Single or Married filing separately—$6,350
Married filing jointly—$12,700
Head of household—$9,350
6.  
7. Standard deduction. 
a. Enter the smaller of line 5 or line 6. If born after January 1, 1953, and not blind, stop here. This is your 
standard deduction. Otherwise, go on to line 7b. 7a.  
b. If born before January 2, 1953, or blind, multiply $1,550 ($1,250 if married) by the number in the box above. 7b.  
c. Add lines 7a and 7b. This is your standard deduction for 2017. 7c.  
Earned income includes wages, salaries, tips, professional fees, and other compensation received for personal services you performed. It also includes any 
taxable scholarship or fellowship grant.
Page 26 of 30  Fileid: … tions/P501/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 12:05 - 2-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 26 Publication 501 (2017)

How To Get Tax Help
If you have questions about a tax issue, need 
help preparing your tax return, or want to down-
load free publications, forms, or instructions, go 
to IRS.gov and find resources that can help you 
right away.
Preparing and filing your tax return.  Find 
free options to prepare and file your return on 
IRS.gov or in your local community if you qual-
ify.
The Volunteer Income Tax Assistance 
(VITA) program offers free tax help to people 
who generally make $54,000 or less, persons 
with disabilities, and limited-English-speaking 
taxpayers who need help preparing their own 
tax returns. The Tax Counseling for the Elderly 
(TCE) program offers free tax help for all tax-
payers, particularly those who are 60 years of 
age and older. TCE volunteers specialize in an-
swering questions about pensions and retire-
ment-related issues unique to seniors.
You can go to IRS.gov to see your options 
for preparing and filing your return which in-
clude the following.
Free File. Go to IRS.gov/FreeFile. See if 
you qualify to use brand-name software to 
prepare and e-file your federal tax return 
for free.
VITA. Go to IRS.gov/VITA, download the 
free IRS2Go app, or call 1-800-906-9887 
to find the nearest VITA location for free 
tax preparation.
TCE. Go to IRS.gov/TCE, download the 
free IRS2Go app, or call 1-888-227-7669 
to find the nearest TCE location for free tax 
preparation.
Getting answers to your tax ques-
tions. On IRS.gov get answers to your 
tax questions anytime, anywhere.
Go to IRS.gov/Help or IRS.gov/LetUsHelp 
pages for a variety of tools that will help 
you get answers to some of the most com-
mon tax questions.
Go to IRS.gov/ITA for the Interactive Tax 
Assistant, a tool that will ask you questions 
on a number of tax law topics and provide 
answers. You can print the entire interview 
and the final response for your records.
Go to IRS.gov/Pub17 to get Pub. 17, Your 
Federal Income Tax for Individuals, which 
features details on tax-saving opportuni-
ties, 2017 tax changes, and thousands of 
interactive links to help you find answers to 
your questions. View it online in HTML, as 
a PDF, or download it to your mobile de-
vice as an eBook.
You may also be able to access tax law in-
formation in your electronic filing software.
Getting tax forms and publications.  Go to 
IRS.gov/Forms to view, download, or print all of 
the forms and publications you may need. You 
can also download and view popular tax publi-
cations and instructions (including the 1040 in-
structions) on mobile devices as an eBook at no 
charge. Or, you can go to IRS.gov/OrderForms 
to place an order and have forms mailed to you 
within 10 business days.
Access your online account (Individual tax-
payers only).  Go to IRS.gov/Account to se-
curely access information about your federal tax 
account.
View the amount you owe, pay online or 
set up an online payment agreement.
Access your tax records online.
Review the past 18 months of your pay-
ment history.
Go to IRS.gov/SecureAccess to review the 
required identity authentication process.
Using direct deposit.  The fastest way to re-
ceive a tax refund is to combine direct deposit 
and IRS e-file. Direct deposit securely and elec-
tronically transfers your refund directly into your 
financial account. Eight in 10 taxpayers use di-
rect deposit to receive their refund. IRS issues 
more than 90% of refunds in less than 21 days.
Delayed refund for returns claiming certain 
credits. Due to changes in the law, the IRS 
can’t issue refunds before mid-February 2018, 
for returns that properly claimed the earned in-
come credit (EIC) or the additional child tax 
credit (ACTC). This applies to the entire refund, 
not just the portion associated with these cred-
its.
Getting a transcript or copy of a return. The 
quickest way to get a copy of your tax transcript 
is to go to IRS.gov/Transcripts. Click on either 
"Get Transcript Online" or "Get Transcript by 
Mail" to order a copy of your transcript. If you 
prefer, you can:
Order your transcript by calling 
1-800-908-9946.
Mail Form 4506-T or Form 4506T-EZ (both 
available on IRS.gov).
Using online tools to help prepare your re-
turn. Go to IRS.gov/Tools for the following.
The Earned Income Tax Credit Assistant 
(IRS.gov/EIC) determines if you’re eligible 
for the EIC.
The Online EIN Application (IRS.gov/EIN) 
helps you get an employer identification 
number.
The IRS Withholding Calculator (IRS.gov/
W4App) estimates the amount you should 
have withheld from your paycheck for fed-
eral income tax purposes.
The First Time Homebuyer Credit Account 
Look-up (IRS.gov/HomeBuyer) tool pro-
vides information on your repayments and 
account balance.
The Sales Tax Deduction Calculator 
(IRS.gov/SalesTax) figures the amount you 
can claim if you itemize deductions on 
Schedule A (Form 1040), choose not to 
claim state and local income taxes, and 
you didn’t save your receipts showing the 
sales tax you paid.
Resolving tax-related identity theft issues.
The IRS doesn’t initiate contact with tax-
payers by email or telephone to request 
personal or financial information. This in-
cludes any type of electronic communica-
tion, such as text messages and social me-
dia channels.
Go to IRS.gov/IDProtection for information 
and videos.
If your SSN has been lost or stolen or you 
suspect you’re a victim of tax-related iden-
tity theft, visit IRS.gov/ID to learn what 
steps you should take.
Checking on the status of your refund. 
Go to IRS.gov/Refunds.
Due to changes in the law, the IRS can’t is-
sue refunds before mid-February 2018, for 
returns that properly claimed the EIC or the 
ACTC. This applies to the entire refund, 
not just the portion associated with these 
credits.
Download the official IRS2Go app to your 
mobile device to check your refund status.
Call the automated refund hotline at 
1-800-829-1954.
Making a tax payment.  The IRS uses the lat-
est encryption technology to ensure your elec-
tronic payments are safe and secure. You can 
make electronic payments online, by phone, 
and from a mobile device using the IRS2Go 
app. Paying electronically is quick, easy, and 
faster than mailing in a check or money order. 
Go to IRS.gov/Payments to make a payment 
using any of the following options.
IRS Direct Pay: Pay your individual tax bill 
or estimated tax payment directly from 
your checking or savings account at no 
cost to you.
Debit or credit card: Choose an ap-
proved payment processor to pay online, 
by phone, and by mobile device.
Electronic Funds Withdrawal: Offered 
only when filing your federal taxes using 
tax preparation software or through a tax 
professional.
Electronic Federal Tax Payment Sys-
tem: Best option for businesses. Enroll-
ment is required.
Check or money order: Mail your pay-
ment to the address listed on the notice or 
instructions.
Cash: You may be able to pay your taxes 
with cash at a participating retail store.
What if I can’t pay now?  Go to IRS.gov/
Payments for more information about your op-
tions.
Apply for an online payment agreement 
(IRS.gov/OPA) to meet your tax obligation 
in monthly installments if you can’t pay 
your taxes in full today. Once you complete 
the online process, you will receive imme-
diate notification of whether your agree-
ment has been approved.
Use the Offer in Compromise Pre-Qualifier 
(IRS.gov/OIC) to see if you can settle your 
tax debt for less than the full amount you 
owe.
Checking the status of an amended return. 
Go to IRS.gov/WMAR to track the status of 
Form 1040X amended returns. Please note that 
it can take up to 3 weeks from the date you 
mailed your amended return for it to show up in 
our system and processing it can take up to 16 
weeks.
Understanding an IRS notice or letter. Go to 
IRS.gov/Notices to find additional information 
about responding to an IRS notice or letter.
Page 27 of 30  Fileid: … tions/P501/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 12:05 - 2-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2017)   Page 27

Contacting your local IRS office.  Keep in 
mind, many questions can be answered on 
IRS.gov without visiting an IRS Tax Assistance 
Center (TAC). Go to IRS.gov/LetUsHelp for the 
topics people ask about most. If you still need 
help, IRS TACs provide tax help when a tax is-
sue can’t be handled online or by phone. All 
TACs now provide service by appointment so 
you’ll know in advance that you can get the 
service you need without long wait times. Be-
fore you visit, go to IRS.gov/TACLocator to find 
the nearest TAC, check hours, available serv-
ices, and appointment options. Or, on the 
IRS2Go app, under the Stay Connected tab, 
choose the Contact Us option and click on “Lo-
cal Offices.”
Watching IRS videos.  The IRS Video portal 
(IRSvideos.gov) contains video and audio pre-
sentations for individuals, small businesses, 
and tax professionals.
Getting tax information in other languages. 
For taxpayers whose native language isn’t Eng-
lish, we have the following resources available. 
Taxpayers can find information on IRS.gov in 
the following languages.
Spanish (IRS.gov/Spanish).
Chinese (IRS.gov/Chinese).
Vietnamese (IRS.gov/Vietnamese).
Korean (IRS.gov/Korean).
Russian (IRS.gov/Russian).
The IRS TACs provide over-the-phone inter-
preter service in over 170 languages, and the 
service is available free to taxpayers.
The Taxpayer Advocate 
Service Is Here To Help You
What is the Taxpayer Advocate 
Service?
The Taxpayer Advocate Service (TAS) is an in-
dependent organization within the IRS that 
helps taxpayers and protects taxpayer rights. 
Our job is to ensure that every taxpayer is trea-
ted fairly and that you know and understand 
your rights under the Taxpayer Bill of Rights.
What Can the Taxpayer Advocate 
Service Do For You?
We can help you resolve problems that you 
can’t resolve with the IRS. And our service is 
free. If you qualify for our assistance, you will be 
assigned to one advocate who will work with 
you throughout the process and will do every-
thing possible to resolve your issue. TAS can 
help you if:
Your problem is causing financial difficulty 
for you, your family, or your business,
You face (or your business is facing) an 
immediate threat of adverse action, or
You’ve tried repeatedly to contact the IRS 
but no one has responded, or the IRS 
hasn’t responded by the date promised.
How Can You Reach Us?
We have offices in every state, the District of 
Columbia, and Puerto Rico . Your local advo-
cate’s number is in your local directory and at 
TaxpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov/Contact-Us. You 
can also call us at 1-877-777-4778.
How Can You Learn About Your 
Taxpayer Rights?
The Taxpayer Bill of Rights describes 10 basic 
rights that all taxpayers have when dealing with 
the IRS. Our Tax Toolkit at 
TaxpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov can help you un-
derstand what these rights mean to you  and 
how they apply. These are your rights. Know 
them. Use them.
How Else Does the Taxpayer 
Advocate Service Help Taxpayers?
TAS works to resolve large-scale problems that 
affect many taxpayers. If you know of one of 
these broad issues, please report it to us at 
IRS.gov/SAMS.
Low Income Taxpayer 
Clinics
Low Income Taxpayer Clinics (LITCs) are inde-
pendent from the IRS. LITCs represent individu-
als whose income is below a certain level and 
need to resolve tax problems with the IRS, such 
as audits, appeals, and tax collection disputes. 
In addition, clinics can provide information 
about taxpayer rights and responsibilities in dif-
ferent languages for individuals who speak 
English as a second language. Services are of-
fered for free or a small fee. To find a clinic near 
you, visit TaxpayerAdvocate.IRS.gov/LITCmap 
or see IRS Publication 4134, Low Income 
Taxpayer Clinic List.
Page 28 of 30  Fileid: … tions/P501/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 12:05 - 2-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 28 Publication 501 (2017)

To help us develop a more useful index, please let us know if you have ideas for index entries.
See “Comments and Suggestions” in the “Introduction” for the ways you can reach us.
Index
 
A
Abroad, citizens living, filing 
requirements 3
Absence, temporary 9, 13, 19
Accounting periods, joint 
returns 6
Adopted child 13, 19
Taxpayer identification 
number 23
Advance payment of premium 
tax credit 5
Age:
Filing status determination 3
Gross income and filing 
requirements (Table 1) 2
Standard deduction for age 65 or 
older 24
Test 13
Aliens:
Dual-status (See Dual-status 
taxpayers)
Nonresident (See Nonresident 
aliens)
Alimony 23
Alternative minimum tax (AMT), 
effect on filing requirements 
(Table 3) 5
Amended returns 8, 25
 (See also Form 1040X)
Change from itemized to 
standard deduction (or vice 
versa) 25
American citizens abroad 3
Annulled marriages, filing 
status 6
Armed forces:
Combat zone, signing return for 
spouse 7
Dependency allotments 20
GI Bill benefits 21
Military quarters allotments 20
Assistance (See Tax help)
ATINs (Adoption taxpayer 
identification numbers) 23
B
Birth of child 9
Blind persons, standard 
deduction 24
C
Canada, resident of 11, 13, 19
Capital expenses 21
Child, qualifying 13
Child born alive 13
Child care expenses 21
Child custody 14
Children:
Adopted child (See Adoption)
Adoption (See Adopted child)
Birth of child 9, 10
Claiming parent, when child is 
head of household 9
Custody of 14
Death of child 9, 10
Dividends of 3
Filing requirements as 
dependents (Table 2) 4
Investment income of child under 
age 18 3, 4
Kidnapped 14, 18
Social security number 23
Stillborn 14
Child support under pre-1985 
agreement 22
Child tax credit 11
Church employees, filing 
requirements (Table 3) 5
Citizen or resident test 13
Citizens outside U.S., filing 
requirements 3
Common law marriage 6
Community property states 8
Cousin 19
Credit, premium tax 5
Custody of child 14
D
Death:
Of child 13
Of dependent 9, 19
Of spouse 3, 6, 11, 19, 24
Of taxpayer 3, 24
Decedents 6, 24
 (See also Death of spouse)
Filing requirements 3
Deductions:
Personal exemption 11
Standard deduction 24
Dependents:
Birth of 19
Born and died within year 23
Child's earnings 3
Death of 19
Earned income 3
Exemption for 11
Filing requirements 3, 4
Married, filing joint return 12, 15
Not allowed to claim 
dependents 12
Qualifying child 13
Qualifying relative 18
Social security number 23
Standard deduction for 24
Unearned income 3
Dependent taxpayer test 12
Disabled:
Child 13
Dependent 19
Divorced parents 14
Divorced taxpayers:
Child custody 14
Filing status 6
Joint returns, responsibility for 7
Personal exemption 11
Domestic help, no exemption 
for 11
Dual-status taxpayers:
Exemptions 11
Joint returns not available 7
E
Earned income:
Defined for purposes of standard 
deduction 24
Dependent filing requirements 
(Table 2) 4
Earned income credit:
Two persons with same 
qualifying child 17
Elderly persons:
Home for the aged 20
Standard deduction for age 65 or 
older 24
Equitable relief, Innocent 
spouse 7
Exemptions 11–23
Dependents 11
Personal (See Personal 
exemption)
F
Fair rental value 21
Figures (See Tables and figures)
Filing requirements 3–5
Filing status 5–11
Annulled marriages 6
Change to:
Joint return after separate 
returns 8
Separate returns after joint 
return 8, 9
Determination of 3, 5
Head of household 6, 8
Marital status, determination 
of 6
Married filing jointly (See Joint 
returns)
Married filing 
separately (See Married filing 
separately)
Unmarried persons (See Single 
taxpayers)
Food benefits 20
Foreign employment, filing 
requirements 3
Foreign students 13
Form 1040:
Personal exemption 11
Social security numbers 23
Use of 6, 7
Form 1040A:
Personal exemption 11
Social security numbers 23
Use of 6, 7
Form 1040EZ:
Personal exemption 11
Use of 6
Form 1040X:
Change of filing status 8
Itemized deductions, change to 
standard deduction 25
Standard deduction, change to 
itemized deductions 25
Form 1095-A 5
Form 1099-B 5
Form 8814, parents' election to 
report child's interest and 
dividends 3
Form 8857, innocent spouse 
relief 7
Form SS-5, social security 
number request 23
Form W-7, individual taxpayer 
identification number 
request 23
Form W-7A, adoption taxpayer 
identification number 
request 23
Foster care payments and 
expenses 15, 20
Foster child 13, 15, 19, 20
Funeral expenses 21
G
GI Bill benefits 21
Gross income:
Defined:
Filing requirements 
(Table 1) 2
Dependent filing requirements 
(Table 2) 4
Test 19
Group-term life insurance 5
H
Head of household 8, 9
Exemption for spouse 11
Filing requirements (Table 1) 2
Health insurance premiums 21
Home:
Aged, home for 20
Cost of keeping up 9
Household workers, no 
exemption for 11
I
Identity theft 27
Income:
Gross 19
Tax exempt 20
Individual retirement 
arrangements (IRAs):
Filing requirements (Table 3) 5
Married filing separately 8
Individual taxpayer identification 
numbers (ITINs) 1, 23
Innocent spouse relief 7
Insurance premiums:
Life 21
Medical 21
IRAs (See Individual retirement 
arrangements (IRAs))
Itemized deductions:
Changing from standard to 
itemized deduction (or vice 
versa) 25
Choosing to itemize 25
Married filing separately 25
When to itemize 25
ITINs (Individual taxpayer 
identification numbers) 23
Page 29 of 30  Fileid: … tions/P501/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 12:05 - 2-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Publication 501 (2017)   Page 29

J
Joint returns 6, 7
Dependents on 19
Personal exemption 11
Joint return test 12, 15
K
Kidnapped children:
Qualifying child 14
Qualifying relative 18
Qualifying widow(er) 10
L
Life insurance premiums 21
Local income taxes, itemized 
deductions 25
Local law violated 19
Lodging 21
Losses, rental real estate 8
M
Marital status, determination 
of 6
Married dependents, filing joint 
return 12, 15
Married filing jointly (See Joint 
returns)
Married filing separately 7
Changing method from or to 
itemized deductions 25
Exemption for spouse 11
Itemized deductions 25
Married taxpayers 6
 (See also Joint returns)
Age 65 or older spouse, 
standard deduction 24
Blind spouse, standard 
deduction 24
Dual-status alien spouse 7
Filing status 6
Medical insurance premiums 21
Medical savings accounts 
(MSAs, effect on filing 
requirements (Table 3) 5
Medicare taxes, not support 21
Member of household or 
relationship test 19
Mexico, resident of 11, 13, 19
Military (See Armed forces)
Missing children, photographs of 
in IRS publications 2
Multiple support agreement 21
N
National of the United States 13
Nonresident aliens 2
Dependents 23
Exemptions 11
Joint return 7
Spouse 9
Taxpayer identification 
number 23
O
Overseas taxpayers 3
P
Parent, claiming head of 
household for 9
Parents, divorced or 
separated 14
Parents who never married 15
Penalty, failure to file 3
Personal exemption 11
Photographs of missing children 
in IRS publications 2
Premium tax credit 5
Publications (See Tax help)
Puerto Rico, residents of 3
Q
Qualifying:
 (See also Surviving spouse)
Child 13
Relative 18
Surviving spouse 9
Widow/widower 9
R
Recapture taxes 5
Relationship test 13, 19
Relative, qualifying 18
Remarriage after divorce 6
Rental losses 8
Residency test 13
S
Scholarships 3, 15, 19, 21, 24
Self-employed persons:
Filing requirements (Table 3) 5
Gross income 3
Separated parents 14
Separated taxpayers:
Filing status 6
Living apart but not legally 
separated 6
Personal exemption 11
Separate returns (See Married 
filing separately)
Signatures, joint returns 7
Single taxpayers:
Filing status 6
Gross income filing requirements 
(Table 1) 2
How to file and forms 6
Personal exemption 11
Social security and Medicare 
taxes:
Reporting of (Table 3) 5
Support, not included in 21
Social security benefits 20
Social security numbers (SSNs) 
for dependents 23
Spouse:
Deceased 6, 7, 11
Dual-status alien spouse 7
Exemption for 11
Innocent spouse relief 7
Nonresident alien 9
Signing joint returns 7
Surviving (See Surviving 
spouse)
SSNs (See Social security numbers 
(SSNs) for dependents)
Standard deduction 1, 24, 25
Married filing jointly 6
State or local income taxes 25
Stillborn child 14
Students:
Defined 13
Foreign 13
Support test:
Qualifying child 15
Qualifying relative 20
Surviving spouse 9
Death of spouse (See Death of 
spouse)
Gross income filing requirements 
(Table 1) 2
Qualifying widow(er) 9, 10
Single filing status 6
T
Tables and figures 9, 16
 (See also Worksheets)
Filing requirements:
Dependents (Table 2) 4
Gross income levels 
(Table 1) 2
Other situations requiring 
filing (Table 3) 5
Standard deduction tables 26
Taxes, not support 21
Tax-exempt income 20
Tax help 27
Tax returns:
Amended (See Form 1040X)
Filing of (See Filing 
requirements)
Joint returns (See Joint returns)
Who must file 1, 3, 5
Temporary absences 13, 19
Tiebreaker rules 17
Tips, reporting of (Table 3) 5
Total support 20
Tuition, benefits under GI Bill 21
U
U.S. citizen or resident 13
U.S. citizens filing abroad, filing 
requirements:
Filing requirements 3
U.S. national 13
U.S. possessions, income 
from 3
Unmarried persons (See Single 
taxpayers)
W
Welfare benefits 20
What's New 1
Widow/widower (See Surviving 
spouse)
Worksheets:
Exemption phaseout 23
Head of household status and 
cost of keeping up home 9
Support test 16
Page 30 of 30  Fileid: … tions/P501/2017/A/XML/Cycle02/source 12:05 - 2-Jan-2018
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Page 30 Publication 501 (2017)